1
CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS (ADOPTING ORDINANCE)
An Ordinance to revise and codify the Ordinances of the Town of
Freeport, Maine.
BE IT ORDAINED by the Town Council of the Town of Freeport,
Maine in Town Council assembled:
Section I Adoption of Code
The Freeport Town Code, as compiled and published is hereby
adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Freeport, Maine.
This adopting ordinance shall be integrated into said Code as
Chapter 1 - General Provisions and the entire Code shall be
viewed as one Ordinance known and cited as the Freeport Town
Code. Copies of the Freeport Town Code are on file in the
office of the Town Clerk for public inspection.
Cross Reference: See Council Manager Charter of the Town of
Freeport.
Section II General Definitions and Rules of Construction
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and
resolutions of the Town, the following rules shall be observed,
unless otherwise specifically provided or unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of
the Town Council:
And; Or "And" may be read "or", and "or" may be read "and",
if the sense requires it.
Council means the Freeport Town Council.
County means Cumberland County, Maine.
Definitions given within a chapter or article apply only to
words or phrases used in such chapter or article unless
otherwise provided.
Gender A word importing the masculine gender shall extend
and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and
corporations as well as to males.
2
M.R.S.A. means Maine Revised Statutes Annotated.
May; Shall The word "may" is permissive, and the word
"shall" is mandatory.
Municipal Officers means the Municipal Officers of the Town
of Freeport, Maine.
Oath shall be construed to include an affirmation in all
cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an
oath.
Owner applied to any property, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or a part of such
property.
Person shall extend and be applied to associations, firms,
partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to
individuals.
Whenever the word "person" is used in any section of this Code
prescribing a penalty or fine as applied to partnerships or
associations, the word shall include the partners or members
thereof, and such word as applied to corporations shall include
the officers, agents or employees thereof who are responsible
for any violation of said section.
Preceding; Following mean next before and next after,
respectively.
State means the State of Maine.
Statutes or Revised Statutes means the latest published
edition of the Statutes or Revised Statutes of Maine.
Street shall include public avenues, boulevards, highways,
roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches
thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the town, and
shall mean the entire width thereof between abutting property
lines; it shall be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath,
unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction
would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Town
Council.
Tenant means any person occupying the premises, building or
3
land of another in subordination to such other person's title
and with his express or implied assent, whether he occupies the
whole or a part of those premises, building or land, whether
alone or with others.
Tense Words used in the past or present tense include the
future, past and present where applicable unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
Town and this Town shall mean the Town of Freeport, Maine.
Words and Phrases shall be construed according to the
common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and others that have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in the law, shall be construed and
understood according to such meaning.
Section III Official Copies Kept by Town Clerk
The Town Clerk shall keep in his office a copy of this Code in
looseleaf form. It shall be the express duty of the Town Clerk
or someone authorized by him to insert in their designated
places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the
intention of the Town's legislative body to make the same a
part of this Code when the same have been printed or reprinted
in page form, and to extract from this Code all provisions
which may from time to time be repealed by the Town's
legislative body.
Section IV Additions or Amendments
Any additions or amendments to this Code, when passed in such
form as to indicate the intention of the legislative body of
the Town of Freeport to make the same a part hereof, shall be
deemed to be incorporated into this Code so that reference to
"The Freeport Town Code" to make the same a part hereof, shall
be understood as including them.
Section V References Include Amendmednts; Construction
4
Any reference in this Code to an ordinance or provision of this
Code shall mean such ordinance or provision as may now exist or
is hereafter amended.
Any references in this Code to chapters, articles, divisions or
sections shall be to the chapters, articles, divisions and
sections of this Code unless otherwise specified.
Section VI Catchlines of Sections
The catchlines of the sections appearing in this Code are only
intended as guide words or phrases to indicate the contents of
the sections and shall not be deemed to be a part of or effect
the application or substance of such sections unless expressly
so provided.
Section VII Provisions Considered as Continuations of
Existing Ordinances
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are in
substance the same as the provisions of ordinances existing at
the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be
considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
Section VIII Conflicting Provisions
1. If the provisions of different chapters, articles,
divisions or sections of this Code conflict with or
contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter,
article, division or section shall prevail as to all
matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of
that chapter, article, division or section.
2. If clearly conflicting provisions are found in different
sections of the same chapter, the provisions of the
section last enacted shall prevail unless the construction
is inconsistent with the meaning of that Chapter.
3. Where any conflict arises between a provision of this Code
and any provision of the Town Charter or Maine Revised
Statutes, the latter shall prevail.
5
Section IX Repeal of Prior Inconsistent Ordinances
This code shall effect a repeal of all ordinances, orders, and
resolutions in effect prior to its adoption which are in
conflict with its provisions. By way of example, and not of
limitation, the adoption of this Code shall not affect any
previously existing ordinances, orders and resolutions:
1. Levying or imposing taxes;
2. Granting, reviewing or extending a franchise;
3. Authorizing the borrowing of money or the issuance of any
bonds for the Town of Freeport;
4. Conveying, leasing, or authorizing the conveyance or lease
of any lands of the Town;
5. Establishing a fire department for the Town of Freeport or
dealing with fire prevention;
6. Establishing zoning regulations and maps for the Town
including, but not limited to, the Zoning Ordinance for
the Town of Freeport, Maine adopted May 6, 1986, and any
amendments thereto.
Section X Effect of Repeal of Ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in
force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or
penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit,
prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal,
for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed.
Section XI Severability of Parts of Code
If any section, paragraph, sentence or clause contained in this
Code shall for any reason be adjudged by any court of competent
6
jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such judgement
shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of the
rules, regulations and ordinances contained in this Code, but
shall be confined in its operation to the section, paragraph,
sentence, clause or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgement shall have been rendered.
Section XII Penalties
Whenever in this Code or in material adopted by reference by
this Code any act is prohibited, made, or declared to be
unlawful, or whenever in this Code or in material adopted by
reference by this Code the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful and where no
specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of such
provisions shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) plus costs. This penalty shall not
be deemed to be exclusive of any other appropriate legal or
equitable action. Each day any violation of this Code occurs
or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Section XIII Prohibited Acts Include Causing, Permitting,
Concealing
Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it
shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting,
suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission.
Section XIV Same Offense Punishable by Different Sections of
the Code; Town Attorney's Option
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is
created by different Sections of this Code, the Town's attorney
may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense.
Amended July 22, 2019
1
CHAPTER 2 FREEPORT ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I
SECTION 101 CORPORATE SEAL
SECTION 102 CHARTER
SECTION 103 BONDS
SECTION 104 OATHS OF OFFICE
SECTION 105 FUNDS
SECTION 106 DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS
SECTION 107 LEGAL DOCUMENTS
SECTION 108 COMPENSATION OF TOWN OFFICERS & OFFICIALS
SECTION 109 RECORDS
SECTION 110 PROPERTY
SECTION 111 ORDINANCE
SECTION 112 COUNCIL INVESTIGATIONS
SECTION 113 NOTICE
ARTICLE II
SECTION 201 COMPOSITION
SECTION 202 DUTIES
SECTION 203 COMPENSATION
SECTION 204 RIGHT TO HIRE
SECTION 205 PROCEDURE
ARTICLE III ELECTIONS
SECTION 301 GENERAL
SECTION 302 PLACE & TIME OF OPENING OF ELECTION
SECTION 303 ISSUANCE OF ELECTION WARRANTS
SECTION 304 FORM OF WARRANTS FOR TOWN ELECTIONS
SECTION 305 FORM OF RETURN WARRANTS
SECTION 306 VOTING PLACES
SECTION 307 BALLOT & ELECTION CLERKS
SECTION 308 COMPENSATION
SECTION 309 WARDENS
Amended July 22, 2019
2
ARTICLE IV TOWN MANAGER
SECTION 401 ESTABLISHMENT & METHOD OF APPOINTMENT
SECTION 402 DUTIES
SECTION 403 DIRECTION BY MANAGER
SECTION 404 ADMINISTRATIVE MANUAL
ARTICLE V DIVISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE
SECTION 501 ESTABLISHMENT
SECTION 502 LEGAL DEPARTMENT
SECTION 503 DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
SECTION 504 DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
SECTION 505 RECORDS DEPARTMENT
SECTION 506 POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION 507 FIRE AND RESCUE DEPARTMENT
SECTION 508 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
SECTION 509 INSPECTIONS DEPARTMENT
SECTION 510 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
SECTION 511 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WELFARE
SECTION 512 HEALTH OFFICER
SECTION 513 TOWN ASSESSOR
SECTION 514 TOWN ENGINEER
SECTION 515 REGISTRAR OF VOTERS
SECTION 516 MANAGER OF WINSLOW PARK
SECTION 517 CABLE TV DIRECTOR
SECTION 518 SOLID WASTE/RECYCLING DIRECTOR
SECTION 519 TOWN PLANNER
SECTION 520 HEAD LIBRARIAN
ARTICLE VI BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
SECTION 601 ESTABLISHMENT
SECTION 602 PLANNING BOARD
SECTION 603 CONSERVATION/LANDBANK COMMISSION
SECTION 604 COASTAL WATERS COMMISSION
SECTION 605 BOARD OF ASSESSMENT REVIEW
SECTION 606 BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION 607 SHELLFISH CONSERVATION COMMISSION
SECTION 608 FREEPORT COMMUNITY LIBRARY BOARD OF
DIRECTORS
SECTION 609 LICENSING BOARD
SECTION 610 WINSLOW PARK COMMISSION
SECTION 611 CABLE T.V. REGULATORY BOARD
SECTION 612 SUSTAINABILITY ADVISORY BOARD
Amended July 22, 2019
3
SECTION 613 PROJECT REVIEW BOARD
SECTION 614 COMPLETE STREETS COMMITTEE
SECTION 615 HUNTER ROAD FIELDS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION 616 ACTIVE LIVING ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Amended July 22, 2019
4
ARTICLE I
SECTION 101 - CORPORATE SEAL
The official seal of the Town of Freeport shall contain the words "Town of
Freeport, Maine, Incorporated l789" and shall appear as the reproduction shown
below.
SECTION 102 - CHARTER
The words "Town Charter" shall refer to the Freeport Town Charter established
in accordance with Maine Revised Statutes, Title 30, Chapter 201-A, the "Home
Rule" provisions, so-called, and as ratified by a municipal election in March
l972, and as may be further amended by municipal election.
SECTION 103 - BONDS (SURETY OR FIDELITY)
Each town official and employee who has responsibility for the collection,
custody or dispersal of public funds shall, prior to assuming his duties, obtain,
at the expense of the Town, a surety or fidelity bond, as the case may require, in
such amount and with such terms and conditions as shall be approved by the
Town Council.
SECTION 104 - OATH OF OFFICE
Every Town Officer or Official shall be sworn to the faithful discharge of their
duties as provided by Article IX, Section 9.03 of the Town Charter.
SECTION 105 - FUNDS
Amended July 22, 2019
5
Every Town Officer or Official shall maintain an accurate account of all moneys
which may by virtue of their municipal office be delivered unto them from
whatever source, stating from whom received and on what account the same was
paid; and with said moneys to be rendered to the Town Treasurer within thirty
(30) days, except where otherwise provided by the Town Council or Town
Treasurer.
SECTION 106 - DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS
All Warrants for disbursements of money shall be signed by the Chairman of the
Town Council, the Vice Chairman of the Town Council and the Treasurer. In the
event that any one of the aforementioned three are unavailable due to unexpected situations
which may include but not be limited to emergencies, sickness, vacation, etc., checks may be
issued upon securing two signatures. Further, no payment shall be made or obligation
incurred against any allotment or appropriation unless the Town Manager or his
designee certifies that there are, or will be, sufficient funds available to meet
the payment or incurred obligation when it becomes due and payable.
SECTION 107 - LEGAL DOCUMENTS
All legal documents shall be signed and executed by the Town Manager upon
authorization by the Town Council, except as may be otherwise ordered by the
Town Council or otherwise authorized by ordinance or State Law.
SECTION 108 - COMPENSATION OF TOWN OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS
The Town Council shall determine the salaries of officials they appoint or who
are otherwise elected to a Town Office. The Town Manager shall be authorized
to fix the salaries of his appointees in accordance with the provisions of the
adopted Personnel Code, as amended, and within authorized expenditure limits
as adopted by the Town Council.
SECTION 109 - RECORDS
All records kept by an officer of the Town shall be open to inspection by the
Town Manager whether or not such records are required by statute or ordinance.
Any records, warrants of accounts of every department, office or agency of the
Town which are required to be held open by statute or ordinance shall be open
to inspection by any citizen at such reasonable times and under such reasonable
regulations established by the Town Manager. Each department head shall be
held responsible for preserving the public records under his jurisdiction. Each
Amended July 22, 2019
6
department head shall retain a copy of all communications issued by him/her to
his/her department. No public records relative to the business of any
department shall be destroyed or permanently removed from the files without
the approval of the Town Manager. All department heads and secretaries to
Town Council, appointed Boards, Commissions and Committees shall be
required to make an annual report to the Town Manager as well as such other
reports as may be required by the Town Council or the Town Manager.
SECTION 110 - PROPERTY
The Town Assessor shall be required to maintain a list of all Town Property in
the form of real estate. The Town Manager shall be required to maintain a list
of all other insurable town property and equipment, exclusive of Department of
Education properties and equipment.
The Town Council hereby establishes, that without its expressed approval, no
town property, supplies or equipment of any kind shall be loaned, rented or
otherwise provided for the personal gain of a private citizen, except that the
Town Manager is authorized to make exceptions hereto, when in his/her opinion
the circumstances for reason of public health, safety or welfare especially so
warrant, in which case he/she shall specify the terms thereof.
SECTION 111 - ORDINANCES
111.1 Ordinances shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of Article
II., Section 12 of the Town Charter.
111.2 Unless expressly provided for by ordinance, repeal of any ordinance of
the Town shall not operate to revive provisions of any other prior
ordinance. The provisions of any ordinance which has been repealed
remain in force for the redress of all past violations of them, and for the
recovery of penalties and forfeitures already incurred, and for the
preservation of all rights and remedies existing by them and so far as they
apply to any office, trust proceeding, right, contract or event already
affected by them.
SECTION 112 - COUNCIL INVESTIGATIONS
The Council may make investigations into the affairs of the Town and the
conduct of any Town department, office, or agency, as authorized by Article II,
Section 4 of the Town Charter. For the purposes of conducting such
investigations, the Town Council may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and
compel the submission of books, papers or other such evidence. Failure of
Amended July 22, 2019
7
compliance of such subpoena or submission of books, papers or other evidence
as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute a civil violation
and shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $25.00, not more than $100.00
as authorized by Article II - Section II (F) of the Town Charter.
SECTION 113 - NOTICE
Notice regarding dangerous structures, abating nuisances, removing signs or
signposts, making sewer connections, or any other act, the expense of which, if
performed by the Town, may be collected from the property owner in an action
at law, shall be served in the manner provided by law, or if no specific
provision is made:
113.1 By delivering the notice to the owner personally or, if notice cannot
with due diligence be given by this method, then
113.2 By mailing the notice by registered mail to such owner at his last
known address, or,
113.3 If the owner is unknown, by posting the notice in some conspicuous
place on the premises five (5) days prior to the date set therein for
compliance.
No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal or tear down an
official notice or placard posted by a Town official unless permission is given
to remove said notice.
ARTICLE II TOWN COUNCIL
SECTION 201 - COMPOSITION
The Town Council of the Town of Freeport shall consist of seven (7) members
as prescribed by Article II, Section 1, of the Town Charter.
SECTION 202 - DUTIES
The Town Council shall have all the duties and responsibilities as prescribed by
the Town Charter.
SECTION 203 - COMPENSATION
Amended July 22, 2019
8
The Town Council shall determine the compensation of its members as
prescribed by Article II, Section VIII and Article X, of the Town Charter.
SECTION 204 - RIGHT TO HIRE
The Town Council shall have the right to hire a secretary for the purpose of
recording the minutes of the Council Meetings and for the purposes outlined in
Article II, Section 10 of the Town Charter.
SECTION 205 - PROCEDURE
The Town Council meetings shall be conducted in a manner that is in
accordance with the Rules and Procedure for the Town Council as adopted
May 1, 1973, as may be amended, and as prescribed by Article II, Section 11 of
the Town Charter.
ARTICLE III ELECTIONS
SECTION 301 - GENERAL
The provisions of the Laws of the State of Maine relating to the qualifications
of electors, registration, the manner of voting, the duties of election officers and
all other particulars in respect to preparation for, conducting, and management
of elections, so far as they may be applicable, shall govern all municipal
elections except as otherwise provided in Articles VII, VIII and IX of the Town
Charter.
SECTION 302 - PLACE AND TIME OF OPENING ELECTION
Subject to the provisions of the Town Charter and Laws of the State of Maine, it
shall be the duty of the Town Council to fix the place and time of the opening of
the polls in the election of officers, or in any special election to decide matters
submitted to a vote of the citizens, and cause same to be inserted in any warrant
and notification to the inhabitants of such election.
SECTION 303 - ISSUANCE OF ELECTION WARRANTS
Amended July 22, 2019
9
Warrants for calling elections shall be issued by the Town Council and contain a
statement of the object of the election, and the time and place at which the
election shall be held, and be served by a police officer, constable or any
resident of the Town. The serving of an election warrant shall consist of
posting an attested copy of the warrant for each Council District in a public and
conspicuous place within each respective Council District, and posting one
attested copy of the warrants for all Council Districts in one public and
conspicuous place other than may be used for the posting of warrants for
individual Council Districts at least seven (7) days before the time of said
election, and the return of warrants shall be submitted to the Town Clerk before
the time of the election therein named.
SECTION 304 - FORM OF WARRANTS FOR TOWN ELECTIONS
The form of warrants for calling elections of the citizens shall be as follows:
WARRANT FOR MUNICIPAL ELECTION
Month, Day, Year
T0 , a constable of the Town of Freeport, County of Cumberland,
State of Maine: You are hereby required in the name of the STATE of MAINE to
notify the voters of this Municipality of the election described in this
WARRANT
TO THE VOTERS OF FREEPORT, MAINE:
You are hereby notified that a MUNICIPAL ELECTION will be held at
MONTH, DAY, YEAR
For the purpose of
THE POLLS OPEN AT A.M. AND CLOSE AT 8:00 P.M.
The Registrar of Voters and Deputy Registrars will be present while the polls
are open to accept new registrations and make address, name and/or enrollment
changes
Pursuant to Tile 21-A, Section 759(7), absentee ballots will be processed at the
polls at the following times:
Amended July 22, 2019
10
Given under our hands at Freeport in the County of Cumberland and State of
Maine this day of 20
MAJORITY OF MUNICIPAL OFFICERS
SECTION 305 - FORM OF RETURN OF WARRANT
The form of the return of the warrant mentioned in this Chapter shall be in
substance as follows:
CONSTABLE’S RETURN
Pursuant to this warrant, I have notified the inhabitants of the Town of Freeport
qualified by law to vote, to assemble at the time and place for the purpose
within named by posting on the day of ,20 ,
attested copies of this warrant at
all being public and conspicuous places in the Town of
Freeport, Maine.
, Constable
SECTION 306 - VOTING PLACES
The Town Council shall have the authority to designate such voting places as it
may deem necessary in order to increase the voting efficiency of the Town.
SECTION 307 - BALLOT AND ELECTION CLERKS
Amended July 22, 2019
11
Ballot and Election Clerks shall be governed by the provisions of M.R.S.A. 2l,
Section 532, as amended.
SECTION 308 - COMPENSATION
Each warden, election and ballot clerk shall be paid such amount per hour for
each election held in the Town of Freeport at which they shall attend, as the
Town Council may determine.
SECTION 309 - WARDENS
Election wardens shall be a municipal officer and shall, forthwith after each
election, complete and deposit the records of their respective places and all
papers connected therewith with the Town Clerk.
ARTICLE IV TOWN MANAGER
SECTION 401 - ESTABLISHMENT AND METHOD OF APPOINTMENT
The Town Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the Town, with
appointment by the Town Council, to serve during the pleasure of the Council.
He/she may head one or more departments and shall be responsible to the
Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the Town. He/she shall
abide by the provisions set forth in Article III of the Town Charter.
SECTION 402 - DUTIES
The Town Manager shall:
402.1 Bonds - Secure bonds for the positions of Town Manager and Tax
Collector in the penal sum of $50,000.00 and for the positions of
Treasurer, Overseer of the Poor and Road Commissioner in the penal
sum of $50,000.00.
402.2 Ex-Officio Member - Be an ex-officio member of all boards and
commissions. May attend all meetings and participate but may not
vote.
402.3 Contracts Examine all proposed contracts to which the Town may be
party and may sign on behalf of the Town any contract authorized by
the Council.
Amended July 22, 2019
12
402.4 Records
1. Prepare and have custody of all municipal records required by Law
to be kept by the Town which are not kept by any other specific
officer.
2. Make available clerical assistance for the preparation of records
required to be kept by a specific officer.
402.5 Purchasing Agent - Be the purchasing agent.
1. When possible, establish sets of standards and specifications to
control all purchases made by the Town.
2. When required by Law or Ordinance, or when in the judgment of the
Town Manager the Town stands to benefit there from, the Town
Manager shall prepare specifications for bids for purchases made by
the Town, and shall publish an invitation to bid on such terms and
conditions as he/she may deem appropriate.
402.6 Road Commissioner - Have general responsibility for the care of
public ways with the Director of Public Works having direct
responsibility for the day-to-day operations of the Highway
Department.
402.7 Personnel Director - Be the general personnel director, except where
specific provision to the contrary is made by law or by the Council,
and prepare personnel rules as outlined in Article IV.
402.8 Police Commissioner - Have general responsibility for the supervision
of Town operated law enforcement agencies with the Chief of Police
having direct responsibility for the day-to-day operations of the Police
Department.
402.9 Fire Commissioner - Have general responsibility for the supervision
of Town operated fire fighting and rescue agencies with the Fire Chief
having direct responsibility for the day-to-day operations of the Fire
Department.
SECTION 403 - DIRECTION BY MANAGER
Amended July 22, 2019
13
Direct and supervise all departments, offices, and agencies that the Council by
Ordinance may establish in accordance with Article IV of the Town Charter.
SECTION 404 - ADMINISTRATIVE MANUAL
The Town Manager is hereby authorized to establish by regulation
administrative procedures to govern the functioning of all municipal
departments except the Department of Education. The procedures shall be
published in an Administrative Manual and shall be distributed to the Town
Council, to all department heads and administrative officials and to all others
who, in the judgment of the Town Manager, derive benefit therefrom. A copy of
the Administrative Manual shall be available for public inspection at the
Administrative Offices of the Town during regular business hours.
ARTICLE V DIVISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE
SECTION 501 - ESTABLISHMENT
501.1 There shall continue to be a Legal Department of the Town which
shall be the responsibility of the Town Attorney who shall be
appointed by the Town Council in accordance with Article II, Section
3 of the Town Charter.
501.2 There shall continue to be a Department of Education of the Town
which shall be the responsibility of the School Committee who shall
be elected by the voters in accordance with Article V of the Town
Charter.
501.3 The Administrative Service of the Town shall be divided into the
following Departments and corresponding Department Heads:
Department Head
(a) Finance Department Treasurer - Tax Collector
(b) Records Department Town Clerk
(c) Police Department Police Chief
(d) Fire Department Fire Chief
(e) Inspections Department Codes Enforcement Officer
(f) Public Works Department Director of Public Works
Amended July 22, 2019
14
(g) Welfare Department Overseer of the Poor
(h) Emergency Management Fire Chief
1. In addition to Department Heads, the following Administrative Officials
shall be directly responsible to the Town Manager:
(a) Health Officer
(b) Town Assessor
(c) Town Engineer
(d) Tree Warden
(e) Fire Warden
(f) Registrar of Voters
(g) Winslow Park Manager
(h) Cable TV Director
(i) Solid Waste/Recycling Director
(j) Town Planner
(k) Rescue Chief
(l) Head Librarian
2. Department Heads and Administrative Officials shall:
(a) Be immediately responsible to the Town Manager for administering
their respective departments. The Town Manager may direct any department
or office except the Department of Education to perform work for any other
administrative unit;
(b) Perform all duties required by their office, by Charter, by
Ordinance, or by other laws, and they shall perform such duties, not in
conflict therewith, as may be assigned by the Town Manager;
(c) Establish and maintain a system of records and reports sufficient in
detail to furnish information necessary for proper control of departmental
activities, and to form a basis for reports required by the Town Manager;
(d) Have the authority to delegate duties and responsibilities as deemed
advisable, together with a proportionate authority for their fulfillment to
members of the departments or division under their direction; but in no case
shall the delegation of such duties and responsibilities relieve a department
head from responsibility and accountability for the duties and responsibilities
assigned to him/her;
(e) Have, when so authorized by the Town Manager, authority to
appoint and remove subordinates in their respective departments except as
otherwise provided by law, by the Town Charter or by rules adopted pursuant
Amended July 22, 2019
15
to the Town Charter.
SECTION 502 - LEGAL DEPARTMENT
502.1 Establishment
There shall be a Legal Department, the head of which shall be the
Town Attorney, who shall be appointed by the Town Council.
502.2 Duties of the Town Attorney
1. Advise the Town Council or its Committees or any other Town
Officer, when thereto requested, upon all legal questions arising in
the conduct of the affairs of the municipal corporation.
2. Prepare or revise ordinances when so requested by the Town
Council or Town Manager.
3. Provide a legal opinion upon any matter or question submitted to
him by the Town Council or Town Manager.
4. Attend meetings of the Town Council upon request of the Chairman
of the Town Council or Town Manager.
5. Prepare or review all contracts and instruments to which the Town
is a party and shall approve, as to form, any bonds required to be
submitted to the Town.
6. Be prepared to prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at
law or equity to which the Town is a party, and to report the
outcome of any litigation in which the Town has an interest to the
Town Council and the Town Manager.
7. Keep a complete record of all suits in which the Town has an
interest.
8. Deliver all records, documents and property belonging to the Town
to his successor in office, who shall give him/her duplicate receipts
therefore, one of which shall be filed with the Town Manager.
SECTION 503 - DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
There shall continue to be a Department of Education established in accordance
with the provisions of Article V of the Town Charter.
SECTION 504 - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
504.1 Establishment There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of
which shall be the Town Treasurer, who shall be appointed by the
Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. The
Treasurer shall be assisted by a Town Tax Collector who shall also be
Amended July 22, 2019
16
appointed by the Town Manager subject to confirmation by the Town
Council. The Town Treasurer and Tax Collector may appoint deputies
in accordance with the provisions of M.R.S.A. 30, Chapter 2255.There
shall also be a Town Purchasing Agent, who shall be the Town
Manager.
504.2 Duties of the Town Treasurer
1. Be responsible for the proper pre-audit and recording of all
financial transactions.
2. Collect all moneys and fees due to the Town.
3. Be responsible for the proper custody of all capital reserve accounts
and make withdrawals from such accounts with Council
authorization.
4. Pay warrants and payrolls upon certification of the Town Council
Chairman and Vice Chairman.
5. Deposit to the credit of the Town all receipts of funds from Federal,
State, and miscellaneous sources.
6. Discharge all responsibilities conferred or imposed upon him/her by
State Law or Town Ordinance.
7. Audit and file all policies of insurance placed by the Town.
504.3 Duties of Town Purchasing Agent
1. Do all purchasing required by the various departments of the Town
Government, excepting the Department of Education.
2. Let contracts or purchase orders to and including Five-Hundred
Dollars ($500.00) in excess of amounts allocated by vote of the
Town Council so long as it does not exceed the maximum
expenditure authority of the related department budget. The
Council Chairman and Vice Chairman may authorize expenditures
on contracts or purchase orders in excess of amounts allocated by
vote of the Town Council to a limit of Two-Thousand Dollars
($2,000.00) so long as it does not exceed the maximum expenditure
authority of the related total appropriation.
3. Receive sealed bids for purchases and contracts in excess of Ten-
Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00), present them to the Town Council
for approval and advise the Town Council on the advantages or
disadvantages on contractual or bid proposals.
SECTION 505 - RECORDS DEPARTMENT
Amended July 22, 2019
17
505.1 Establishment and Appointment of Town Clerk
There shall be a Records Department, the head of which shall be the
Town Clerk, who shall be appointed by the Town Manager, subject to
confirmation by the Town Council. The Town Clerk may appoint a
Deputy Town Clerk to act as his/her agent, and as many assistant
clerks as approved by the Town Manager.
505.2 Duties of Town Clerk
1. Secure a bond in the penal sum of $15,000.00.
2. Seal and attest all contracts of the Town along with such other
documents that require this type of action.
3. Turn over all money collected to the Treasurer.
4. Have proper accounts for all money received.
5. Maintain such records and perform such duties as may be required
by the Laws of the State of Maine or as may be required, from time
to time, by the Town Manager.
6. Keep a record of all ordinances and other records that the Clerk is
required to keep by statute.
7. Issue certificates to those appointed to any office.
8. Obtain and maintain statistics relating to births, marriages and
deaths.
9. Be custodian of the Town Seal.
10.Make all arrangements for elections. Keep and maintain all
election records and have custody of all property used in connection
with elections.
SECTION 506 - POLICE DEPARTMENT
506.1 Establishment and Appointments
There shall be a Police Department, the head of which shall be the
Police Chief who shall be appointed by the Town Manager subject to
confirmation by the Town Council. There shall also be a Harbor
Master and Shellfish Warden who shall be administratively responsible
to the Chief of Police.
506.2 Number of Policemen
The Town Manager shall make all appointments to the Police
Department and may entertain recommendations both as to the number
and names of possible appointees of both regular and special
policemen from the Chief of Police, except as the Town Manager may
delegate his/her appointive powers in the Police Department to the
Chief of Police. Special policemen shall have all the powers vested in
the regular Town Policemen; said special policemen shall, however,
Amended July 22, 2019
18
serve only when and as specifically required by the Police Chief, and
shall function only under the direction of the Police Chief; they shall
assist the Police Chief whenever called upon and whenever so called
shall be compensated for services
506.3 Promotions
Promotions within the Police Department shall be made by the Town
Manager based on recommendations submitted by the Chief of Police.
506.4 Duties of Police Chief
1. The Police Chief shall be the commanding officer of the Police
Force. He/she shall:
2. Be responsible for the enforcement of law and order.
3. Direct the police work of the Town.
4. Arrange for the attendance of one or more Police Officers at every
fire, to preserve order and to prevent theft and destruction of
property.
5. Cause the streets, ways and lands of the Town to be inspected
regularly and cause to be removed all nuisances, obstructions or
impediments therein, causing offenders to be prosecuted when
necessary to abate such nuisances.
6. Cause to be observed, and reported immediately to the
Superintendent of Public Works, all defects and want of repair in
street and sidewalks.
7. Receive and cause to be delivered all notices and papers to members
of the Town Council when requested by the Town Manager, and
make due return thereof.
8. Be responsible for the maintenance and care of all property used by
the Police Department.
9. Investigate, or cause to be investigated, the cause and
circumstances of any accident occurring for which the Town may be
liable, instruct all police officers to report to him/her such
accidents, and notify the Town Manager.
10.Investigate promptly all applicants for any license or permit when
such application requires certification by the Police Chief, and
either deliver promptly to the Town Clerk a certificate approving
such license or permit, or promptly advise the Town Clerk of
his/her refusal to so certify.
506.5 Duties of the Members
The members shall:
1. Enforce all Ordinances of the Town and all laws effective in the
Town.
2. Preserve order, prevent violations of the Law and arrest those who
violate the Law.
Amended July 22, 2019
19
3. Respond to all complaints made to the Department and attempt to
resolve them.
4. Exercise due caution to avoid unnecessary damage to or loss of
Department property.
5. Immediately report to their superior officer any defect observed by
or reported to them with respect to any police apparatus or
equipment unless they can remedy the situation.
6. Be thoroughly familiar with all Departmental General Orders,
Special Orders, and Rules and Regulations.
7. Whenever an incident is brought to the attention of a Police Officer
whereby the Town may be subject to a liability, said Police Officer
shall immediately communicate such evidence of potential liability
to the Chief of Police.
506.6 Harbor Master
1. Establishment and Appointment The Town Manager shall appoint a
Harbor Master, subject to confirmation by the Town Council.
2. Duties of the Harbor Master The Harbor Master shall:
a) Enforce all Ordinances and Laws of the Town relative to
the Harbor and Port of Freeport.
b) Notify and warn the owner of any dock, pier, wharf or
landing strip that has fallen into disrepair or remains in a
dangerous condition, and cause the condition to be abated
as a nuisance if not corrected within a reasonable period
of time as specified by the Harbor Master.
c) Enforce the provisions of any Statute, Ordinance and any
Rules and Regulations legally promulgated thereunder,
applicable to the harbor, waterfront and watercraft.
d) Be overseer of the Town's mooring and regulate the use of
all moorings for safety and traffic flow purposes.
e) Promote order in the Harbor so that the safety and
convenience of those using the Harbor shall be enhanced.
f) Have the Rules and Regulations of the port printed and
distributed.
g) Staff the Coastal Waters Commission.
506.7 Marine Resource Conservation Officer
1. Establishment and Appointment The Town Manager shall appoint a
Marine Resource Conservation Officer, subject to confirmation by
the Town Council.
2. Duties The Marine Resource Conservation Officer shall enforce all
Town Ordinances and State Laws that pertain to the regulations of
the clam flats situated within the Town. The Marine Resource
Conservation Officer shall be responsible for establishing and
managing a shellfish management program which shall include
Amended July 22, 2019
20
water testing, flat surveys and other local and state requirements.
The Marine Resource Conservation Officer shall act as a liaison
with the Department of Marine Resources and Environmental
Protection and coordinate with DEP on overboard discharge issues.
The Marine Resource Conservation Officer shall be responsible for
other conservation related activities as assigned by the Town
Manager, and other duties as assigned by the Chief of Police.
SECTION 507 - FIRE AND RESCUE DEPARTMENT
507.1 Establishment and Appointment
There shall be a Fire and Rescue Department, the heads of which shall
be the Fire-Rescue Chief, who shall be appointed by the Town Manager
subject to confirmation by the Town Council.
FIRE
507.2 Membership
The Town Manager shall make all appointments to the Fire-Rescue
Department and may entertain recommendations both as to the number
and names of possible appointees from the Fire-Rescue Chief.
507.3 Promotions
Promotions within the Fire-Rescue Department shall be made by the
Town Manager based on recommendations submitted by the Fire-
Rescue Chief.
507.4 Duties of Fire Chief
1. Forest Fire Warden - In accordance with Title 12, M.R.S.A. 8902,
the Fire-Rescue Chief shall be appointed as Forest Fire Warden and
no other person shall be appointed without the approval of the Town
Council. The Forest Fire Warden shall serve at the pleasure of the
Director of the Bureau of Forestry and shall be sworn to the faithful
discharge of their duties and a certificate thereof shall be returned
to the office of the Director of the Bureau of Forestry. The
appointed Forest Fire Warden may appoint one or more Deputy
Forest Fire Wardens subject to approval of the Town Manager and
may delegate to one of them authority to issue burning permits.
2. Direct and control all Town firefighters and rescue personnel in the
performance of emergency operations within the municipality
except as provided in Section 504.4, 1. of this Code.
3. Be authorized, with the approval of the Town Manager, to
promulgate administrative rules and regulations relating to
municipal fire and rescue protection, consistent with State Statutes
and Ordinances.
Amended July 22, 2019
21
4. Provide a training program for first responders within the Town in
cooperation with appropriate governmental agencies.
5. Provide for the maintenance of all Town owned fire and rescue
equipment and buildings used by the Town Fire-Rescue Department.
6. Prepare and submit annually to the Town Manager a budget relating
to fire-rescue protection.
7. Be authorized to obtain assistance from persons at the scene of an
emergency to assist in the protection of persons and property from
injury.
8. Be authorized to pull down and demolish structures and
appurtenances if he judges it necessary to prevent the spread of fire.
9. Serve as the Emergency Management Director.
10.Be responsible for the administration of the non-emergency
transportation (NET) program.
SECTION 508 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
508.1 Establishment and Appointment
There shall be a Freeport Emergency Management Department, the
head of which shall be the Fire Chief.
508.2 Duties of Emergency Management
Shall be prepared to effectively handle any emergency operation due to
natural or man-made disasters.
508.3 Duties of Emergency Management Director
1. Prepare an Emergency Management Plan for the Town of Freeport.
2. Preserve and improve the Emergency Management Program.
3. Maintain cooperation with the nearby communities and the County,
State and Federal Emergency Management Associations.
SECTION 509 - INSPECTIONS DEPARTMENT
509.1 Establishment and Appointment
There shall be a Department of Inspections, the head of which shall be
the Codes Enforcement Officer who shall be appointed by the Town
Manager subject to confirmation by the Town Council. The Codes
Enforcement Officer may be assisted by a Building Inspector,
Plumbing Inspector and Electrical Inspector, who shall be appointed by
the Town Manager, or the Codes Enforcement Officer may serve as any
or all such Inspectors. In addition, these Inspectors will coordinate
their work with the Fire Chief to assure that all safety regulations are
being complied with.
Amended July 22, 2019
22
509.2 Duties of the Inspectors
1. It shall be the responsibility of the Inspectors to enforce the
Ordinances, Codes, and Statutes that pertain to the development of
property, building construction and maintenance.
2. It shall be unlawful for an Inspector to be engaged in any personal
business activities that are directly related to his/her role as a
Codes Enforcement Officer within the Town.
3. An Inspector in accordance with his/her duties, may place a stop
order on activities that are in violation of any municipal code or
statute that he/she is responsible for enforcing.
4. An Inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy and/or approval
when he/she determines that all the requirements of any municipal
code or statute which he/she must enforce have been met.
509.3 Codes Enforcement Officer
1. The Codes Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for enforcing
all codes pertaining to the development or improvement of any
property within the Town.
2. The Codes Enforcement Officer shall serve as the building official
as defined in Section 2371 of Title 25 of the Maine Revised Statutes
and shall be responsible for issuing building permits and
certificates of occupancy.
3. The Codes Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for inspecting
all permitted construction for compliance with the following
components of the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code as
such components may be revised from time to time by the Technical
Building Codes and Standards Board:
a) the 2015 International Building Code;
b) the 2015 International Existing Building Code; and
c) the 2015 International Residential Code.
d) the 2009 International Energy Conservation Code:
e) the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-
Conditioning Engineers, Standards (ASHRAE) 62.1-2013
(Ventilation for Acceptable Indoor Air Quality), 62.2-2013
(Ventilation and Acceptable Indoor Air Quality in Low-
Rise Residential Buildings) and 90.1-2013 (Energy
Standard for Buildings except Low-Rise Residential
Buildings), editions without addenda; and
f) The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM),
E-1465-08, Standard practice for Radon Control Options
for Design and Construction of New Low-Rise Residential
Buildings.
4. The Codes Enforcement Officer shall have such other duties as may
be imposed upon him/her by law or, from time to time, by the Town
Council or Town Manager.
Amended July 22, 2019
23
509.4 Duties of the Building Inspector
The Building Inspector, when authorized by the Codes Enforcement
Officer, may issue building permits and certificates of occupancy.
509.5 Duties of the Plumbing Inspector
Shall be responsible for issuing plumbing permits and inspecting all
permitted plumbing work in accordance to the State Plumbing Code
and/or such Codes as may be adopted by the Town Council.
509.6 Duties of the Electrical Inspector
Shall be responsible for inspecting all electrical work in accordance
with the National Electrical Code as adopted by the Town Council
and/or such other Codes as may be adopted by the Town Council.
509.7 Other Duties of the Codes Enforcement Officer
The Codes Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for issuing other
permits as necessary.
SECTION 510 - PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
510.1 Establishment and Appointment
There shall be a Public Works Department, the head of which shall be
the Town Engineer/Director of Public Works who shall be appointed by
the Town Manager subject to confirmation by the Town Council.
510.2 Number of Public Works Employees
The Town Manager shall make all appointments to the Public Works
Department and may entertain recommendations both as to the number
and names of possible appointees from the Town Engineer/Director of
Public Works, except as the Town Manager may delegate his
appointive powers in the Public Works Department to the Town
Engineer/Director of Public Works.
510.3 Promotions
Promotions within the Public Works Department shall be made by the
Town Manager based on recommendations submitted by the Town
Engineer/Director of Public Works.
510.4 Duties of the Town Engineer/Director of Public Works
Amended July 22, 2019
24
1. Responsible for all matters pertaining to construction, maintenance,
and operation of the Town's physical properties as directed by the
Town Manager.
2. Supervises and directs the Department’s activities, delegating to
subordinates as appropriate, but responsible for planning,
coordinating and evaluating programs and activities.
3. Develops and administers the annual department budget, program
estimates and costs, and Capital Improvement Plan under the
direction of the Town Manager.
4. Responsible for the preparation and specifications of all contracts
related to public works improvements.
5. Oversees the Town Solid Waste/Recycling Center.
510.5 Tree Warden
1. Establishment and Appointment
There shall be a Tree Warden appointed by the Town Manager.
2. Duties of the Tree Warden
a) Insure that all Statutes or Ordinances for the protection and
planting of trees are enforced.
b) Responsible for the cutting, trimming and pruning of trees in
the streets and public places of the Town.
SECTION 511 - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WELFARE
511.1 Establishment
There shall be a Department of Public Welfare, the head of which shall
be the Overseer of the Poor who shall be appointed by the Town
Manager subject to confirmation by the Town Council.
511.2 Duties of the Overseer of the Poor
1. Responsible for the administration of the Town's General
Assistance Account in accordance with the General Assistance
Guidelines, and as may be further amended.
2. Responsible for the planning, budgeting reporting and control of the
General Assistance Program.
3. Exercise all powers and perform all duties conferred or imposed by
State Law upon Overseers of the Poor.
SECTION 512 - HEALTH OFFICER
512.1 Establishment and Appointment
Amended July 22, 2019
25
There shall be a Health Officer appointed by the Town Manager,
subject to confirmation by the Town Council.
512.2 Duties of Health Officer
1. Enforce all Ordinances containing provisions for the protection of
public health.
2. Present reports to the Town Manager as may be required.
SECTION 513 - TOWN ASSESSOR
513.1 Establishment and Appointment
There shall be a Town Assessor who shall be appointed by the Town
Manager subject to confirmation by the Town Council, and who shall
be responsible for the performance of all work in connection with the
assessing of property and preparation of all assessment and tax rolls
and tax notices as required by Article IV, Section IV of the Town
Charter.
513.2 Duties of Town Assessor
1. Be responsible for the assessing of property and for preparing the
assessment, tax rolls and tax notices.
2. The assessor shall not appraise or sell real estate for a fee within
the Town.
3. Maintain a list of all Town Property.
4. Perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him/her by law
or regulation.
SECTION 514 - TOWN ENGINEER
514.1 Establishment and Appointment
There shall be a Town Engineer who shall be appointed by the
Town Manager subject to confirmation by the Town Council.
514.2 Duties of the Town Engineer
1. Perform the duties as from time to time may be imposed upon
him/her by the Planning Board, Town Council or Town Manager.
2. Perform such duties as are provided by law or by ordinance.
3. Make reports to the Town Council or Planning Board regarding
public improvements or such other work that may be requested, and
shall offer suggestions regarding public improvements or such other
work that may be requested, and shall offer suggestions regarding
the same, as shall in his/her judgment seem best and proper.
4. Staff the Traffic & Parking Committee.
Amended July 22, 2019
26
SECTION 515 - REGISTRAR OF VOTERS
515.1 Establishment and Appointment
There shall be a Registrar of Voters who shall be appointed by the
Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. The
Registrar of Voters may appoint Deputies in accordance with
provisions of M.R.S.A. 2l, Section 42.
515.2 Duties of the Registrar of Voters
The Registrar of Voters shall comply with State Laws and any Town
Ordinance related to the position.
SECTION 516 - MANAGER OF WINSLOW PARK
516.1 Establishment and Appointment
There shall be a Manager of Winslow Memorial Park who shall be
appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town
Council.
516.2 Duties of the Manager of Winslow Park
1. Be responsible for the care and maintenance of Winslow Memorial
Park.
2. Insure that the provisions of the Adelaide M. Harb Trust are
complied with and will make recommendations to the Town Council
whereby compliance with the Trust shall be assured.
3. Provide the Park Commission with an annual report on the
performance of the Adelaide Harb Trust Fund Trustee.
4. The Park Manager shall act as staff for the Park Commission.
5. The Park Manager will work directly for the Town Manager.
ARTICLE VI BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
SECTION 601 - ESTABLISHMENT
There are hereby continued or created and established the following Boards and
Commissions to be appointed by the Town Council:
1. Planning Board
2. Conservation Commission
3. Coastal Waters Commission
Amended July 22, 2019
27
4. Board of Assessment Review
5. Board of Appeals
6. Shellfish Conservation Commission
7. Freeport Community Library Board of Directors
8. Licensing Board
9. Winslow Park Commission
10. Cable TV Regulatory Board
11. Solid Waste/Recycling Advisory Board
12. Project Review Board
13.Traffic & Parking Committee
601.1 Appointments to Boards and Commissions
1. Individuals appointed to boards and commissions will be limited to three
terms or a total of nine (9) years, provided that the Appointments
Committee may waive this limitation in exigent circumstances as
determined by an affirmative vote of a majority of the Appointments
Committee. Additionally, individuals who serve as chair or vice chair of
the board or commission at least four (4) of the previous nine (9) years
shall be exempt from this limitation. Appointments due to exigent
circumstances must be approved by a majority of the Town Council.
2. Individuals serving on boards or commissions must be residents of the
Town of Freeport.
3. A member of a board or commission shall forfeit his or her seat if he or
she (a) is convicted of a crime or offense which is reasonably related to
his or her ability to serve; (b) fails to attend three consecutive regular
meetings without being excused by the chairperson, or; (c) fails to attend
75% of all regular meetings in a calendar year (effective 1/1/99).
4. The Town Council may remove any member of a board or commission for
just cause but the affirmative vote of at least the majority plus one
member of the Town Council shall be required.
5. Interim Appointments - Any person appointed to fill an unexpired term
shall be credited with a full term if more than half of the unexpired term
remains. If less than half the unexpired term remains, it shall not count
toward the two term or six year limitation.
6. Each Board and Commission shall hold an election of officers at the first
regularly scheduled meeting following the annual appointments of the
Town Council.
SECTION 602 - PLANNING BOARD
There shall continue to be a Planning Board as created in accordance with the
provisions of Home Rule granted by Article VIII of the State of Maine
Constitution by M.R.S.A. 30, Section 1917 and by the Town of Freeport
Planning Board Ordinance adopted by the Town Council on March 9, 1973, and
as may be amended.
Amended July 22, 2019
28
602.1 Establishment The Planning Board of the Town of Freeport is hereby
created and constituted under the provisions of Article VIII-A of the
Maine Constitution and by Title 30, Charter 201-A, Section 1917
M.R.S.A, 1964, as they can be amended.
1 The Planning Board shall consist of seven members appointed
by the Town Council. They shall all be residents of the Town
of Freeport and interested or skilled in planning, public
historical preservation, environmental protection,
architecture, construction, and engineering, while striving to
protect the diversity of Freeport. Members shall serve
without compensation.
2 Neither a municipal officer nor a member of the (Zoning)
Board of Appeals, or Project Review Board may be a member
of the Planning Board.
3 The term of office of a member shall be three years except for
initial appointments which shall be as follows: three
members for three-year terms, two members for two-year
terms, and two members for one-year terms. Upon expiration
of their terms, members shall continue to serve until their
successors are appointed and qualified. In addition, the
Planning Board has the ability to appoint members to an adhoc
committee for specific studies.
4 The Board shall annually elect a Chairman and Vice-
Chairman and a Secretary from its own membership, and may
create and fill other offices as it may determine. Officers
shall serve one-year terms and shall be eligible for reelection.
5 When there is a permanent vacancy, the Town Council shall,
within sixty days of its occurrence, appoint a person to serve
for the unexpired term.
6 The Chairman shall call meetings of the Board as required
and shall call at least one regular meeting of the Board each
month. The Chairman shall also call meetings of the Board
when requested to do so by a majority of the members or by
the municipal officers. A quorum of the Board necessary to
conduct an official Board Meeting shall consist of at least
four (4) members. Final action on any matter brought before
the Planning Board shall require the concurring vote of a
majority of those present and voting. The Chairman or the
Vice-Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the Board.
The Chairman shall be the official spokesman of the Board.
7 Any question of whether a particular issue involves a conflict
of interest sufficient to disqualify a member from voting
thereon shall be decided by a majority vote of the members
Amended July 22, 2019
29
present and voting, except the member who is being
challenged.
8 The Board shall adopt rules for transaction of business,
subject to the approval of the Town Council and the Secretary
shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions,
correspondence, findings and determinations. All records
shall be deemed public and may be inspected at reasonable
times.
9 The Board, subject to the Town Council's prior consent, shall
have the right to retain and pay for the services and expenses
of professional help required in carrying out the duties and
responsibilities of this Code. The cost of such services shall
be borne by the applicant.
602.2 Duties and Responsibilities
The Planning Board shall have the duty and responsibility to:
1 Prepare, and revise and maintain, subject to the approval of
the Town Council, a Comprehensive Plan for the Town of
Freeport in accordance with the provisions of 30 M.R.S.A.
Subsection 4961. The Planning Board shall constitute the
“local planning committee” under 30-A M.R.S.A. section
4324(2).
2 Give the public ample opportunity to be heard concerning the
development of the Comprehensive Plan.
3 Advise the Town Council on proposed changes to the Zoning
Ordinance. For purposes of conducting public hearings on
proposed changes to the Zoning Ordinance, the Planning
Board shall constitute the “municipal review authority” under
30-A M.R.S.A. section 4352, subsections 8, 9 and 10.
4 Advise the Town Council on proposed changes to the
Subdivision Ordinance.
5 Advise the Town Council on proposed changes to the Design
Review Ordinance.
6 Investigate and report on any problems referred to it by the
Town Council or by the Town Manager.
7 Undertake studies as it may deem necessary.
8 Make recommendations to the Town Council concerning any
projected Capital Improvement Programs.
9 Perform such duties and services necessary to its proper
function within the limits of the appropriation made for the
purpose.
Amended July 22, 2019
30
602.3 Employment of Planning Staff
1. The Town Manager shall appoint a Town Planner who will staff
the Planning Board and Project Review Board and other boards
as necessary.
2. The Town Planner shall carry out all planning functions as
assigned by the Town Manager.
602.4 Repealing
1. All prior Acts, Ordinances or Boards inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed.
602.5 Saving Clause
1. The invalidity of any provision of this Ordinance shall not affect
the validity of any other provision.
602.6 When Effective
1. The amendments to this Ordinance enacted on April 4, 2004
shall take effect immediately upon passage.
The foregoing Ordinance was adopted 3/29/73 and became effective
4/29/73 and was amended effective April 4, 2004.
SECTION 603 - CONSERVATION/LANDBANK COMMISSION
There shall continue to be a Conservation/Landbank Commission as created in
accordance with the provisions of Sub-Chapter II of Chapter 229 of Title 30 of
M.R.S.A. and the Town of Freeport Conservation Commission Ordinance
adopted by the Town Council on July 17, 1973, and as may be amended.
SECTION 604 - COASTAL WATERS COMMISSION
604.1 Establishment
The Freeport Coastal Waters Commission is hereby created and
established for the general purpose of studying and evaluating public
usage of and access to coastal waters under the jurisdiction of the
Town of Freeport, planning for its future use, to advise the Town
Council on policy matters concerning the Town's coastal waters, and to
Amended July 22, 2019
31
hear appeals from any person aggrieved by any decision, act or failure
to act of the Harbormaster. The Commission shall regularly inform the
Town Council, Planning Board, and such other boards, committees,
commissions or officials of the Town as is appropriate of its activities.
The Harbormaster shall regularly inform the Commission of his/her
activities as well as provide such available information as may be
requested by the Commission for the execution of its duties.
604.2 Organization
604.2.1 The Coastal Waters Commission shall consist of seven (7)
members appointed by the Town Council. Each
Commissioner shall be a resident of the Town of Freeport and
shall serve without compensation. The Harbormaster shall
serve as an ex-officio member of the Commission.
604.2.2 The term of office of a member shall be three (3) years except
for initial appointments which shall be as follows: three (3)
members for three-year terms; two (2) members for two-year
terms; and two (2) members for one-year terms.
604.2.3 The Commission shall annually elect a Chairman, Vice
Chairman and Secretary from its membership, and may create
and fill such other offices as it may determine. Officers shall
serve one-year terms and shall be eligible for re-election.
604.2.4 Commissioners may be removed by the Town Council for
cause, after notice and hearing. A Commissioner shall forfeit
his membership on the Commission if he fails to attend three
(3) consecutive regular meetings of the Commission without
being excused by the Commission. The Chairman of the
Commission will notify the Town Council chairman of the
forfeiture of office by a Commissioner.
604.3 Duties
The Coastal Waters Commission:
604.3.1 Shall report to and advise the Town Council on matters
concerning Freeport's coastal waters, and recommend
ordinances to the Town Council on matters involving said
coastal waters.
604.3.2 May evaluate the use of Freeport's coastal waters with respect
to Federal and State Statutes, Freeport Ordinances, and the
rights of any other public authority having specific
jurisdiction.
604.3.3 May recommend rules and regulations to the Harbormaster.
604.3.4 May annually request funding for planning assistance and
such commodities that the Commission may deem necessary.
Amended July 22, 2019
32
604.3.5 Shall annually submit to the Town Manager a five (5) year
Coastal Facilities Planning Report for use in the preparation
of the Capital Improvements Program.
604.3.6 Shall keep records of its meetings and activities and shall
make an Annual Report to the Town Council to be published
as part of the Annual Report.
604.3.7 Shall perform such other duties as may be delegated to it
from time to time by the Town Council.
604.3.8 Shall conduct a regular meeting of the Commission to be held
monthly, said meeting to be open to the public. The
Commission may conduct special meetings which may be
called by the Commission Chairman or by any three (3)
Commissioners, said meetings to be open to the public.
604.3.9 Shall hear any appeal by any person affected directly or
indirectly, from any decision, order, rule, act or failure to act
on the Harbormaster. In deciding any appeal, the
Commission shall hear and approve, approve with
modifications or conditions, or disapprove the decision, order
rule, act or failure to act of the Harbormaster, from which the
appeal is made. If a person is aggrieved by a decision of the
Coastal Waters Commission, he or she may appeal the
decision of the Coastal Waters Commission to the Town
Council within ten (10) days.
604.4 Savings Clause
604.4.1 The invalidity of any provision of this Ordinance shall not
affect the validity of any other provision.
604.5 Repealer
604.5.1 The Freeport Harbor Commission Ordinance as adopted on
May 7, 1974, and as amended, is hereby repealed.
SECTION 605 - BOARD OF ASSESSMENT REVIEW
There shall continue to be a Board of Assessment Review as created by Article
IV, Section 4.04(b) and (c) of the Town Charter.
SECTION 606 - BOARD OF APPEALS
There shall continue to be a Board of Appeals as created by the Town of
Freeport Board of Appeals Ordinance adopted by the Town Council on May 29,
1973, and as may be amended.
Amended July 22, 2019
33
SECTION 607 - SHELLFISH CONSERVATION COMMISSION
There shall continue to be a Shellfish Conservation Commission as established
by the Ordinance adopted by the Town Council on 7-14-73, and as may be
amended.
SECTION 608 - COMMUNITY LIBRARY BOARD OF DIRECTORS
608.1 Establishment
1. There shall continue to be a Freeport Community Library Board of
Directors to be herein established as consisting of nine (9) members
who shall all be residents of the Town of Freeport.
2. The term of office of a member shall continue to be three (3) years.
3. The Board of Directors shall annually elect a Chairman, Vice
Chairman, and Secretary from its own membership and may create
and fill such other offices as it may determine. Officers shall serve
one-year terms and shall be eligible for re-election.
4. When there is a permanent vacancy, the Town Council shall, within
sixty (60) days of its occurrence, appoint a person to serve for the
unexpired term.
5. The Chairman shall call meetings of the Board of Directors as
required and shall call at least one regular meeting of the Board
every second month. A quorum of the Board necessary to conduct
an official meeting shall consist of at least five (5) members.
608.2 Duties of the Freeport Community Library Board of Directors
1. The Board of Directors shall have responsibility for the affairs of
the Freeport Community Library.
2. The Board of Directors have the responsibility for submitting an
annual report of activities to the Town Manager.
608.3 Employment of Library Staff
1. The Town Manager shall appoint a Head Librarian with advice of
the Board of Directors.
2. Support Staff shall be hired by the Head Librarian and confirmed by
the Town Manager
3. All reviews of the Head Librarian by the Town Manager shall be
shared with the Chair of the Board of Directors with the written
Amended July 22, 2019
34
consent of the Head Librarian. The Chair of the Board of Directors
shall be available to the Town Manager for consultation on all such
reviews.
SECTION 609 - LICENSING BOARD
609.1 Establishment
There shall be a Licensing Board consisting of nine (9) members; each
of the duly elected and sworn members of the Town Council, the duly
appointed and sworn Town Manager and the duly appointed and sworn
Town Council Secretary, the latter serving as Secretary to the Board.
609.2 Duties of the Licensing Board
1. It shall meet on an as needed basis at such time and place as they
appoint by posting notices in three or more places in Freeport, at
least seven (7) days previously stating the purpose of the meeting.
2 It shall consider applications of all persons for licenses to be
Victualers after all of the following conditions have been complied
with:
a) Certification by the Tax Collector that all taxes assessed to the
applicant for property both real and personal used in the conduct
of said application's business have been paid by the annually
specified date or by the time of the Annual Meeting in May.
b) File with the Town Clerk a photostatic copy or written evidence
or certification by the State Board of Health that the facility for
which the license is applied for meets their standards.
SECTION 610 - WINSLOW PARK COMMISSION
610.1 Establishment
The Winslow Park Commission shall consist of nine (9) appointed
members; one (1) from the Town Council and eight (8) citizens at
large.
610.2 Duties of the Winslow Park Commission
The Winslow Park Commission shall act as an advisory group to the
Town Council. The Park Manager shall act as staff for the Park
Commission. The Park Manager will work directly for the Town
Manager.
610.3 Adelaide Harb Trust
Amended July 22, 2019
35
The Winslow Park Commission shall annually review the performance
of the Adelaide Harb Trust Fund.
SECTION 611 - CABLE T.V. REGULATORY BOARD
611.1 Establishment
1. The Cable T.V. Regulatory is hereby created and established for the
general purpose of regulating, evaluating and enforcing the Town of
Freeport's Cable T.V. Franchise Agreement. The Board shall
consist of five (5) members, each appointed by the Town Council
for three (3) year terms. The School Department shall have a
designated seat on the Board. The Board shall annually elect a
Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary from its own members.
2. The Chairman shall call meetings of the Board as required and shall
call at least one regular meeting of the Board every month. A
quorum of the Board necessary to conduct business shall consist of
at least four (4) members.
611.2 Duties of the Cable T.V. Regulatory Board
1. Create, revise, and update the application form for CATV Systems;
2. Recommend regulations to the Municipal Officers concerning
CATV Systems;
3. Review and recommend to the Municipal Officers all applications
and any renewals or extensions for CATV Systems within the Town;
4. Review the performance of the Company and its compliance with
the franchise agreement at least once a year;
5. Review the rates, fees, and deposits for CATV System services at
least once a year;
6. Review all applications for rate increases and make
recommendations to the Municipal Officers;
7. Review and recommend to the Municipal Officers and Town
Manager topics for local programming and services;
8. Review and settle disputes and grievances concerning CATV
Systems;
9. Assume other CATV related duties as designated by the Municipal
Officers of this Ordinance.
10.Review and recommend an annual Five Year Capital Plan in
conjunction with the Cable T.V. Director
11.Promote and facilitate FCTV programming and production.
12.Advise the Cable T.V. Director on CATV program scheduling.
611.3 Employment of Cable TV Staff
Amended July 22, 2019
36
1. The Town Manager shall appoint a Cable TV Director who will
staff the Cable TV Regulatory Board.
2. The Cable TV Director shall carry out all cable TV functions as
assigned by the Town Manager.
SECTION 612-SUSTAINABILITY ADVISORY BOARD Amended 07/05/16
612.1 Establishment
The Sustainability Advisory Board shall consist of seven (7) members serving
three year staggered terms. A quorum of the Committee is necessary to conduct
an official meeting and shall consist of at least four (4) members. Members shall
all be residents of the Town of Freeport. The Committee shall annually elect
officers from its own membership. The officers shall be eligible for re-election.
612.2 Duties and Responsibilities
The Committee shall:
1. advise/recommend to the Town Council through the Town Manager; 2.
advise/recommend all sustainability related policies to the Town Council and/or
through Town Staff; 3. study any other matters or duties that from time to time
are requested by the Town Council and/or Town Staff as it pertains to the above
matters; 4. meet monthly as determined by the Committee.
612.3 Employment of Town Staff
1) The Town Manager may appoint a town staff person to staff the Sustainability
Advisory Board.
2 Appointed staff will perform sustainability functions as assigned by the Town
Manager.
SECTION 613– PROJECT REVIEW BOARD
613.1 Project Review Board Establishment
1.1 There is hereby created the Project Review Board, which
shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Town
Council who shall be residents of the Town of Freeport and
interested or skilled in historical preservation, environmental
protection, architecture, construction, and engineering, while
striving to protect the diversity of Freeport. Members shall
serve without compensation.
1.2 Neither a municipal officer nor a member of the (Zoning)
Board of Appeals or the Planning Board may be a member of
the Project Review Board.
1.3 The term of office of a member shall be three years except for
initial appointments which shall be as follows: three
Amended July 22, 2019
37
members for three-year terms, two members for two-year
terms, and two members for one-year terms. Upon expiration
of their terms, members shall continue to serve until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
1.4 The Board shall annually elect a Chairman and Vice-
Chairman and a Secretary from its own membership, and may
create and fill other offices as it may determine necessary.
Officers shall serve one-year terms and shall be eligible for
re-election.
1.5 When there is a permanent vacancy, the Town Council shall,
within sixty days of its occurrence, appoint a person to serve
for the unexpired term.
1.6 The Chairman shall call meetings of the Board as required
and shall call at least one regular meeting of the Board each
month. The Chairman shall also call meetings of the Board
when requested to do so by a majority of the members or by
the municipal officers. A quorum of the Board necessary to
conduct an official Board Meeting shall consist of at least
four (4) members. Action for a Design Review Certificate
shall follow the procedure outlined in the Freeport Design
Review Ordinance, Chapter 22, Section VI.A. All other
decisions of the Project Review Board shall require the
concurring vote of a majority of those present and voting.
The Chairman or the Vice-Chairman shall preside at all
meetings of the Board. The Chairman shall be the official
spokesman of the Board.
1.7 If there is any question of whether a particular issue involves
a conflict of interest or bias sufficient to disqualify a member
from voting thereon shall be decided by a majority vote of the
members present and voting, except the member who is being
challenged.
1.8 The Board shall adopt rules for transaction of business,
subject to the approval of the Town Council and the Secretary
shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions,
correspondence, findings and determinations. All records
shall be deemed public and may be inspected at reasonable
times.
1.9 The Board, subject to the Town Council's prior consent, shall
have the right to retain and pay for the services and expenses
of professional help required in carrying out the duties and
responsibilities of this Code. The cost of such services shall
be borne by the applicant.
1.10 The Board shall hold regular meetings, at least monthly. All
meetings of the Board shall be open to the public and a public
record shall be kept of the Board’s resolutions and decisions.
Amended July 22, 2019
38
613.2 Duties and Responsibilities
The Project Review Board shall have the duty and responsibility to:
2.1 Review and issue its order with respect to all proposed
subdivisions including the approval of road names within a
proposed subdivision. The Project Review Board shall
constitute the “municipal reviewing authority” for
subdivisions under 30-A M.R.S.A section 4403.
2.2 Review and issue its order with respect to all reviews as
required by the Freeport Zoning Ordinance.
2.3 Review and issue its order with respect to all reviews as
required by the Freeport Design Review Ordinance. In
reviewing such applications, the Board shall be concerned
with those elements of development, redevelopment,
rehabilitation and/or historic preservation that affect the
visual quality of the Design Review District. The Board shall
not consider use or interior arrangements. The Board may
make any requirement consistent with the specific intent of
the Design Review Ordinance as set forth in Section IB and
Sec. VIII of the Design Review Guidelines thereof.
613.3 Repealing
3.1 The Design Review Board previously established under the
Design Review Ordinance and the Administrative Code is
hereby abolished and all powers and duties previously
exercised by the Design Review Board shall be exercised by
the Project Review Board on and after 04/01/04, except with
respect to pending applications as provided in Section 615.4.
613.4 Transition Clause
4.1 Effective March 3, 2004 the Project Review Board shall have
those powers and duties previously exercised by the Planning
Board and the Design Review Board, which relate to the
review of applications for permits or approvals of any kind,
except where review of such applications has been expressly
assigned to the Board of Appeals, Codes Enforcement
Officer, Staff Review Board, or Coastal Waters Commission.
If any ordinance existing as of 04/01/04 continues to refer to
the Planning Board or the Design Review Board with respect
to an application for a permit or approval, the Project Review
Board shall be substituted as the permitting authority,
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any application filed before
March 3, 2004, shall continue to be reviewed by the board
Amended July 22, 2019
39
with which the application was filed until a final decision is
rendered, except that any application for a new subdivision or
a major site plan filed after February 3, 2004 shall not be
reviewed or acted on by the Planning Board, but shall be
taken up by the Project Review Board at its first meeting on
or after April 1, 2004.
613.5 When Effective
5.1 The amendments to this Ordinance enacted on March 3, 2004
shall take effect immediately upon passage
SECTION 614 - COMPLETE STREETS COMMITTEE (Amended 7/22/19
from Traffic and Parking Committee)
614.1 Establishment
The Complete Streets Committee shall promote, advise, and recommend
policies related to Freeport’s public multi-modal transportation system, with
emphasis on best practices for enhancing safety, community connectivity,
system sustainability, and economic development.
“Complete Streets” (for purpose of general definition within this ordinance)
is a transportation policy, which encourages street planning, design,
operation, and maintenance that enables safe access for all members of our
community, to include pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists, and transit riders,
regardless of age and abilities. A ‘complete street’ safely accommodates all
users. An ‘incomplete street’ does not.
The Complete Streets Committee shall consist of nine members. The
membership shall include:
— Police Chief, Town of Freeport
— L.L. Bean representative
— Town Councilor
— Six (6) At-Large representatives
All Complete Streets Committee members shall be appointed by Town
Council. Appointments will be for staggered three-year terms. The Complete
Streets Committee shall elect a Chair and Vice-Chair consistent with
Section 601.1 of the Freeport Administrative Code. All municipally imposed
term limits for Board or Committee members (including those in Section
601.1 of this code) shall not apply to the Police Chief or L.L. Bean
representative regarding their membership on the Complete Streets
Committee.
Amended July 22, 2019
40
All Complete Streets Committee members must be Freeport residents, with
the exceptions of the Police Chief and L.L. Bean representative. The
Complete Streets Committee Chair shall be a Freeport resident.
The Complete Streets Committee shall be staffed by the Town Engineer.
614.2 Duties and Responsibilities
The Complete Streets Committee shall advise Town Council on public multimodal
transportation system projects and related issues to include, but not
limited to:
• Town of Freeport Complete Streets Policy — develop, propose,
implement, and update;
• short- and long-term improvements that implement the goals of the
Complete Streets Project Plan and Active Living Plan dated 7/9/2014;
• traffic flow and circulation;
• pedestrian flow and circulation, to include crosswalks;
• shared use pathways, particularly those that address community connectivity;
• on- and off-street parking;
• signage;
• general safety issues;
• funding sources for multi-model transportation maintenance and improvements;
• alternative transportation accommodation and ADA compliance;
• integration of sustainability practices.
The Complete Streets Committee shall monitor and maintain the Freeport Complete Streets
Project Plan. This plan will include project priorities, current status,
estimated costs, project scope and timing, funding sources, and anticipated
community benefit. The Complete Streets Project Plan shall be updated each
year, no later than December 31, and submitted to Town Council for
consideration during budget development.
The Complete Streets Committee shall provide advice, when requested, for
other Boards and Commissions such as the Planning Board, Project Review
Board, Coastal Waters Commission, and others.
The Complete Streets Committee shall develop and gather technical
information through consultants,
and advocacy groups, as needed, and from committee staff.
The Complete Streets Committee shall conduct special projects related to
Complete Streets Committee Duties and Responsibilities.
Amended July 22, 2019
41
Complete Streets Committee members are expected to participate in
workgroups and on special projects related to Complete Streets Committee
Duties and Responsibilities.
The Complete Streets Committee shall recommend ordinance revisions, as
necessary, and advise on proposed ordinance revisions.
The Complete Streets Committee shall provide for public comment from
residents with questions and concerns about multi-modal transportation
system elements, to include safety, community connectivity, economic
impact, and other related issues.
The Complete Streets Committee shall decide on public peddler locations.
The Complete Streets Committee shall act in any capacity required by
specific Town ordinances.
The Complete Streets Committee shall periodically review the efficacy of its
structure and governing ordinance and annually provide guidance to the
Appointments Committee regarding qualifications for open seats.
The major focus of Complete Streets Committee efforts shall be on the
Village, Route 1 corridor, high density areas, and opportunities for
connectivity, though it will provide advice and recommendations, as needed,
about issues within its purview in other sections of Freeport.
Section 615 Hunter Road Fields Advisory Committee
615.1 Establishment
The Hunter Road Fields Advisory Committee shall consist of seven (7) members
appointed by the Town Council for staggered three-year terms. The members shall
include a Town Councilor, a Conservation Commission member, an RSU #5
representative and a member from each of the Town of Freeport’s 4 voting districts.
The Committee shall annually elect a Chair and a Vice-Chair.
615.2 Duties and Responsibilities
Develops a purpose statement for the Hunter Road Fields and Trails that contains
intended purposes including, but not limited, to accessibility by all residents, fulfills
longstanding need for fields within community, provides opportunities for outdoor
activities for people of all ages and abilities, groups and individuals, organized and
informal activities.
The Hunter Road Fields Advisory Committee shall advise the Town Council on field
and related trail issues such as, but not limited to, the following:
? Fee structures
? Process and protocol for scheduling
? Management structure
Amended July 22, 2019
42
? Field and trail maintenance
? Preparing annual budgets, both capital and operating, in consultation with
the Finance Director
? Develop use priorities
? Signage
? Parking
? Review and settle disputes and grievances concerning field operations.
The Hunter Road Fields Advisory Committee shall provide advice, when requested,
for other Boards and Commissions.
Develop and gather technical information, as needed.
Recommend ordinance revisions and advise on proposed ordinance revisions.
Provide for public comment from citizens with concerns about issues related to fields
and trails.
Act in any capacity required by specific Town ordinances.
SECTION 616 – ACTIVE LIVING ADVISORY COMMITTEE
616.1 Establishment
The Active Living Advisory Committee shall consist of seven (7)
members serving three year staggered terms. The members shall
include one Town Councilor, two at large members, and one
member from each of the Town’s four voting districts. A quorum
of the Committee is necessary to conduct business and shall consist
of at least four (4) members. Members shall all be residents of the
Town of Freeport. The Committee shall annually elect a chair and
vice-chair. The Committee shall exist for six years, ending on June
30, 2021, unless this ordinance is amended by future action of the
Town Council.
616.2 Duties and Responsibilities
The Committee shall serve as a resource to the Town of Freeport
citizens for initiatives outlined in the Town of Freeport Active
Living Plan.
616.3 Employment of Planning Department Staff
1. The Town Manager shall employ a Town Planner, who will staff
the Active Living Advisory Committee.
2. The Town Planner shall carry out Planning functions as assigned
by the Town Manager.
Amended July 22, 2019
43
Amendments as of 6/16/2015:
Section 506.7 (1) & (2) Amended by the Town Council on February 24, 2015.
Section 614.1 Amended by the Town Council on April 7, 2015.
Section 601.1 Amended by the Town Council on June 16, 2015
Section 616 Adopted as new ordinance on June 16, 2015.
Amendments as of 07/05/2016:
Section 612 on 7/5/2016. Changed Solid Waste/Recycling Advisory Board to Sustainability
Advisory Board.
Amendments as of 01/08/2019:
Section 509 Inspections Department . Amended by Town Council on 01/08/2019.
Amendments 7/22/2019-amended Traffic and Parking to be the new Complete Streets Committee.
New charge of committee.
CHAPTER 3 FISCAL YEAR
ARTICLE I FISCAL YEAR ORDINANCE
SECTION 3-101
Whereas, the Town of Freeport's fiscal year is currently a period from
January 1 through December 31, and whereas, the Maine School Finance
Act of 1975 stipulates that the Freeport Department of Education shall
operate effective on July 1, 1977, with a budget year for a period
from July 1 through June 30, and whereas, the variancce between the
budget year for the Department of Education and the Town's Fiscal Year
will result in two separate budget review sessions within the current
fiscal year period, and whereas, Article VI, Section 6.01 of the
Freeport Town Charter provides that the Town Council:"may, by
ordinance, change the fiscal year to conform to general municipal
practice in the State". Therefore, the Town of Freeport hereby
ordains - that the Town of Freeport's Municipal Fiscal Year shall
commence on July 1 and end on June 30, and that the period from
January 1, 1977 to June 30, 1977 shall constitute a separate and
distinct fiscal period for purposes of instituting a transition from
the current fiscal year.
-1-
Amended July 1, 2007
1
CHAPTER 4 FREEPORT PERSONNEL CODE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION
I INTRODUCTION
II RESPONSIBILITY
III GENERAL
IV RECRUITMENT & SELECTION
V EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS
VI EMPLOYEE DEVELOPMENT
VII WORK PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
VIII PROMOTIONS
IX WORK HOURS & WORK WEEK
X VACATIONS
XI HOLIDAYS
XII LEAVE OF ABSENCE WITH PAY
XIII LEAVE OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY
XIV FAMILY LEAVE
XV NON-DISCRIMINATION POLICY
XVI SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY
XVII LAYOFF & REINSTATEMENT
XVIII DISCIPLINE, DISCHARGE & SUSPENSION
XIX GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
XX RESIGNATION
XXI PUBLIC CONDUCT OF EMPLOYEES
XXII SICK LEAVE
XXIII INJURY LEAVE
XXIV SALARIES & WAGES
XXV EMPLOYEE SERVICES
Amended July 1, 2007
2
FREEPORT PERSONNEL CODE
SECTION I INTRODUCTION
In accordance with Article IV, Section 4.03 of the Town Charter, the
Town Council hereby adopts the following Personnel Ordinance for
utilization by the Town Manager in the administration of the
personnel activities of the employees of the Town of Freeport.
The general purpose of this policy is to establish a system of
personnel administration that meets the social, economic and program
needs of the people of Freeport. This system shall provide means to
recruit, select, develop, and maintain an effective and responsive
work force, and shall include policies and procedures for employee
hiring, advancement, training, job classification, salary
administration, retirement, fringe benefits, discipline and other related
activities. All appointments and promotions in the Town of Freeport
shall be made without regard to race, creed, color, sex, sexual
orientation or political affiliation. A copy of this Personnel Policy
shall be made available to any employee of the Town.
SECTION II RESPONSIBILITY
As outlined by Article IV of the Charter, the Manager or a person
appointed by him, shall have the responsibility for administration of
the personnel program and make every effort to adequately consider
the rights and interests of the Town of Freeport, and shall make
periodic reports concerning the administration of the Code to the
Town Council.
SECTION III GENERAL
A. Application: The following prescribed regulations shall apply to
any and all persons in the permanent, full-time employ of the
Town of Freeport, except the Town Manager, elected or
appointed Boards, Committees and Commissions, employees of
Amended July 1, 2007
3
the Department of Education, and Employees of the Freeport
Community Library
B. Amendments: The Town Council or the Town Manager may
modify and amend the Personnel Code.
C. Appointing Authority: The appointing authority shall be the
Town Manager or a person appointed by him who shall also be
responsible for enforcing the Personnel Code.
D. Freeport Community Library Board of Directors: The Freeport
Community Library Board of Directors shall determine all
personnel policies for the employees of the Library in cooperation
with the Town Manager and subject to final approval by the
Town Council.
E. Words of the Masculine Gender found in this Code may include
the feminine, and words of the singular may include the plural.
F. Immediate Family: Immediate family is defined to include an
employee's spouse, children, mother, and/or father, grandmother
and/or grandfather, and brothers and/or sisters.
G. Police & Dispatch Union: When terms of this Code conflict with
terms of the Union Contract, the Union Contract shall supersede
this Code.
SECTION IV RECRUITMENT AND SELECTION
A. Notice of Vacancy: Except when five (5) or more names are
retained on file for ninety (180) days for future vacancies, a
notice of vacancy shall be made by placing an advertisement in a
local newspaper, by posting notice of the vacancy at the Town
Office, and by any other means that the appointing authority
consider appropriate. The vacancy shall not be filled earlier than
five (5) days following the first day of publication in a newspaper
and the posting of notices at the Town Office.
Amended July 1, 2007
4
B. Application for Employment: Application for employment may
be made on forms provided by the Town. Resumes, letters of
reference, and any other material that is of assistance in
determining the applicant's ability shall, at the request of the
Town Manager, be included with the employment application.
C. Examinations:
1. When an opening for employment within the Police
Department or Highway Department occurs, the applicant
shall be required to successfully complete a physical
examination by a physician. The cost shall be paid by the
Town at a rate equal to the cost of a physical examination
for the Police Department.
2. When an opening for employment occurs, the applicant
may be required to successfully complete a written, oral,
or a performance examination to be determined by the
appointing officer. The type and scope of the examination
shall be consistent with the characteristics of the job
opening and may not include any inquiry into the political
or religious affiliations or race of any candidate. All
applicants shall be given proper notice if and when an
examination is required.
D. Age Limitations for Employment: The minimum age allowed for
full-time employment for permanent positions with the Town in
all Departments shall be eighteen (18) years of age.
E. Preference for Employment: Preference for employment with the
Town shall, whenever practical and all other qualifications are
equal, be given to residents of the Town of Freeport.
F. Probationary Period: Any person employed full-time by the
Town shall be employed on a probationary status for a period of
one year and at the pay rate established for the position. The
conduct and work performance of employees on probation shall
be subject to review and evaluation at least once in every six
months, and if found to be unsatisfactory, the appointing
authority may remove or demote the probationer at any time
Amended July 1, 2007
5
during the probationary period. Such removals or demotions
shall not be subject to review or appeal.
G. Employment of Immediate Family Members within a Town
Department: Members of an immediate family shall not be
employed within the same Department. This provision shall not
affect any employees of the Town as of the effective date of this
Ordinance.
SECTION V EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS
A. Right to Organize: The Town recognizes the rights of its
employees to organize under the Maine Public Employees Labor
Relations Law. The provisions of any collective bargaining
contract with such an organization shall supersede this Code
where such contract provisions are inconsistent with this Code.
B. Prohibited Practices:
1. Employee organizations or their agents shall not restrain or
coerce employees to join or not join, or to maintain or
terminate membership in any such organization.
2. Since the services provided by the Town Employees are
necessary for the public's health, safety, and welfare, no
employee organization shall advocate strikes, work stoppages,
or slowdowns of its members. Such action shall be considered
misconduct and any employee participating in a strike, work
stoppage or slowdown may be subject to removal by the Town
Manager.
3. No employee organization business will be pursued during
normal working hours, except where necessary to represent
members involved in grievance or bargaining procedures.
4. No Official or Employee of the Town, other than a member,
shall interfere in the administrative affairs of such
organizations, and no members of the organization shall
interfere with the administrative affairs of the Town.
Amended July 1, 2007
6
5. Employees shall be eligible to join an organization pursuant to
the provisions of the Municipal Public Employees Labor
Relations Act.
SECTION VI EMPLOYEE DEVELOPMENT
A. In-Service Training: The Employees of the Town shall be
entitled to participate in any in-service training program
sponsored by the Town in order to increase their job performance
or positions. The in-service training programs shall be
determined and fostered by the Town Manager in cooperation
with the Council and Department Heads.
B. Training Fund: The Town Council may set aside appropriations
annually for purposes of financing in-service training programs,
schools, or conferences aimed at improving employee
performance. The uses of the Training Fund shall be determined
by the Town Manager in cooperation with the Department Heads.
C. Records: A record of each in-service training program, school, or
conference attended and completed by any employee shall be
kept as part of the employee's personnel record, and such
accomplishments by the employee shall be given consideration
during promotions procedures.
SECTION VII WORK PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A. Annual Evaluation: Once every year each Department Head shall
evaluate every full-time employee within his Department to
determine if each employee is performing his required
assignments adequately.
B. Personnel Director's Responsibility: It shall be the responsibility
of the Town Manager, acting as the Town's Personnel Director, to
construct the personnel evaluation forms, distribute the forms to
the Department Heads, and to place such records on file for
Amended July 1, 2007
7
reference purposes. It shall also be the Town Manager's
responsibility to complete annual evaluation surveys of
employees under the Town Manager's direct supervision.
C. Purpose of Evaluations: The personnel evaluation forms shall be
considered by the Town Manager when salary increases,
promotions, disciplinary action, rewards, training programs, or
any other related personnel action is proposed.
SECTION VIII PROMOTIONS
A. Methods of Promotion: Promotions to fill vacancies in positions
of greater responsibility shall be made on the basis of merit of
past work performance, seniority, achievements in any in-service
training programs, initiative and any other relevant
considerations. If an examination is required to select a
candidate for promotion, the examination material shall be
determined by the Town Manager, or Personnel Director, and
the candidates shall be given proper notice of the examination.
Whenever practical or consistent with the best interests of the
Town, preference for promotion within any Department shall be
given to an employee of the Department. The Town Manager
may, however, open any promotion to any qualified applicants.
B. Probationary Period: Anyone who is promoted to a higher rank
shall complete a six-month probationary period at the base pay
rate for the new position and without losing any earned benefits
SECTION IX WORK HOURS AND WORK WEEK
A. Attendance: Employees shall be in attendance at their places of
work in accordance with the rules regarding hours of work,
holidays, and leave. All Departments shall keep daily attendance
Amended July 1, 2007
8
records and shall furnish periodical reports to the Town Manager
when requested.
B. The following table shall be a partial work schedule of several
Departments of the Town:
Department: Work Week: Hours of Operation:
General
Administration 37.5 Hours 8:00 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.
Monday, Tuesday &
Thursday;
8:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M.
Wednesday; &
8:00 A.M. to l:00 P.M.
Friday
Police 40 Hours Irregular
7 Days/Week
Fire 40 Hours Irregular
7 Days/Week
Highway 40 Hours 6:00 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.
Monday-Thursday/Summer
7:00 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.
Monday-Thursday;
Friday until Noon/Winter
Solid Waste: 31 Hours 8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M.
Wednesday-Friday;
9:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M.
Saturday.
C. Establishment of Hours: The establishment of work hours, work
weeks, and other work schedules shall be made and determined
by the Town Manager, based upon the recommendations of the
Department Heads and the requirement of services, subject to
approval by the Town Council.
Amended July 1, 2007
9
D. Overtime: Overtime pay is compensation for work in excess of 40
hours per week. The rate of payment for overtime work will be
time and one-half for each hour of overtime work put in by the
employee. This section applies to hourly workers only.
E. Call Time: Highway personnel will be paid a minimum of three
(3) hours for call-back for highway related work.
SECTION X VACATIONS
A. Vacation Privileges: Vacation privileges are available only to
full-time employees of the Town. Each full-time employee shall
earn vacation time, with pay, computed on his/her anniversary
date, on the following basis:
1. Entitlement - Two Weeks : Upon the completion of your first
year through the completion of your fifth year.
2. Entitlement - Three Weeks: Upon the completion of your
sixth year through the completion of your twelfth year
3. Entitlement - Four Weeks: Upon completion of your thirteenth
year through the completion of your nineteenth year
4. Entitlement – Five Weeks: Upon the completion of your
twentieth year and thereafter.
B. Vacation Schedules: Vacations shall be granted at such time or
times that are mutually agreeable to the employees and their
Department Heads. An employee's seniority shall be considered
by the Department Head with respect to scheduling vacations.
The Department Head shall be responsible for designing the
vacation schedule so as not to interfere with the work schedule of
the Department.
C. Working Vacations Prohibited: Since vacations are intended as a
rest period, no employee shall be allowed to work and be paid
double time during his vacation period.
Amended July 1, 2007
10
D. Vacations Not To Accumulate: Vacations shall be taken each
fiscal year and accumulation of vacation time into a succeeding
year shall not exceed one week, except that the Town Manager
may approve a carry over of additional vacation time to a
succeeding year due to extenuating circumstances made necessary
by work schedules. For termination purposes, vacation time will
be accrued at the rate of days earned per month.
E. Terminal Vacation Pay:
1. If an employee of the Town retires or resigns voluntarily and is
in good standing, he shall be entitled to pay for that portion of
the vacation time which has not been expired.
2. Any employee of the Town who is dismissed or resigns
without proper notice shall not be entitled to pay for that
portion of the vacation time which has not been expired.
3. Vacation time will be computed on an employee's anniversary
date.
SECTION XI HOLIDAYS
A. Official Legal Holidays: The Official Legal Holidays of the
Town of Freeport are as follows:
1. New Year's Day
2. Martin Luther King, Jr. Day
3. Washington's Birthday
4. Patriot's Day
5. Memorial Day
6. Fourth of July
7. Labor Day
8. Veteran's Day
9. Columbus Day
10. Thanksgiving Day
11. Day After Thanksgiving
Amended July 1, 2007
11
12. Christmas
B. Entitlement: All Permanent, full-time employees, including
Department Heads and those on probation who have served at
least thirty (30) days, shall be entitled to receive their regular
base pay rate for an official legal holiday.
C. Eligibility for Holiday Pay: In order to be eligible to receive
holiday pay, an employee must work the last scheduled
departmental work day preceding and the first scheduled work
day following the official legal holiday. Exceptions may occur at
the discretion of the Town Manager.
D. Work Required on Holidays: Whenever it is required by the
Town than an employee work on a holiday, the employee shall be
paid for actual time worked, plus holiday pay at his regular base
rate of pay, exclusive of salaried or clerical employees.
E. Holiday During Weekends: Whenever an official legal holiday
falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the following Monday or
preceding Friday may be declared a holiday by the Town
Manager.
SECTION XII LEAVE OF ABSENCE WITH PAY
A. Professional Leave: The Town Manager may permit a leave of
absence with pay to any employee for the following purposes:
1. To attend in-service training schools;
2. To attend sessions, meetings, conferences, or conventions in
the employee's job category.
B. Bereavement Leave: An employee may be granted a maximum
of five (5) days leave of absence because of death or serious
illness in an employee's immediate family. In this case, immediate
family includes: spouse, child or parent. In the event of a death
of other immediate family members (grandmother, grandfather,
Amended July 1, 2007
12
brother or sister), an employee may be granted a maximum of
three (3) days leave of absence.
C. Jury Leave: An employee called for jury duty shall be excused
from work by the Town Manager, and the Town shall pay an
employee called for jury duty the difference between his regular
pay and his juror's pay upon presentation of an official statement
of jury pay received.
SECTION XIII LEAVE OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY
A. Allowable Purposes: The Town Manager may authorize a leave
of absence upon written request and approval by the Department
Head for maternity, educational, reserve training, or other
justifiable purpose.
B. Suspension of Vacation Time, Sick Leave and Pay: Vacation
time, sick leave and pay shall not accrue to any employee granted
a leave of absence without pay during the time of the leave of
absence.
C. Suspension of Sick Leave: No employee shall be paid for any
earned sick leave nor shall sick leave accrue during the time of
the leave of absence.
D. Health Benefits: Health benefits will be paid for by the Town, at
the customary rate, during long periods of illness.
SECTION XIV FAMILY LEAVE OF ABSENCE
A. Family medical leave is granted to all employees under the
guidelines established by the statutes of the State of Maine and
the United States.
B. Policy: Employees who have worked for the Town for at least
twelve (12) months and at least 1250 Hours during the prior
Amended July 1, 2007
13
twelve (12) months may take up to twelve (12) weeks of unpaid
leave (F.M.L.A. Leave) for the following reasons:
1. Birth and or care of a child of the employee
2. Placement of a child into the employee’s family by adoption
or by foster care arrangements
3. Care of the employee’s spouse, child or parent who has a
serious health condition; or
4. Inability of the employee to perform the functions of the
employee’s position due to a serious health condition
SECTION XV NON-DISCRIMINATORY POLICY
Any employee of the Town of Freeport who believes that she or she
has been discriminated against in employment in any way (including
harassment of the denial of any employment benefit) on the basis of
race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, physical or
mental disability, veteran’s status, status as a whistleblower, sexual
orientation (defined by the Maine Human Rights Act as a person’s
actual or perceived heterosexuality, bisexuality, homosexuality, or
gender identity or expression), or any other status protected by law,
should file a complaint with the personal manager or his or her
designee. The Town of Freeport takes allegations of discriminatory
treatment very seriously. The Town of Freeport will investigate every
allegation of discrimination promptly and take whatever action is
necessary to stop unlawful discrimination and remedy any effects of
unlawful discrimination
SECTION XVI SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY
It is illegal for any employee to sexually harass another employee and
for any supervisory employee to permit any act of sexual harassment
in the workplace by anyone, whether or not an employee
SECTION XVII LAYOFF AND REINSTATEMENT
Amended July 1, 2007
14
A. Layoffs: The Town Manager, subject to approval by the Council,
may reduce the work force whenever it becomes essential due to
lack of funds or work, or due to other reasonable or justifiable
causes.
B. Order of Layoffs and Reinstatement: The order of layoffs shall
be:
1. Probationary Employees
2. Part-time Employees
3. Full-time Employees
The full-time employees shall be laid off in accordance with their
seniority of employment and performance evaluations. The
reverse order of layoff shall be used when reinstating employees.
The Town Manager, however, has the right to retain or reinstate
key employees out of the normal order of layoff or reinstatement
as mentioned above.
C. Notice of Layoff and Reinstatement:
1. A notice shall be given to each employee scheduled to be laid
off seven (7) days prior to the effective layoff date.
2. A notice to return to work shall be sent to each employee by
Certified Mail at least three (3) days before the date of the reemployment.
An employee must return at the appointed time,
unless special arrangements have been made with the
Department Head to return at some other date. Failure by the
employee to report for work or notify the Department Head
shall be considered as termination of employment.
SECTION XVIII DISCIPLINE, DISCHARGE AND SUSPENSION
A. Authority: The Town Manager shall have the right to discipline
any municipal employee whose work performance or conduct
justifies such action. Discipline may include reprimand,
suspension, or removal. Any reference to cause and hearing
Amended July 1, 2007
15
does not apply to probationary employee as defined in State
Law.
B. Causes of Disciplinary Action: The following shall be considered
cause for disciplinary action:
1. Failure to follow orders of one's supervisor, Department Head,
or Town Manager;
2. Being absent or tardy;
3. Failure to perform assigned work in an efficient manner;
4. Willful misuse, theft, destruction or conversion of Town
property for personal use;
5. Indictment or conviction of a felonious crime;
6. Use of an alcoholic beverage or unlawful use of a drug when
reporting for work or while on the job;
7. Inability to get along with fellow employees so that required
levels of work are hindered or not met;
8. Inappropriate public conduct as outlined in Section XVIII;
9. Other causes as determined by the Town Manager.
C. Notice of Disciplinary Action: Prior to the imposition of
disciplinary action, employees shall be given an opportunity to
refute the charges against them except in those situations which
require immediate action. Notice of disciplinary action against an
employee must be in writing and received by the employee no
later than five (5) working days prior to the effective date of the
action. The notice shall specify the penalty and contain a
statement of the reason or reasons for the action taken against
him.
D. Employee's Right to Appeal: A permanent employee of the
Town, except the Town Clerk, Treasurer, Tax Collector,
Assessor, and Department Heads shall have the right to appeal
any disciplinary action to the Personnel Grievance Board. A
written request for a hearing before the Personnel Grievance
Board shall be filed with the Town Manager before the
disciplinary action becomes effective. The Town Manager shall
request a convening of the Personnel Grievance Board in
accordance with Section XVI within ten (10) working days of the
Amended July 1, 2007
16
request for a hearing, and advise the employee and his
Department Head of the time and place for the scheduled hearing.
Both parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
to present witnesses.
The Town Clerk, Treasurer, Tax Collector, Assessor, and
Department Heads shall have the right to confirmation of any
disciplinary action by the Town Council. A written request for
confirmation shall be filed with the Town Manager before the
disciplinary action becomes final. The Town Manager shall
schedule a hearing before the Town Council as soon as the
Council's schedule permits.
E. Result of Appeal: The finding and decision of the Personnel
Grievance Board shall be preserved by its Chairman and written
notice of the findings and decisions shall be final. The findings
and decisions shall be sent to the Town Manager, Department
Head and employee. Any employee who successfully appeals his
case shall be reinstated to his job without loss of pay, seniority, or
other benefits.
SECTION XIX GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Grievances, which for the purposes of this Code are defined as
disputes with respect to the interpretation or application of the
specific terms of this Code, shall be processed in the following
manner:
1. An employee who believes he has a grievance shall first present
the grievance, in an informal manner, to his immediate
supervisor or Department Head within three (3) days of its
occurrence. If the grievance is not resolved to the satisfaction of
the employee within three (3) working days, the employee may,
within three (3) working days thereafter, reduce the grievance to
writing and request the Department Head to render a written
decision on the grievance. The written grievance shall contain a
concise statement of the events allegedly giving rise to the
grievance, the specific section of this Code alleged to be
Amended July 1, 2007
17
violated, all evidence available in support of the alleged
grievance, a statement as to when the grievance arose, became
known, or should have become known to the employee, and a
statement of the relief requested. Upon receipt of a grievance in
writing, the Department Head shall respond in writing to the
employee within seven (7) working days.
2. If the grievance is not resolved to the satisfaction of the
employee, the employee may, within five (5) working days of
the date of the written decision of the Department Head, or
within twelve (12) working days of the submission of the
grievance in writing, request a review of the grievance by the
Town Manager. The Town Manager shall arrange, at the earliest
possible time, for a hearing of the grievance which shall include
the aggrieved employee and his Department Head, and which
may include the calling of witnesses who may have knowledge
of the grievance. The Town Manager may discuss a grievance
with the Department Head at any time prior to the hearing. The
Town Manager shall conduct the hearing and respond in writing
to the employee and the Department Head within seven (7)
working days following the adjournment of the hearing.
3. If, following hearing and decision by the Town Manager, an
employee believes that the grievance is still not resolved
satisfactorily, the employee may, within five (5) working days of
receipt of the decision of the Town Manager, appeal the
grievance in writing to the Personnel Grievance Board. The
Personnel Grievance Board consists of three (3) members,
appointed by the Town Council. One member to represent
employees, one member to represent the employer and the third
member to represent the public, who shall be Chairman of the
Personnel Grievance Board. The employee representative shall
be appointed from a list of ten (10) persons submitted by the
employee and his equals within his department, and the
employer representative shall be appointed from a list of ten (10)
persons submitted by the Town Manager. Upon receipt of the
employee request, the Town Manager shall, within ten (10)
working days, request the scheduling of an administrative
hearing with the Personnel Grievance Board, which shall include
Amended July 1, 2007
18
the aggrieved employee, the Department Head and the Town
Manager. The Personnel Grievance Board shall render its
decision in writing within five (5) working days of the
completion of the administrative hearing. The decision of the
Personnel Grievance Board shall be final with regard to the
employee's grievance.
4. All grievances shall be filed and appealed within the time limit
set forth above or they shall be deemed waived; provided,
however, that the time limits may be extended by mutual
agreement.
SECTION XX RESIGNATION
A. Sufficient Notice: To resign in good standing, full-time
employees shall submit resignations in writing at least ten (10)
working days in advance of the effective date of their
resignation.
B. Quitting Without Notice: Any employee who quits without
notice shall lose all rights and benefits granted by this Code.
SECTION XXI PUBLIC CONDUCT OF EMPLOYEES
A. Political Activities: While employed by the Town of Freeport,
employees shall refrain from seeking or accepting nomination or
election to any office in Town Government, and from using their
influence in any way for or against any candidate for elective
office in the Town Government. This shall not prevent Town
Employees from becoming or continuing to be members of any
political organization, from attending political organization
meetings, from expressing their views on political matters,
signing petitions, or from voting with complete freedom in any
election.
B. Conflict of Interest: No employees of the Town shall have any
financial interest in or profit from any contract, service, purchase,
Amended July 1, 2007
19
sale, or work performed by the Town, unless otherwise provided
for by the Town Council.
C. Outside Full-Time Employment: No full-time employee of the
Town shall engage in additional full-time employment outside the
hours of his regular hours of municipal work, unless due
notification is supplied to the appropriate Department Head or to
the Town Manager.
D. Employee Conduct: Town employees shall not use obscene,
uncivil, boisterous language while on duty or in any contact with
any member of the public, nor shall they incite an altercation
under any circumstances.
SECTION XXII SICK LEAVE
A. Basic Number and Total Accumulation: Each full-time,
continuous employee shall be entitled to one day per month of
regular employment to be used as paid sick leave. Sick leave
shall be cumulative as follows:
Up to nineteen (19) years of employment - one hundred and
twenty days (120) days;
20 years employment - one-hundred fifty (150) days;
30 years employment - one-hundred eighty (180) days.
B. Regulations and Conditions:
1. Paid sick leave may be granted only by the Town Manager,
subject to the recommendation of the Department Head, to an
employee who is unable to perform the duties of his position
on account of personal illness or physical incapability. If
requested by the Town Manager, a certificate from a physician
shall be furnished by the employee to the Town Manager.
2. An employee must notify his Department Head or the Town
Manager at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to a planned sick
leave for medical purposes or as ordered by a physician. In
case of sickness, emergency hospitalization, or a situation that
Amended July 1, 2007
20
prevents an employee from making an advanced notification, a
member of the employee's family shall notify the Department
Head or Town Manager as soon as is practical.
C. Ineligible Conditions:
1. Sick leave shall not be used as vacation time, but vacation time
may be used as sick leave if desired by the employee.
2. Upon termination in good standing or retirement, an employee
shall receive pay for his/her accrued and unused sick leave as
follows:
employed less than two years - none
employed from 2 through 10 years - one fourth (1/4)
employed from l1 through 15 years - one third (1/3)
employed 16 or more years - one half (1/2)
3. An employee may use up to three (3) sick leave days per year
to care for a member of his/her immediate family (son,
daughter, husband, wife, mother, father).
4. An employee may use up to three (3) sick leave days per year
for personal reasons.
5. An employee may donate up to three (3) sick leave days per
year to a sick leave bank. The bank may be used on an asneeded
basis and only for major illnesses.
SECTION XXIII INJURY LEAVE
A. Requirement: All injuries sustained in the course of regular
Town work shall be immediately reported to the employee's
Supervisor or Department Head as a requirement for leave or
compensation.
B. Compensation: Injury leave compensation shall be paid to the
employee through a combination of Workmen's Compensation
Insurance, and with supplementation from the Town in such a
Amended July 1, 2007
21
manner that the employee shall receive his basic weekly wage
for a period of time not to exceed accumulated sick leave.
C. Eligibility: Injury leave is only applicable to an injury sustained
by an employee while engaged in Town work. In such
instances, sick leave will only be charged for the amount of
supplementary payments made directly by the Town.
SECTION XXIV SALARIES AND WAGES
A. Comprehensive Pay Plan: The Comprehensive Pay Plan shall be
instituted by the Town Manager and shall include a Position
Classification System and Compensation Plan. The Town
Council shall be notified by the Town Manager of any changes
made to the Position Classification System and Compensation
Plan prior to such changes being effective.
1. The Position Classification System shall serve as a narrative
description of the duties and responsibilities required by each
full-time position within the Town Government. Each class of
positions shall be arranged on the basis of similarity, subject
matter, level of difficulty and responsibility, and shall serve as
a foundation for the Compensation Plan.
2. The Compensation Plan shall be a basic salary schedule of pay
ranges, and shall use the Position Classification System for
determining the minimum and maximum rates of pay and
intermediate steps for all full-time positions. The rate of each
range shall serve as a numerical benchmark that reflects fairly
the difference in duties and responsibilities, and shall be
related to compensation for similar positions in the other
places of public and private employment.
SECTION XXV EMPLOYEE SERVICES
A. Retirement System: The Town of Freeport is a participating
member of the International City Managers Association
Amended July 1, 2007
22
Retirement Plan (ICMA). Beginning July 1, 1985, the Town will
match employee contributions up to 5% of an employee's income.
Beginning July 1, 1986, the Town's matching contribution will
increase to 6%. Beginning January 1, 1990, the Town's matching
contribution will increase to 8%. Beginning July 1, 2000 the
Town’s contribution will increase to 10% and the employee’s
matching contribution will be 7%.
Beginning July 1, 2003 Employees may choose between joining
ICMA or the Maine State Retirement System (MSRS).
B. Social Security: In addition to the International City Managers
Association (ICMA), and Maine State Retirement System
(MSRS) the Town of Freeport participates jointly with employees
in Social Security Payments.
C. Group, Hospital, Surgical and Major Medical Insurance: The
Town of Freeport shall maintain in force Medical Insurance Plans
offered by the Maine Municipal Employee's Health Trust. For
employees hired after 1-1-99, the employee shall pay 10% of a
single premium, 20% of the employee/dependent premium, and
25% of the family premium
D. Dental Plan: The Town of Freeport shall maintain in force the
present or equal dental insurance plan. The Town will pay the
full cost of a single subscription under the plan.
DEPARTMENT HEAD BENEFIT PLAN
1. Vacations - Three (3) weeks after 5 years; Four (4) weeks after l0
years; Five (5) weeks after 20 years.
2. Professional Development Program - The Town will assume the
cost of one college course per semester per employee based on
the per credit cost of the University of Southern Maine.
3. Any employment agreement negotiated with a Department Head
at his/her time of hire will supersede this Code.
Amended July 1, 2007
23
4. Retiree Health Savings Plan - Upon reaching the age of 60 or
retirement whichever occurs last and with 20 years of continuous
service, the Town will deposit annually an amount equal to 43.5%
of an individual or family health insurance premium in an RHS
account. The family health insurance plan premium will only be
paid if all covered by the family plan are retired. Premium
reimbursement will be on the Town’s health plan premiums or
premiums of another provider, whichever is lower. Contributions
will terminate when a retiree reaches the age of 65.
For those Department Heads eligible for the State of Maine or any
other retiree health plan the Town will pay the difference, if any, of
bringing the total constitution up to 43.5% of the health insurance
premium.
Effective January 1, 2007
1
CHAPTER 5 CONSTABLES
ARTICLE I - CONSTABLE'S COMMISSION ORDINANCE
Section 5-101 Appointment
In accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, the Town
Manager may appoint, subject to confirmation by the Town
Council, for not more than one year, suspend control and fix
the compensation of so many constables of the Town of Freeport
as may, in the opinion of the Town Manager, be necessary or
required to serve the needs of the public safety or welfare of
the Town of Freeport.
Section 5-102 Qualifications
Constables shall be of good moral character and no constable
commission shall be granted to any person who has been
convicted in any State of the United States of a felony.
Section 5-103 Application
1. All applicants for the position of constable shall submit
to the Town Manager in such form as may be prepared and
approved by the Town Manager all pertinent information
relative to the applicant's qualifications for the
position of Constable.
2. All applicants shall be fingerprinted by the Freeport
Police Department, and the Chief of Police shall submit
the fingerprints of each applicant to the appropriate
State and Federal agencies for classification and criminal
record.
3. In addition to the foregoing, the Chief of Police shall
conduct, or cause to be conducted, such investigation
regarding the applicant's qualification as he may deem
appropriate.
4. All information relating to each applicant shall be
presented to the Town Manager, together with a
recommendation of the Chief of Police, and the Town
Manager shall present himself to the Town Council to
answer any questions regarding each applicant.
Section 5-104 Oath of Office, Bond
2
Upon approval and appointment, every constable shall forthwith
qualify for the office by presenting to the Town Treasurer a
surety bond in an amount approved by the Town Manager and by
taking the required oath of office before the Town Clerk, which
oath shall be subscribed by the Town Clerk, and filed and
preserved in the Municipal Offices.
Section 5-105 Removal
The Town Council may remove any constable from offie for cause,
after notice and hearing.
Section 5-106 Savings Clause
The invalidity of any provisions of this Ordinance shall not
affect the validity of any other provisions.
CHAPTER 6 COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION ORDINANCE
OF FREEPORT, MAINE
REFERRED TO AS:
CATV ORDINANCE OF FREEPORT, MAINE
SECTION I PURPOSE
The purposes of this Ordinance are to provide for Town regulation and
use of community antenna television systems including all aspects of
their construction, installation, maintenance, and operation, and any
additions or extensions thereto in the Town of Freeport; and to
provide rules, regulations, and conditions for the granting of
franchises or any part thereof for the construction, installation,
maintenance, and operation of community antenna television systems in
the Town of Freeport, in the best interests of the Town of Freeport
and its citizens.
SECTION II DEFINITIONS
A. Board - shall mean the CATV Regulatory Board of the Town of
Freeport as established by this Ordinance.
B. Community Antenna Television System (referred to in this
Ordinance as "CATV System" - shall mean any facility which
receives television or radio signals or originates its own signal
or signals and transmits them to subscribers paying a fee for
such service, but shall not include any such facility serving
only the residents of one or more apartment dwellings under
common ownership, control, or management.
C. Company - shall mean any person, persons, firm, partnership, or
corporation granted a CATV System Franchise by the Town of
Freeport.
D. Franchise - shall mean the written agreement between the
Company and the Town which defines the rights, duties, and
liabilities of the parties regarding the construction,
installation, maintenance, and operation of a CATV System within
the Town, as set forth by the Town.
E. Municipal Officers - shall mean those persons duly elected as
the governing body of the Town of Freeport.
F. Subscriber - shall mean any person or group electing to have
CATV System services on their premises.
G. Town - shall mean the Town of Freeport, organized and existing
under the laws of the State of Maine, and the area within its
territorial boundaries.
SECTION III FRANCHISE REQUIRED
No person, persons, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity
shall construct, install, maintain, operate, or own a CATV System or
any part thereof within the Town unless it has obtained a franchise
from the Town pursuant to the terms and provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION IV REGULATORY BOARD
A. Upon adoption of this Ordinance, the Municipal Officers shall
appoint seven (7) residents of the Town to form a CATV Regulatory
Board. The term of office of a member shall be three years
except for initial appointments which shall be three (3) members
for three years, two (2) members for two years, and two (2)
members for one year.
B. The Board shall have the following responsibilities and duties:
1. Create, revise, and update the application form for CATV
Systems;
2. Recommend regulations to the Municipal Officers concerning
CATV Systems;
3. Review and recommend to the Municipal Officers all
applications and any renewals or extensions for CATV Systems
within the Town;
4. Review the performance of the Company and its compliance with
the franchise agreement at least once a year;
5. Review the rates, fees, and deposits for CATV System services
at least once a year;
6. Review all applications for rate increases and make
recommendations to the Municipal Officers;
7. Review and recommend to the Municipal Officers local
programming and services, if applicable;
8. Review and settle disputes and grievances concerning CATV
Systems;
9. Assume other CATV related duties as designated by the
Municipal Officers or this Ordinance.
C. Grievance Procedure
1. This section shall regulate the Grievance Procedure
concerning CATV Systems.
2. All complaints and disputes concerning the Company regarding
any aspect of the CATV System shall be submitted in writing
to the Board.
3. The Board shall investigate the complaint, hear all parties,
and shall file a written report stating its findings of
facts, and either dismiss the complaint or direct the Company
to remedy the complaint, which remedy may include the
ordering of a refund or rebate to any subscriber. The Board
shall give reasonable notice to all parties of the time and
place of the hearing.
4. The decision of the Board shall be binding unless appealed to
the Municipal Officers within ten (10) days after the
decision of the Board is announced. Said appeal shall be in
writing and filed with the Town Clerk.
SECTION V PROCEDURES FOR OBTAINING A FRANCHISE
A. Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation desiring to obtain
a franchise to establish or operate a CATV System must apply only
in response to a Request for Applications issued by the Town.
B. An applicant must first complete an application form furnished by
the Town and in addition to this form, the applicant shall
furnish any information requested by the Town or the Board.
C. Upon receipt of all applications pursuant to its Request for
Applications, the Municipal Officers shall hold a public hearing
to review the Applications. The public hearing shall be
advertised and conducted in accordance with the Freeport Town
Charter.
SECTION VI FRANCHISE CONTRACT TERMS
A. The terms of the franchise shall be set forth in the franchise
agreement. The Company shall abide by the terms of this
Ordinance and the franchise agreement, including but not limited
to programming and expansion of CATV System services.
B. The Municipal Officers may grant an exclusive or non-exclusive
contract for a period not to exceed ten (10) years, on such terms
and conditions as are in the best interests of the Town and its
citizens.
C. The company shall report all information requested by the Board
or the Municipal Officers concerning the construction,
installation, maintenance, or operation of the CATV System.
Further, the Company shall submit any information requested by
the Board or the Municipal Officers necessary for reviewing
rates, determining rate increases, settling disputes or
grievances, or evaluating the general performance of the company.
D. All fees, rates, deposits, or charges to subscribers shall be
fair and reasonable, and shall be filed with and approved by the
Municipal Officers prior to becoming effective. The Company may
apply to the Municipal Officers for changes in rates, fees,
deposits, or charges. The Board shall review the application for
such request and make recommendations to the Municipal Officers.
A public hearing shall be held upon each such application after
notice as described in Section V, Subsection D of this Ordinance.
The burden is on the Company to prove that the current rates are
not adequate to provide for a fair return. The Municipal
Officers may approve, increase, or decrease the rates, fees,
deposits, or charges requested by the Company and shall set forth
the reasons for its actions.
E. The Municipal Officers shall have the right, in addition to any
other remedy contained herein or in the franchise agreement, to
revoke a franchise for cause after notice to the Company and a
public hearing thereon. The Company may appeal such action to
the Cumberland County Superior Court under Rule 80B of the Maine
Rules of Civil Procedure.
SECTION VII PERFORMANCE BOND
Upon the signing of the franchise agreement, the Company shall file
and maintain a surety company performance bond in an amount which the
Municipal Officers deem fair and appropriate, conditioned on its
performance of the franchise contract and its compliance with any
rule, regulation, ordinance, or law concerning the franchise and CATV
Systems. The amount of this bond may be reduced at the discretion of
the Municipal Officers as construction of the CATV System is
completed.
-1-
SECTION VIII INSURANCE
The Company awarded a franchise shall carry public liability insurance
covering its activities in constructing, installing, maintaining, and
operating a CATV System in the Town, in an amount and on such terms as
set forth in the franchise agreement.
SECTION IX ENFORCEMENT
Any person, persons, partnership, firm, or corporation violating any
provision of this Ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
Two-Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for each such violation. In addition,
this Ordinance and any franchise agreement awarded hereunder may be
enforced by injunctive relief or any other legal means of enforcement.
SECTION X SEPARABILITY
In the event a Court declares any provision of this Ordinance invalid,
illegal, or unconstitutional, such provision shall be deemed to stand
alone and all other provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
-2-
CHAPTER 7 STREET NUMBERING ORDINANCE
I. Designation of Street Numbers
A. The Town Asessor shall assign street numbers for all dwellings,
places of business and buildings of any type capable of use or
occupancy whether located on public or private streets or ways.
The Town Assessor shall assign such numbers to dwellings,
places of business and buildings existing on the effective date
of this Ordinance no later than 30 days after the effective
date. The Town Assessor shall assign such numbers to new
dwellings, places of business and buildings at the time
subdivision approval, building permits or certificates of
occupancy are requested, as provided in Section III of this
Ordinance.
B. The Town Assessor shall keep a record of all numbers assigned
under this Ordinance.
C. Upon assigning a number to any dwelling, place of business or
building, the Town Assessor shall send written notice of the
assigned number to the owner, occupant, or person in charge of
the dwelling, place of business or building.
D. Where a building contains more than one dwelling or place of
business, the Town Assessor shall determine whether each
dwelling or place of business shall be assigned its own street
number or whether, because of the quality or configuration of
the dwellings or places of business within the building, only
one street number should be assigned to the building.
II. Posting of Designated Street Addresses
A. Within 60 days after receipt of written notice from the Town
Assessor that a number has been assigned to a dwelling, place
of business or building, the owner, occupant or person in
charge shall display the assigned number on the exterior of the
dwelling, place of business or building or in some other
location on the premises, so that the number is conspicuous and
legible from the street or way.
B. Within 60 days after receipt of written notice from the Town
Assessor that a number has been assigned to a dwelling, place
of business or building, the owner, occupant or person in
charge shall remove any different number which might be
mistaken for or confused with the assigned number.
C. Where a principal building contains more than one dwelling or
place of business and each such dwelling or place of business
has been assigned a separate street number, the street number
shall be displayed at the front entrance to each dwelling or
place of business so that the number is conspicuous and legible
from the street or way.
D. The owner, occupant or person in charge of each dwelling, place
of business or building to which a number has been assigned
shall maintain such number so that it is conspicuous and
legible from the street or way at all times of year.
III. New or Renovated Properties
A. The Codes Enforcement Officer shall not grant a building permit
for any dwelling, place of business or building until the Town
Assessor has assigned a street number to the dwelling, place of
business or building.
B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Section 302 of
Title 1 of the Maine Revised Statutes, the requirements of this
Section III shall apply to applications for subdivision
approval, building permits and Certificates of Occupancy
pending upon the effective date of this Ordinance, except that
no such approval, permit or certificate shall be withheld if
the Town Assessor has not yet assigned street numbers to the
property at the time when the application is otherwise in order
for approval.
C. Developers of Subdivisions shall be required to erect signs
naming streets within each approved subdivision. Street signs
shall be approved by the Public Works Director.
IV Enforcement and Penalties
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be enforced by the Codes
Enforcement Officer of the Town of Freeport. Penalties for
violation of the Ordinance shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
Section XII of the Freeport Town Code.
V. Effective Date
This Ordinance shall take effect thirty days after its enactment.
Enactment date is October 4, 1988. Owners of existing structures
shall have until June 1, 1989 to comply with the terms and
conditions of this Ordinance.
CHAPTER 7 STREET NUMBERING ORDINANCE
I. Designation of Street Numbers
A. The Town Assessor shall assign street numbers for all dwellings,
places of business and buildings of any type capable of use or
occupancy whether located on public or private streets or ways.
The Town Assessor shall assign such numbers to dwellings,
places of business and buildings existing on the effective date
of this Ordinance no later than 30 days after the effective
date. The Town Assessor shall assign such numbers to new
dwellings, places of business and buildings at the time
subdivision approval, building permits or certificates of
occupancy are requested, as provided in Section III of this
Ordinance.
B. The Town Assessor shall keep a record of all numbers assigned
under this Ordinance.
C. Upon assigning a number to any dwelling, place of business or
building, the Town Assessor shall send written notice of the
assigned number to the owner, occupant, or person in charge of
the dwelling, place of business or building.
D. Where a building contains more than one dwelling or place of
business, the Town Assessor shall determine whether each
dwelling or place of business shall be assigned its own street
number or whether, because of the quality or configuration of
the dwellings or places of business within the building, only
one street number should be assigned to the building.
II. Posting of Designated Street Addresses
A. Within 60 days after receipt of written notice from the Town
Assessor that a number has been assigned to a dwelling, place
of business or building, the owner, occupant or person in
charge shall display the assigned number on the exterior of the
dwelling, place of business or building or in some other
location on the premises, so that the number is conspicuous and
legible from the street or way.
B. Within 60 days after receipt of written notice from the Town
Assessor that a number has been assigned to a dwelling, place
of business or building, the owner, occupant or person in
charge shall remove any different number which might be
mistaken for or confused with the assigned number.
C. Where a principal building contains more than one dwelling or
place of business and each such dwelling or place of business
has been assigned a separate street number, the street number
shall be displayed at the front entrance to each dwelling or
place of business so that the number is conspicuous and legible
from the street or way.
D. The owner, occupant or person in charge of each dwelling, place
of business or building to which a number has been assigned
shall maintain such number so that it is conspicuous and
legible from the street or way at all times of year.
III. New or Renovated Properties
A. The Codes Enforcement Officer shall not grant a building permit
for any dwelling, place of business or building until the Town
Assessor has assigned a street number to the dwelling, place of
business or building.
B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Section 302 of
Title 1 of the Maine Revised Statutes, the requirements of this
Section III shall apply to applications for subdivision
approval, building permits and Certificates of Occupancy
pending upon the effective date of this Ordinance, except that
no such approval, permit or certificate shall be withheld if
the Town Assessor has not yet assigned street numbers to the
property at the time when the application is otherwise in order
for approval.
C. Developers of Subdivisions shall be required to erect signs
naming streets within each approved subdivision. Street signs
shall be approved by the Public Works Director.
IV Enforcement and Penalties
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be enforced by the Codes
Enforcement Officer of the Town of Freeport. Penalties for
violation of the Ordinance shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
Section XII of the Freeport Town Code.
V. Effective Date
This Ordinance shall take effect thirty days after its enactment.
Enactment date is October 4, 1988. Owners of existing structures
shall have until June 1, 1989 to comply with the terms and
conditions of this Ordinance.
CHAPTER 8 AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS AND JUNKYARDS
Article I Applicability
This Ordinance shall apply to all junkyards including automobile
graveyards in the Town of Freeport as defined in the Zoning Ordinance
in conjunction with State Law as defined in 30 M.R.S.A.
Article II Preference standards as outlined in 30 M.R.S.A. shall be
complied with for all junkyards and automobile graveyards.
A. Upon receiving a motor vehicle, all junkyards and automobile
graveyards shall remove the battery, the engine lubricants,
transmission fluid, brake fluid and engine coolant, and shall
recycle or dispose of the battery and all such fluids according
to all applicable Federal and State laws regarding disposal of
waste oil and hazardous materials. All junkyards and automobile
graveyards shall annually provide the Codes Enforcement Officer
in December, on a form prescribed by the Codes Enforcement
Officer, a complete description of all automobiles received at
such yard and shall certify that the requirements of this
subsection have been met.
B. Anyone violating provisions of this Ordinance will be subject to
a fine of two hundred dollars ($200) for each day that a
violation exists or continues.
-1-
Amended June 5, 2012
CHAPTER 9 SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE ORDINANCE
Article I Snow to be removed from sidewalks in the designated Sidewalk Plowing Zone.
The commercial owner, commercial tenant, commercial occupant and any person having
the care of any commercial building or lot of land bordering on any street, lane, court,
square or public place within the designated Sidewalk Plowing Zone where there is any
footway or sidewalk shall, within twenty-four (24) hours after the ceasing to fall of any
snow, cause such snow to be removed from such footway or sidewalk.
Article II Ice to be removed from sidewalks in the designated Sidewalk Plowing Zone.
Whenever the footway or sidewalk, or any part thereof adjoining any building or lot of
land on any street in the designated Sidewalk Plowing Zone shall be encumbered with
ice, it shall be the duty of the owner, commercial tenant, occupant and any person having
the care of the such building or lot to cause such sidewalk to be made safe and convenient
by removing the ice there from or by covering the same with sand or some other suitable
substance; and in case such owner, tenant, occupant or other person shall neglect to do so
within in the space of six (6) continuous hours during the daytime, he or she shall be
guilty of an offense.
Article III Penalty
The penalty for the violation of either Article I or II shall be twenty-five dollars ($25) for
every day that the footway or sidewalk shall not have the snow removed therefrom or
shall continue to be encumbered with ice.
Article IV Designated Sidewalk Plowing Zone
The designated Sidewalk Plowing Zone is depicted on the attached plan titled “Sidewalk
Plowing Zone, April 4, 2012.

1
CHAPTER 10
ORDINANCE REQUIRING NOTICE FOR OUTDOOR EVENTS
WITH ATTENDANCE IN EXCESS OF 250 PEOPLE
A. No person, acting individually or in concert with
others, shall sponsor, promote, operate or hold any
outdoor event, including, without limitation,
festivals, exhibitions, amusement shows, fairs,
theatrical performances, music concerts, parades or
other outdoor activities, at which attendance by 250 or
more people is invited, solicited, expected or should
be anticipated by such person, without first providing
written notice to the Police Chief of the Town of
Freeport.
B. The written notice shall:
1. be delivered to the Freeport Police Department no
less than thirty (30) days before the commencement
of the event;
2. describe waste disposal facilities provided;
3. describe fire fighting equipment and personnel
provided;
4. describe water supplies available;
5. describe list of facilities provided;
6. describe communication facilities provided;
7. provide evidence that the event is authorized by
the owner of the property on which it will be held
and that the owner or the person conducting the
event has procured adequate liability insurance for
the event;
8. contain the signed written agreement of the person
giving the notice that such person will assume
responsibility for any damage in the nature of
vandalism to any property occurring before, during
or after the event and caused by persons en route
to or from the event.
C. If, upon review of the notice, the Police Chief or
his designee determines that the imposition of
conditions on the event is necessary to protect the
public health, safety and welfare, the Chief or his
designee may require the person giving the notice to:
1. post a bond to ensure prompt clean-up of the
grounds and to ensure payment for any damage
to public or private property in the area;
2
2. provide private security guards or police officers
in numbers deemed adequate for the event by the
Chief of Police or his designee and reimburse the
Town of Freeport for the cost of providing any
special duty police officers;
3. take other reasonable precautions appropriate to
the size, location and purpose of the event,
including but not limited to, restrictions on the
hours of operation, limitations on the portions of
the property which can be utilized for the
event,limitations on signage, requirements for
fencing, shelter, noise control, and other
reasonable restrictions necessary to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.
Violation of any condition imposed by the Police Chief
or his designee shall be a violation of this Ordinance.
D. If at any time during an event subject to this
Ordinance any Freeport police officer determines that
the continuation of the event presents a danger to the
public safety, peace or order, or if an event is held
for which no notice was given as required by this
Ordinance, any Freeport police officer may order the
event immediately terminated, and failure of the person
or persons operating the event to comply with such
order shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance.
E. No person who owns property on which an event subject
to this Ordinance is held shall cause, permit, or fail
to prevent the operation of such an event in violation
of this Ordinance. The owner of the property on which
an event subject to this Ordinance is held shall be
liable for violations of this Ordinance to the same
extent as the person or persons who sponsor,
promote,operate or hold the event.
F. This Ordinance may be enforced by any police officer of
the Town of Freeport. Violation of this Ordinance
constitutes a civil violation punishable by a civil
penalty of up to One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for
each violation.
Amended June 19, 2012, January 9, 2019
ch11:072705 1
CHAPTER 11
BUILDING CODE ORDINANCE FOR THE TOWN OF FREEPORT, MAINE
1. Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code
Effective December 1, 2010, the Town of Freeport applies and enforces the Maine
Uniform Building and Energy Code (“M.U.B.E.C.”), as required by Title 10
M.R.S.A. § 9724.
2. Fee Schedule
Fees for plan examinations, permit applications and inspections under M.U.B.E.C.
shall be paid in accordance with a fee schedule established by the Town Council, as
such may be amended by the Town Council from time to time.
3. Enforcement, Violation and Penalties
The Codes Enforcement Officer shall serve as the Building Official as defined in Title
25 M.R.S.A § 2371 and shall enforce M.U.B.E.C. within the Town of Freeport. Any
person who violates a provision of M.U.B.E.C. or fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure
in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Codes Enforcement Officer or a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of M.U.B.E.C. commits a civil
violation and shall be subject to fines and penalties as provided in Title 30-A M.R.S.A
§ 4452. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
4. Unlawful Continuance
Any person who continues any work in or about a structure after having been served
with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe conditions, commits a civil violation and shall be subject
to fines and penalties as provided in Title 30-A M.R.S.A § 4452.
5. Board of Appeals
Appeals from decisions of the Codes Enforcement Officer under M.U.B.E.C. may be
taken to the Board of Appeals as an administrative appeal pursuant to the provisions of
the Freeport Zoning Ordinance.
6. Public Rest Rooms in Retail Establishments
a. Any building or facility used for retail trade, and containing from 2500 to 4999
sq.ft. of (floor area, gross) as defined in the Zoning Ordinance, regardless of its
division into more than one separate retail establishment, shall locate the rest
rooms required by the State plumbing Code, Minimum Plumbing Facilities, for
total number of employees, in at least one central location which is accessible to
the public, available for public use free of charge, open during regular business
hours, and identified as a public rest room.
Amended June 19, 2012, January 9, 2019
ch11:072705 2
b. Any building or facility used for retail trade and having a minimum of 5000 sq. ft.
of (floor area, gross) as defined in the Town of Freeport Zoning Ordinance,
regardless of its division into more than one separate retail establishment, shall
provide public rest rooms which are in at least one central location, accessible to
the public, available for public use free of charge, open during regular business
hours and identified as public rest rooms, according to the following formula:
Building Size (square feet) Rest Rooms
5,000 – 10,000 Male (1 water closet, 1 lavatory)
Female (1 water closet, 1 lavatory)
10,001-15,000 Male (2 water closets, 2 lavatories)
Female (2 water closets, 2 lavatories)
Each additional Male (1 water closet, 1 lavatory)
10,000 sq. ft. Female (1 water closet, 1 lavatory)
Whenever urinals are provided, one (1) water closet less than the number
specified may be provided for each urinal installed except the number of
water closets in such cases shall not be reduced to less than two-thirds (2/3)
of the minimum specified.
c. If restrooms in a building of facility are required to be available to the public,
signage identifying their availability shall be placed in a minimum of two
locations: in a visible location inside the building near each public entrance and in
a visible location inside the building on or near the rest rooms’ facilities.
The public rest rooms shall be in addition to those required for the total number of
employees by the State Plumbing Code, Minimum Plumbing Facilities. However, if the
employee rest rooms meet the requirements described in Paragraph A above for public
rest rooms, they may be counted toward the number of required public rest rooms. If
employee rest rooms are not available to the public, they shall be physically separated
from the required public rest rooms.
CHAPTER 12 WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM
Notwithstanding the provisions of Title 38 M.R.S.A., Section 414,
414A, except as provided below, it shall be unlawful to construct,
maintain, or use any privately owned waste water treatment system,
including any mechanical or sand filter system, which discharges any
treated or untreated waste waters into the fresh or salt waters of
Freeport.
Any such treatment system licensed by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection and in use as of June 1, 1986, may continue
in use so long as the discharges therefrom continue to meet the
"effluent limitations" and "license parameters" imposed by the
Department of Environmental Protection in each case, including the
specific allowances for maximum flow, B.O.D., settleable solids, total
suspended solids, fecal coliform bacteria, and maximum chlorine
residual, as determined by periodic tests conducted by the Town of
Freeport, the Department of Environmental Protection, the Department
of Marine Resources, the owner or the owner's agent. If any such test
reveals a failure to meet one or more of the license conditions, the
Freeport Code Enforcement Officer shall, by written notice sent by
Certified Mail, give the owner or operator of the system fourteen days
from receipt of the notice to rectify the failure. The Codes
Enforcement Officer shall also require the owner or operator of the
system to have it immediately pumped to avoid any discharge of
effluent during this repair period.
If subsequent testing reveals a new or continuing failure of the
system to meet the license conditions, or if the Department of Marine
Resources determines that the effect of the discharge requires closure
of clam flats within 3,000 feet of the discharge pipe, then the Codes
Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner or operator in writing by
Certified Mail that use of such system must immediately cease, and
thereafter any replacement system must be both allowed under the State
Plumbing Code and not prohibited by this Ordinance.
This Ordinance is adopted under the Town's general police powers under
the authority of Home Rule (Title 30 M.R.S.A., Sections 2151 and
1917). Should any provision of this Ordinance be declared by the
courts to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other
provision of this ordinance. If any provisions of this ordinance
conflict with any other ordinance of the Town or with any regulation
of the Department of Environmental Protection, the stricter provision
shall apply.
-1-
CHAPTER 13 - FIRE PREVENTION CODE
13.1 SHORT TITLE
A. This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Fire Prevention Code for the
Town of Freeport, Maine.”
B. Purpose - The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe minimum regulations governing
life safety and hazardous condition to life and property from fire or explosion.
C. Applicability - The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all properties, buildings,
and structures within the Town of Freeport.
D. Authority. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the following state law provisions:
25 M.R.S. § 2361; 25 M.R.S. § 2465; and 30-A M.R.S § 3003.
13.2 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
A. This Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Town of Freeport Fire Chief
and/or the Town of Freeport Codes Enforcement Officer, or any designee of the Fire
Chief.
B. Pursuant to 25 M.R.S §2361, the Fire Chief or Codes Enforcement Officer shall have the
authority to enforce any of the state laws or adopted state rules of the State Fire Marshal’s
Office.
C. The Fire Chief or Codes Enforcement Officer may prohibit the continued occupancy of
any structure or portion of a structure, and may post such structure against occupancy, if
the Fire Chief or Codes Enforcement Officer determines that such occupancy presents an
immediate life-threatening situation. If the Fire Chief or Codes Enforcement Officer
prohibits continued occupancy of the structure, no further occupancy shall occur until the
situation identified as life threatening has been corrected in a manner that removes the
threat, as determined by the Fire Chief or Codes Enforcement Officer.
13.3 ADOPTION OF NFPA 1 FIRE CODE BY REFERENCE
A. That a certain document, one (1) copies of which are on file in the office of the Town of
Freeport Town Clerk, marked and designated as the NFPA Fire Code 1 - 2006 Edition as
published by the National Fire Protection Association, as adopted and amended by the
State of Maine and further amended by section 13.3.B, be and is hereby adopted as the
Fire Code of the Town of Freeport.
B. The Fire Code adopted by section 13.3.A shall be revised as follows:
1. Section 1.10 shall be deleted in its entirety.
2. In addition to the requirements of section 18.2.3.4, “fire department access
roads” shall comply with the requirements of the Town of Freeport Subdivision
Ordinance.
3. Permits required under Section 1.12. “Permits and Approvals” shall only pertain
to structures/buildings other than single- and two-family dwellings.
4. Definitions.
a) “Authority having jurisdiction” as used in the Fire Code, shall mean the
Fire Chief or the Codes Enforcement Officer of the Town of Freeport, or
his or her duly authorized representative.
b) Wherever the word “municipality” or “Town” or “city” is used in the Fire
Code, it shall be held to mean the Town of Freeport.
C. All buildings, structures, or dwellings subject to this article may be inspected by the
Fire Chief or the Codes Enforcement Officer or his or her duly authorized
representative.
13.4 ADOPTION OF NFPA LIFE SAFETY 101 BY REFERENCE
A. That a certain document, one (1) copies of which are on file in the office of the Town
of Freeport Town Clerk, marked and designated as the Life Safety Code 101 - 2009
Edition including Appendices A and B as published by the National Fire Protection
Association, as adopted and amended by the State of Maine and amended by section
13.4.B, be and is hereby adopted as the Life Safety Code of the Town of Freeport for
control of buildings and structures as herein provided.
B. The Life Safety Code adopted by section 13.4.A shall be additionally modified with the
following:
1. Provisions of the Life Safety Code shall not apply to one- and two-family dwellings
existing prior to the adoption of this section, unless the dwellings are being used for a
purpose which requires a State of Maine license.
2. Definitions.
a) “Authority having jurisdiction” as used in the Life Safety Code, shall mean
the Fire Chief or the Codes Enforcement Officer of the Town of Freeport, or
his or her duly authorized representative.
b) Wherever the word “municipality” or “Town” or “city” is used in the Life
Safety Code, it shall be held to mean the Town of Freeport.
C. All buildings, structures, or dwellings subject to this article may be inspected by the Fire
Chief or the Codes Enforcement Officer or his or her duly authorized representative.
13.5 WATER SUPPLIES
A. Water Supply for Residential Developments that require Site Plan or Subdivision Review
from The Project Review Board, pursuant to Chapter 21 Art VI § 602, Town of Freeport
Zoning Ordinance & Chapter 25, Town of Freeport Subdivision Ordinance:
1. The Fire Chief shall review all proposed residential developments consisting
of three (3) or more dwelling units or single building developments with three
(3) or more dwelling units and shall specify a suitable water supply for
firefighting purposes. The water supply must be of suitable capacity to
provide a sufficient fire flow for the largest proposed structure within the
development. A sufficient water supply must be located within one thousand
(1,000) feet of all dwellings within the development, as measured along the
traveled roadways that can be used by firefighting apparatus. In areas where
water supplies are not available for firefighting purposes, the applicant shall
provide an adequate water supply in accordance with the National Fire
Prevention Association Standards (NFPA) 1141 and 1142, as may be
amended from time to time. The provision of a water supply in accordance
with the National Fire Prevention Association Standards (NFPA) 1141 and
1142 may be waived if all one and two-family dwellings within the
development are equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler system in
accordance with NFPA 13D – 2016 Edition Standard for the Installation of
Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured
Homes as published by the National Fire Protection Association, as adopted
and amended by the State of Maine and further amended in section 13.8 of
this Ordinance.
2. The developer or property owner installing a water supply facility located on
privately owned property to satisfy the water supply requirement set forth in
this section as a condition of development must provide the Town with an
easement for access to and use of the water source. The easement shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Fire Chief. The easement must
provide acceptable access over all private property between the closest Town
road and the water source.
B. Maintenance of Water Sources for Residential Developments that require Site Plan or
Subdivision Review from The Project Review Board, pursuant to Chapter 21 Art VI §
602, Town of Freeport Zoning Ordinance & Chapter 25, Town of Freeport Subdivision
Ordinance:
1. Maintenance of water sources required under this Ordinance and that is
located on private property, including private streets, shall be the
responsibility of the property owner. Required maintenance shall include
snow removal and the cutting of brush and grass so that the water source is
readily visible and accessible at all times.
2. If the water source includes tanks, the property owner shall be responsible
for the initial filling of any tanks that may be used, for the maintenance of
the tanks and for maintaining the required water level in the tanks. In the
event that the Fire Department utilizes the tanks, it will be responsible for
refilling them after such use.
13.6 Fire Hydrant
A. All fire hydrants, whether owned or leased by the Town or privately owned, shall be
maintained in proper operating condition at all times. Owners of private hydrants shall be
responsible for all required maintenance including, but not limited to, removing
accumulations of snow/ice from the hydrant and ensuring adequate access to the hydrant
by the Town of Freeport Fire Department.
B. No person or persons shall obstruct or permit to be obstructed by any means any fire
hydrant located within the Town of Freeport. Any person or persons causing snow to
obstruct a fire hydrant shall immediately clear said fire hydrant. Failure to do so shall
result in clearing of the fire hydrant by the Town of Freeport Fire Department at the cost
of the property owner. The cost of such violation shall be included on a fee schedule
established by order of the Town Council.
13.7 ALARM SYSTEMS
This section establishes requirements for alarm system installation and monitoring.
A. Any building other than one and two family dwellings, that are required to have a
sprinkler system shall have a supervised alarm, detection, and notification system that
complies with NFPA 72 - 2007 Edition as published by the National Fire Protection
Association, as adopted and amended by the State of Maine. This shall be a fully
addressable system.
B. If said building is required under this section to have an alarm system, the alarm system
shall be monitored.
C. At no time shall anyone other than a certified technician or fire department representative
deactivate or restore an alarm for any reason.
D. In the event an alarm system installed under this section malfunctions or is rendered
inoperable, it shall be repaired and returned to operation within fourteen (14) calendar
days. Any non-functioning alarm system shall cause notification to the Freeport Fire
Department. Failure to remedy a non-functioning alarm system shall result in a
suspension or revocation of the certificate of occupancy until such time that the
corrections have been made and approved by the Fire Chief.
E. The Fire Chief reserves the right to grant an extension of time when extenuating
circumstances beyond the control of the occupant have been outlined and brought forth
by the occupant and a correction date has been accepted by the Fire Chief before the
expiration of the fourteen (14) calendar day time period set forth herein. This extension
of time is intended to be used only for rare occasions and will only be granted for
substantiated reasons.
F. All buildings, structures, or dwellings subject to this article may be inspected annually for
fire alarm code and ordinance compliance by the Fire Chief or Codes Enforcement
Officer or his or her duly authorized representative.
13.8 FIRE SUPPRESSION
A. This article shall govern the installation and maintenance of sprinkler systems in
buildings and structures subject to this article.
B. For purposes of this article, an approved automatic sprinkler system shall mean a system
installed in accordance with the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard
13, NFPA 13R or NFPA 13D – 2016 Edition as published by the National Fire Protection
Association, as adopted and amended by the State of Maine and in accordance with the
provisions of this article and approved by the State Fire Marshal’s Office, and shall be
further subject to the Fire Chief’s approval.
C. All automatic sprinkler systems shall be an approved system listed by Underwriters
Laboratories (UL) or Factory Mutual (FM) fire insurance underwriters, an approved
Maine Life Safety Sprinkler System, or otherwise deemed acceptable by the Fire Chief.
D. Any structure requiring the installation of an NFPA Standard 13 or 13R System shall
have a fire department connection. The location and type of fire department connection
shall be approved by the Fire Chief. The fire department connection shall be identified by
a sign, plaque, or plate identifying it as a “Fire Department Sprinkler Connection.”
E. The property owner shall keep the fire department connection clear of any obstructions
and maintained in good, serviceable condition at all times.
F. All systems required to be installed under this article shall be reviewed and approved by
the Fire Chief in accordance with this article.
G. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the automatic sprinkler system has been
properly installed and tested by a State of Maine licensed installer and approved by the
Fire Chief.
H. All automatic sprinkler systems installed under this article shall be required to comply
with the following:
1. Installation, extension, modification, or alteration shall be done by a State of
Maine licensed installer.
2. Plans for the installation of any system containing ten (10) or more sprinkler
heads, or the modification of an existing sprinkler system containing ten (10)
or more additional sprinkler heads, shall be approved by the State Fire
Marshall’s office and the Fire Chief.
3. When required by NFPA 13 or 13R, a tamper switch alarm at the system shut
off which shall be monitored by the fire alarm and which shall transmit as an
“alarm” and not as a “trouble” or “supervisory” shall be required.
4. Any building other than a one and two family dwelling that is required to be
sprinkled by this article shall have an NFPA 72 compliant supervised alarm
system installed, as set forth in Section 13.7 of this chapter.
5. An outside water flow alarm shall be installed on all NFPA 13 and 13R
sprinkler systems.
6. Property owner shall maintain all sprinkler and standpipe systems and
component parts in accordance with NFPA 25 “Standard for Inspection
Testing and Maintenance of Water Based Fire Protections Systems– 2014
Edition”. It shall be unlawful to tamper with any system under this article,
except that this shall not prohibit necessary testing, repairs, alterations, or
additions, provided that the testing, repairs, alterations or additions are done
in such a way as to avoid the creation of a safety hazard. The office of Fire
Chief shall be notified before such testing, repairs, alterations, or additions
are conducted.
I. Automatic sprinklers and standpipes may be shut down subject to the following
conditions:
1. A letter stating that the sprinkler system and and/or standpipe has/have been shut
down and rendered inoperable has been provided to the Fire Chief.
2. The building remains unoccupied during the shutdown, except for the property
owner or their representative to conduct occasional walk-through inspections.
3. A licensed sprinkler contractor or inspector has properly shut down the sprinkler
system.
4. The system is reactivated only by an installer or technician licensed by the State
of Maine.
5. The approval of the Maine State Fire Marshal and the approval of the property’s
insurance carrier shall be provided in writing before any decision regarding
shutdown of the system shall be rendered.
J. Any building having more than one sprinkler riser shall have the risers separately zoned
and wired to a local fire alarm panel to provide zone identification upon activation.
K. The fire alarm panel shall be located as near as possible to the main exit door. There shall
also be a building map located at the fire alarm panel showing each zone of the building.
L. Any structure containing an automatic sprinkler system shall be required to be tested in
accordance with NFPA 25 “Standard for Inspection Testing and Maintenance of Water
Based Fire Protections Systems– 2014 edition”. A written copy of all test reports shall be
forwarded to office of the Fire Chief.
13.8.1 THIRD PARTY REVIEW
A. Due to the complexity of certain projects, buildings, or developments, the Fire Chief may
require third party review of the plans prior to approval. All costs associated with third
party review under this section shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant, developer,
or property owner.
13.9 BUILDING PERMIT AND CONSTRUCTION PLAN REVIEW
A. The Fire Chief or his/her designee shall conduct a plan review under the provisions of
Fire and Life Safety Codes and Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Freeport for any public
building that requires a building permit or for a change of use and for any non-residential
structures including but not limited to structures that require site plan approval,
subdivision approval, building permit, occupancy inspection or for a change of use.
B. The Fire Chief or his/her designee shall review all road accesses in subdivisions and site
plans and to review fire prevention measures and general layout of all developments of
dwellings, boarding houses, dormitories, hotels, motels, multifamily dwellings,
(including, but not limited to, town houses, condominiums, and any other building that
houses three (3) or more dwelling units).
C. The Freeport Fire Chief or his/her designee shall review all required site plans and
sprinkler plans; however, all sprinkler system plans shall primarily be subject to approval
by the State Fire Marshal’s Office.
D. The Codes Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for maintaining all applications and
approvals. The Fire Prevention Code shall comply with 25 M.R.S. § 2448 and the Fire
Chief or Codes Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the permit application
process pursuant to 25 M.R.S. § 2448.
13.10 KNOX BOX PROGRAM
A. Any building that shall be equipped with a fire alarm system that reports, by whatever
means, to the Town of Freeport Fire Department, shall be further equipped with a Knox
Box which shall hold a key or keys that will provide for access to the building and ALL
portions thereof, for emergency purposes only. The Fire Chief shall serve as the
administrator for the Knox Box Program, as defined by the Knox Company. The number,
make, model and location of the box(es) shall be determined by the Fire Chief or his/her
designee. Except that if a land or building owner appoints a personal representative that
can within fifteen minutes provide access to the entire property at the discretion of the
Fire Chief.
13.11 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
A. Any violation of this Ordinance shall be subject to enforcement as provided in 30-
A M.R.S. § 4452.
B. Any person, firm or corporation, being the owner or occupant of, having control of, or
the use of, any building or premises, or part thereof, who violates any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to the laws and liability of 30-A M.R.S. § 4452.
C. The Fire Chief or Codes Enforcement Officer is authorized to, in writing, suspend or
revoke a certificate of occupancy issued under provisions of the Town of Freeport
Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 21 Art VI § 601.F) wherever the certificate is issued in
error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that
the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any of the provisions of
this Ordinance.
13.12 BOARD OF APPEALS
A. The Board of Appeals shall act and hear appeals of orders, decisions, or
determinations made by the Fire Chief or Codes Enforcement Officer related to permit
applications or interpretation of the Fire Prevention Code. All appeals shall follow the
requirements and procedures of the Town of Freeport Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 21
Art VI § 601.G).
Amended May 17, 2012
Town of Freeport
CHAPTER 14 ALARM SYSTEMS ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I TITLE, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
Section 14-101 Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish appropriate guidelines for the installation of alarm
systems for notification of the Town of Freeport's Police and Fire Departments.
Section 14-102 Definitions
For purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms or words used
herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows:
1. Alarm System. A system including any mechanism, equipment or device designed to
automatically transmit a signal, message or warning from a private premises, including
telephonic alarms systems designed to operate automatically through the use of public telephone
facilities to the Town of Freeport Public Safety Communications Center; or monitored by other
private or public agencies which, in turn transmit a signal to the Town of Freeport Public Safety
Communications Center.
ARTICLE II PERMITS
Section 14-201 No person or business shall operate or maintain an alarm system which by any
method transmits a signal, message or warning to the Police or Fire Departments without first
filing an application.
Section 14-202 Application for permits to install, maintain or operate an alarm system shall be
filed with the Chief of each concerned department, or the Chief’s designee, on forms supplied by
the Town. Said application shall set forth the name, address and telephone number of both the
installer of the systems and the person or business on whose premises the system will be
installed, as well as a description of the system and the location where it is proposed to be
installed. Installers are responsible for submission of said application and fee. The application
fee for residences, which could include both fire and burglar service, is fifty-five dollars
($55.00). The application fee for non-residential services, which includes fire service only or
fire and burglar, is five-hundred ($500.00). The fee for a non-residential burglar service only
would be $55.00. The fee for annually monitoring a Municipal Fire Alarm System, nonresidential
only. which may include burglar alarm monitoring, is two-hundred and seventy five
dollars ($275.00). The fee for annually monitoring a residential alarm system or non-residential
1
Amended May 17, 2012
burglar alarm only is thirty-five dollars ($35.00). Installations or monitoring will not be
permitted until the application has been filed with the Town of Freeport and the application fee
has been paid in full. Annual monitoring fees shall be paid on or before July 1 of each year.
Section 14-203 The Chief of the concerned department shall
approve such application if the Chief finds that:
1. The use of said alarm system to transmit a signal, message or warning to a designated Town
Police Department or Fire Department will not interfere with the orderly conduct of Town
business;
2. The entity installing the system maintains an adequate service organization to repair, maintain
or otherwise service alarm systems sold or leased by the entity. Any leased monitoring
company shall be UL listed and meet N.F.P.A. Coded 71 standards or will be connected to
municipal fire alarm.
3. The Police Chief or Fire Chief may impose other reasonable conditions on the exercise of
said permits. The Town Manager shall retain final authority to approve the reasonableness
of any other conditions.
4. The Chief of the concerned department shall have the sole right to inspect or cause to be
inspected by the system installer any alarm system on premises where it is intended to
function prior to issuance of any permit for operation of such a system, and he may inspect or
cause an inspection by the system installer or by a qualified individual in alarm systems
installation of such system to be made at any time after the issuance of a permit to determine
whether it is being used in conformity with the terms of the permit and the provisions of this
Ordinance. Information related to any alarm system shall be maintained in a confidential
manner and the release of such information by any member of a concerned department shall
be a violation of this Ordinance.
5. No person shall install, operate or maintain a telephonic alarm system which automatically
transmits a signal, message or warning to the Town's Police or Fire Department's telephone
lines, except to such telephone number or numbers as designated by the permit issued under
the provisions of this Ordinance.
6. The Chief of the concerned department may revoke any permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of this Ordinance, after giving written notice to the permit holder and an
opportunity for the permit holder to be heard, if he determines that the alarm system installed
pursuant to said permit has been installed, maintained or operated in violation of the
provisions of this Ordinance, or of any term or condition of said permit, or for failure to pay
any fee specified in Article III
7. A. Any residential construction in units with one (1) bedroom on one (1) floor will require a
smoke detector to be located in hall adjacent to bedroom or sleeping quarters and one (1) in
2
Amended May 17, 2012
basement or cellar. Detectors will be wired together so one (1) detector, when activated, will
sound the other. The detectors will be hard wired 120V AC.
B. In units with more than one (1) sleeping area, smoke detectors will be installed to protect
each bedroom and one (1) in basement or cellar. Detectors will be wired together so one (1)
detector, when activated, will sound the other. The detectors will be hard wired 120V AC.
C. In units two (2) stories above ground level, detectors will be located in sleeping area or
adjacent hallway on ground floor and in cellar or basement. Detectors will be wired together
so one (1) detector, when activated, will sound the other. The detectors will be hard wired
120V AC.
ARTICLE III TRANSMITTAL OF NON-EMERGENCY ALARMS
Section 14-301 Any permit holder whose system causes the
transmittal of a non-emergency police alarm more than two (2)times per calendar year shall pay
a fee based upon the following scale:
3rd Alarm, $30.00
4th Alarm, $55.00
5th - 9th Alarm, $100.00
10th + Alarm, $150.00
In the case of the Fire Department, the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each
instance of a non-emergency alarm in excess of three (3) such alarms per year. Non-emergency
alarms shall include, but shall not be limited to, malfunctioning equipment, or improperly
monitored equipment such as to cause false alarms.
ARTICLE IV PENALTY
Section 14-401 Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance commits a civil
violation and shall pay a civil penalty of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus costs
and attorney’s fees.
ARTICLE V SAVINGS CLAUSE
Section 14-501 The invalidity of any provisions of this Ordinance shall not affect the validity of
any other provision.
Section 14-502 All fees associated with this Ordinance will be deposited in a reserve account
established by the Town and will be used for maintenance and expansion of the Town of
Freeport Alarm System.
3
Amended May 17, 2012
4
ARTICLE VI EFFECTIVE DATE
Section 14-601
Updated with amendments April 1990, July, 2002, April 2005 July 1, 2008, and May 17, 2012.
Amended September 6, 2016
1
STREET REGULATION ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 15
TOWN OF FREEPORT
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO ENTRANCES, UTILITY CONSTRUCTION, HEAVY LOADS,
AND OTHER REGULATIONS
IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Article 1. General
A. Purpose
This Ordinance has been enacted by the Town Council to regulate the use of public rights-of-way in the
interest of public safety and convenience, and to protect public infrastructure. Excavation and restoration
standards, control of access, and regulation of vehicle loads are required to preserve the integrity,
operational safety, and function of the public right-of-way.
B. Definitions
1. Town shall mean the Town of Freeport and/or its Public Works Authority.
2. Director shall mean the Director of Public Works and/or his designee.
3. Contractor shall mean anyone licensed by the Town of Freeport to work in the public right-of-way.
4. Emergency shall mean any event, which may threaten public health or safety, where action is necessary
to prevent personal injury, death or the loss or disruption of a private or public utility or service. The
burden of proof of such emergency rests with the applicant.
5. Excavation shall mean any operation in which earth, rock, paving or like material, on, or below the
surface of the ground, is moved, displaced, dug, trenched, tunneled or in any similar manner disturbed,
except the agricultural tilling of soil or gardening.
6. Applicant shall mean a person applying for a permit required by this Ordinance.
7. Permit Holder shall mean a person who has obtained a permit as required by this Ordinance. A
applicant may be any natural or corporate “person”, business association or other business entity
including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or
private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any of the foregoing, or any other legal
entity.
8. Public right-of-way shall mean the entire width between property lines of every way and place of
whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes
of traffic, except for private roads and private ways. The definition shall include the area on, above and
below the public right-of-way, dedicated to public use, and any dedicated, but unaccepted street or way.
The definition shall also include any publicly owned space or park. A right-of-way does not include the
airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other non-wire telecommunications or
broadcast service.
9. Entrance shall mean direct vehicular access to property abutting the public right-of-way.
10. M.D.O.T shall mean the Maine Department of Transportation.
11. Technical and Design Standards shall mean the standards cited herein and adopted by the Town of
Freeport including the Maine Department of Transportation (MDOT) Standards and Specifications for
Highways and Bridges, latest edition.
12. Utility shall mean a public utility, as defined in 35-A M.R.S.A. § 102 as it may be hereinafter amended
and shall specifically include the non-regulated activities of such a utility.
Amended September 6, 2016
2
C. Administration
1. The Director is the responsible authority for the enforcement of this ordinance.
2. A Highway Opening and/or Entrance permit is required prior to the commencement of any excavation in
the right-of-way. It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate, or to place, deposit or leave upon any
street any earth or other material, equipment or structure tending to interfere with the free use of the
street, unless such person shall first have obtained a permit.
3. All Federal and State requirements for safe operation within the right-of-way shall be followed,
including, but not limited to, OSHA and the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).
4. The permit holder shall hold harmless the Town of Freeport and its duly authorized agents and
employees against any action for personal injury or property damage sustained by reason of the exercise
of any permits issued under this ordinance.
5. Only contractors and Public Utilities with a valid license are permitted to work in the public right-ofway.
Refer to Article 5 – Approved Contractors.
6. Environmental Considerations
a) In the course of any work in the right-of-way, the permit holder shall not remove any trees or shrubs
which exist in the street area without first obtaining the approval of the Director.
b) Best Management Practices (BMP’s) as defined in the Maine Department of Transportation
Practices for Erosion and Sedimentation Control, dated September 1997 shall be followed for all
construction in the public rights-of-way.
7. The Public Works Director or his/her designee shall make such inspections as are necessary in the
enforcement of this ordinance.
8. Permit holders shall maintain accurate drawings, including plans, and profiles showing the location and
character of all underground structures including abandoned installations proximate to their work.
Corrected as- built plans shall be filed with the Director within sixty (60) days after new installations,
changes or replacements are completed.
9. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Ordinance shall be
subject to a fine in an amount established by order of the Town Council. Each day of continued
violation, and every violation of a provision of this Ordinance shall constitute a new and separate
offense.
10. If any work performed under any permit issued under this ordinance is not completed in compliance
with the terms of this ordinance, the Town may cause such work to be repaired and deduct the costs of
such work from the performance guarantee or surety. In the event such repair was undertaken without a
permit, the Town shall prepare a bill for the cost of the repair, plus an additional amount of fifty (50)
percent to be paid by the person doing the work. The Town shall issue no further permits to any person
who has performed such work until the Town receives payment from the person for the repair work.
11. Working Hours: Except for emergency repairs or as approved by the director, working hours shall be
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., prevailing time. Starting or warming up equipment prior
to 7:00 a.m. is prohibited. Work on the weekend or legal holidays is prohibited unless specifically
authorized by the director.
Article 2. Entrances to Public Right-of-Ways
A. Purpose
This Article provides for the review of any entrance onto a public way for compliance with sound
construction and design practices, to ensure that traffic safety, drainage and public improvements are not
adversely affected. A permit is not required for paving, culvert replacements, sealing, or repairs to any
existing access.
Amended September 6, 2016
3
B. Permit Required.
No person shall construct, cause or permit to be constructed, alter or relocate, any driveway, entrance, or
approach or other improvement within the right-of-way of such road or extending from such road onto his
property except in accordance with an entrance permit. This Ordinance applies to all proposed entrances or
substantive changes to existing entrances to public roads after the effective date of the Ordinance.
C. Administration
1. A permit will be issued upon application to the Director for the purpose of securing access to private
property.
2. An entrance permit does not authorize parking or servicing vehicles within such right-of-way.
3. A permit fee established by order of the Town Council shall be paid for each permit.
4. The Director may establish a review fee for staff or consultant review of the application. This fee shall
be based on the estimated time for review and be placed in a cash escrow account with the Town prior to
issuance of a permit.
5. Performance Guarantee. Prior to the issuance of any permit for highway entrance, the Applicant shall
secure surety in the amount of $250.00. Said surety shall be set aside in an escrow account with the
Finance Director – Town of Freeport or designee listed as the only authorized signature for withdrawal
or release of funds as approved by the Director said surety shall be held in non-interest bearing account
to secure the completion of all work approved under the permit issued under this ordinance. Once the
work has been inspected and approved the security money will be refunded.
6. The Application on standard form available at the Town Office or Public Works garage shall be filed
with the Director together with an application fee. The applicant shall furnish a copy of plans or
sketches showing the following information:
(a) location(s), width, and arrangement;
(b) distance between existing entrances within 100 feet of the proposed entrance(s);
(c) distance(s) from the centerline of the traveled way to any structures, gasoline pumps, or other
obstructions within 100 feet of the proposed entrance(s) etc.;
(d) property lines and easements;
(e) length, size and location of existing pipes, culverts, catch basins or manholes, curbing, curb and
gutter, and/or sidewalks, and above ground utilities within 100’ of the proposed entrance(s); and
(f) The proposed location of new pipes, culverts, catch basins or manholes, curbing, etc.
7. The entrance permit shall be valid for a period of twelve months from the date of original issue.
8. A contractor, licensed with the Town, must complete all work within the right-of-way.
9. The Director must approve any variances from the Entrance Standards contained in the permit.
Amended September 6, 2016
4
TOWN OF FREEPORT
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
APPLICATION FOR ENTRANCE
Application/Permit No. Date
Return to: Owner Information:
TOWN OF FREEPORT Name
30 MAIN STREET Street & No.
FREEPORT, ME 04032 City
State & Zip
ATTN: PUBLIC WORKS DEPT Telephone
In accordance with Title 23, Revised Statutes Annotated, Application is hereby made to construct an entrance to my property on the
(North) (South) (East) (West) side of Town Road/Highway Rte. No. in the Town of Freeport a point
(Circle Appropriate Direction)
point about _________ ft. (North) (South) (East) (West) from for the following purpose:
(Circle Appropriate Direction) (Town Line, Road, or other)
Residential  , Commercial  , Industrial  , Or Other Land Use 
description
INFORMATION REGARDING TO THE LOCATION OF THE REQUESTED ENTRANCE(S):
1. Frontage of lot along highway ft. 2. Depth of Lot ft.
3. Number of Entrances requested 4. Proposed width of Entrance(s) _________________.
2. Setback from center of Highway: (A) to Buildings __________ ft. (B) to Other Structures ______________ ft.
3. The surface on the proposed driveway is to be ________________________________________________.
4. Construction desired to commence on _______________20______ and to be completed on ____________20_____.
5. Is this entrance part of a project/development requiring a D.E.P. Site Location Permit? Yes No
THE PERMIT HOLDER HEREBY AGREES:
(1) To provide, erect and maintain all necessary barricades, lights, warning signs and other devices to safeguard traffic properly while
to work is in progress.
(2) That the highway will at no time be closed to traffic.
(3) The entrance will be located and constructed in accordance with the entrance standards included herein.
(4) To Notify the Public Works Department at least 24 hours before starting work on the entrance.
(5) To maintain said entrance and approach in accordance with this permit.
(6) FURTHER CONDITION OF THE PERMIT: the permit holder shall well and truly pay all damages, fines, and penalties for which
he shall become liable, and shall indemnify and save harmless said Town against all suits, claims, damages and proceedings of
every kind arising out of the construction and maintenance of said entrance and approach, including snow removal.
(7) To limit work days in the hours between 7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. (See Article 1.C.11)
(8) The Applicant holds Utility Location Permit No._______. (Dig Safe)
(9) The Applicant is required to secure a surety in the amount of $250.00, prior to the issuance of this permit. Upon satisfactory
completion of work, and upon inspection and approval by the Town of Freeport, such funds shall be returned in their entirety.
DATE SIGNATURE OF OWNER
PLEASE NOTE: Section 512 of the Freeport Zoning Ordinance states the following standards for single and two-family dwellings:
Driveways, roads, rights-of-ways, or other means of access from single and two-family dwellings or public or private ways shall not
have an average slope in excess of eight percent (8%) within fifty (50) feet of the point of intersection. The angle of intersection
between the access road and the way shall not be less than sixty degrees (60), nor to exceed one hundred twenty degrees (120).
(Over)
Amended September 6, 2016
5
Sketch or blueprint is required as a part of the application. Blueprints must be furnished in duplicate.
(Show description from town line, road intersection or other identifying landmark.)
SKETCH
INSTRUCTIONS
For securing a Permit
The owner of the property desiring to construct an entrance(s) connecting with any Public Way, State or State Aid Highway
should forward the completed application and permit fee to the Freeport Public Works Department.
Amended September 6, 2016
6
Amended September 6, 2016
7
AD. Entrance Standards
1. Sight Distance Criteria:
a) All entrances shall be so located such that vehicles approaching or using the entrance will be able to
obtain adequate sight distance in both directions along the public way and to maneuver safely and
without interference with traffic: Unobstructed sight distance both ways for an exiting vehicle shall
be in accordance with the following schedule:
Posted Highway
Speed (MPH)
Minimum Sight Distance
(in feet)
25 250
30 300
35 350
40 400
45 450
50 500
55 550
Minimum sight distance shall be increased by 50% for industrial use.
b) Unobstructed sight distance shall be that distance of clear sight measured from a point 10¢ from the
edge of pavement or curb line at a height of 3.5 feet to an object in an approaching lane with a height
of 2.0 feet.
c) Clearing, limbing and removal of other obstructions within the right-of-way necessary to provide the
required sight distance shall be the responsibility of the permit holder and require the approval of the
Director.
2. Geometry
a) The entrance shall be designed such that the grade within the right-of-way does not exceed 10%.
b) In rural sections the entrance grade shall match the edge of the existing shoulder and slope away from
the road surface at a rate of one half inch per foot, for a distance of ten (10) feet from the edge of
pavement.
c) In curbed sections, the entrance grade shall match the existing gutter line and slope up at a rate of one
inch per foot for a distance of not less than six (6) feet from the curb line.
d) The entrance should intersect the traveled way at a horizontal angle of 90 degrees but in no case shall
the horizontal angle be less than 75 degrees.
e) No part of the entrance shall extend beyond the property lot frontage for the lot being served.
f) The entrance shall not be located closer than 50 feet from an intersection.
g) Not more than two entrances (or exits) shall be allowed on any parcel of property for which the
frontage is less than two hundred (200) feet. Additional entrances for parcels of property having a
frontage in excess of two hundred (200) feet shall be permitted only after showing of necessity.
When frontage is fifty (50) feet or less, only one entrance is permitted, the width of which shall not
exceed thirty (30) feet.
Amended September 6, 2016
8
3. Drainage
a) Existing roadside drainage in gutter or ditch lines shall not be altered or impeded by the entrance.
The permit holder shall provide suitable and approved drainage structures/culverts at all entrances.
b) Surface drainage shall be provided so that all surface water on the areas adjacent to the road shall be
carried away from the roadway.
c) Where a drainage culvert is required to maintain roadside drainage the Director must approve the pipe
diameter, length and material type prior to installation. Minimum pipe size shall be 12 inch diameter.
4. Construction Standards
a) The Permit Holder is responsible for all construction and restoration of disturbed areas for the
entrance within the limits of the Right of Way.
b) The entire portion of any entrance within the limits of the Right of Way shall be stripped of all
organics. The base for the entrance shall be constructed with a minimum 15-inch well-graded gravel
base course conforming to MDOT Standard Specifications, Section 703.
c) If the entrance grade within the Right of Way exceeds five (5%) percent slope then the entrance shall
have a paved surface within the limits of the Right of Way.
d) Where culverts are not required or where they are continuous between multiple entrances, an island
raised not less than six (6) inches above the surface of the adjacent drives shall be provided. The
island shall be curbed, loamed and seeded, or paved. If an open swale is used between entrances, the
raised island is not necessary.
e) When sidewalk, curbing or curb and gutter is to be removed, it shall be replaced in kind at the
transition points of the entrance. All curbing at the side of entrance shall be rounded with a radius of
not less than five (5) feet.
5. Curb and Sidewalk
a) When sidewalk or curb exists at the proposed entrance the permit holder shall remove and replace
such materials at the permit holder’s expense. Any granite curb to be removed by the permit holder
will remain the property of the Town.
b) Curb transitions shall be provided at each side of a new entrance.
c) Where sidewalk is removed to accommodate a new entrance, a new walk surface of equal type
construction is to be provided. The sidewalk area at all entrances shall meet handicap accessibility
requirements and conform to the American with Disabilities Act guidelines. In general sidewalks
shall meet the following:
1) The maximum sidewalk longitudinal transition slope is not to exceed 1 vertical to 12 horizontal.
2) The maximum sidewalk cross-slope is not to exceed 2%.
3) No abrupt changes in grade are permitted and the maximum curb reveal crossing a walkway is ½
inch or less.
Amended September 6, 2016
9
Article 3 Excavation and Utility Installation in public Right-of-Way
A. Purpose
The purpose of this Article is the regulation of the use of public right-of-ways in the interest of public safety
and convenience, and the operation and protection of public works infrastructure. Excavation and
restoration standards are required to preserve the integrity, operational safety, and function of the public
right-of-way.
B. Highway Opening Permit Required.
No person, except utilities performing emergency excavations, shall make any excavation in any public
right-of-way without first obtaining a Highway Opening permit from the Director. All such excavations are
governed by 23 M.R.S.A., Sec. 3301 et seq. as amended from time to time, and this Ordinance.
C. Administration
1. A permit will be issued upon application to the Director for the purpose of excavation and utility
construction within the public right-of-way.
2. An application fee established by order of the Town Council shall be paid for each permit, plus a
Maintenance Fee equal to 10% of the Performance Guarantee amount.
3. The Director may establish a consultant review fee for staff or consultant review of the application. This
fee shall be based on the estimated time for consultant review.
4. Performance Guarantee. Prior to the issuance of any permit for highway opening, the Applicant shall
secure surety in the form of cash bond or irrevocable letter of credit equal to the estimated cost of
restoring the highway to the pre-construction condition. Said surety shall be set aside in an escrow
account with the Finance Director – Town of Freeport or designee listed as the only authorized signature
for withdrawal or release of funds as approved by the Director. Said surety shall be held in non-interest
bearing account to secure the completion of all work approved under any permit issued under this
ordinance. Once the work has been inspected and approved, the performance guarantee security will be
refunded. The Director may waive the performance guarantee for public utilities operating in Freeport or
the Freeport Sewer District, unless outstanding fees or charges remain from previous projects.
5. No person shall be granted a permit to excavate or open any street or sidewalk from November 15 of
each year to March 31 of the following year, unless an emergency or special condition exists and
permission is obtained in writing from the Director. Any person wishing to obtain a Highway Opening
permit between these aforementioned dates shall first explain fully in writing the emergency or special
condition to the Director before issuance is granted. If a hazardous condition which could endanger life
and/or property exists, excavation work shall not be delayed by this section of this Ordinance; however,
a written explanation shall be delivered to the Director within two (2) working days, and a Highway
opening permit shall be obtained for the work.
6. The Application on standard form available at the Town Office or Public Works garage shall be filed
with the Director together with the Application review and opening fee (if applicable) and plans and
specifications of the work including property lines and easements.
7. Upon review for completeness and submission of all fees the Director will issue the Highway Opening
Permit.
8. In cases of emergency as defined in Section 1.C.5 above or in cases of minor alteration, the Director
shall have the authority to waive the provisions of this ordinance.
Amended September 6, 2016
10
TOWN OF FREEPORT
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
HIGHWAY OPENING PERMIT
Application/Permit No. _______________________ Date ________________________
Return to: Owner Information:
TOWN OF FREEPORT Name
30 MAIN STREET Street & No.
FREEPORT, ME 04032 City
State & Zip
ATTN: PUBLIC WORKS DEPT Telephone ( )
Permission is granted the applicant, ________________________________to open Town Road/Highway Rte
No.____________ in the Town of Freeport at the location shown in the application, for the purpose
of______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________________________.
The work shall be performed between the dates of ___________ and __________.
ESTIMATED WORK AND FEE
Cost/S.Y. S.Y. Amount
Bituminous concrete surface, shoulder or sidewalk $75.00
Bituminous concrete surface, over PCC concrete base $100.00
Gravel surface or shoulder $10.00
PCC sidewalk $70.00
Brick sidewalk Brick $150.00
Turf slopes and ditches $2.00
Replace Granite Curb $50.00 per Linear Foot (LF)
Plowed-in or trenchless installation $15.00 per LF $0.50
Other
Subtotal -Performance security amount*
Maintenance Fee (10% of performance security amount)
Application Fee $150.00
Consultant Review Fee
TOTAL – ESTIMATED FEES
*Minimum security amount is $500.00
1. Actual square yards opened or disturbed will be measured by the Public Works Department’s representative and the permittee will
be billed for the difference between estimated maintenance fee paid and the final maintenance fee as determined by measurement
of the opening. Additional costs to the Public Works Department as outlined in Highway Opening Permits, may be billed.
2. Upon request of the Permit Holder, the Town may consider making a partial release of the performance guarantee to the permit
holder for portions of the work satisfactorily completed.
3. The performance guarantee security payment may be waived for the public utilities located in Freeport. All of the Fee amounts
shall be paid with the application.
(OVER)
Amended September 6, 2016
11
4. The permit is issued in accordance with Title 23, Sec. 54, Title 35-1, Sec. 2507, 2508, and 2510 and Title 23, Sec. 3351 to 3360,
M.R.S.A. and is subject to the following conditions.
The Permit Holder hereby agrees:
1. To abide by the rules, regulations and policies of this Highway Opening permit. Conditions pertaining to performance of work, are
included herein.
2. To provide, erect, and maintain all necessary barricades, lights, warning signs, traffic officers and other devices to safeguard
vehicular and pedestrian traffic while the work is in progress. All traffic control devices shall be in accordance with the manual on
Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways (MUTCD).
3. To notify the Public Works, Police and Fire Departments at least 24 hours before starting work.
4. The permit holder shall well and truly pay all damages, fines, and penalties for which he shall become liable, and shall indemnify
and save harmless said Town against all suits, claims, damages and proceedings of every kind arising out of the construction and
maintenance of said opening, including snow removal.
5. Final restoration of the affected area shall be completed to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works Department.
6. To limit work to weekdays, in the hours between 7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. (See Article 1.C.11)
The Applicant holds Utility Location Permit (Dig Safe) No._____________
FREEPORT PUBLIC WORKS
By:_____________________
Title____________________
_______________________________________________
SIGNATURE OF APPLICANT
Amended September 6, 2016
12
D. Protection and Restoration of Highway Structures and Protection of the Traveling Public.
1. Maintenance
The permit holder/contractor shall be responsible for maintaining the excavated/ construction area in
a safe, passable condition satisfactory to the Director until the project is accepted. A temporary
bituminous patch shall be placed on all trenches that cannot be permanently patched within 48 hours
of initial disturbance. Permanent restoration of the pavement structure including hot bituminous
base and surface shall be made within 15 days.
One lane of traffic shall be maintained at all times, unless traffic has been detoured. The permit
holder/contractor shall provide traffic control officers, barricades, lights, warning signs and other
devices to safeguard traffic and pedestrians while the work is in progress.
Two-way traffic shall be maintained during all non-working hours, unless approved by the Director.
In the event that two-way traffic cannot be maintained during these hours, the permit
holder/contractor shall install and maintain barriers and lights, as specified in the MUTCD until a
permanent surfacing has been installed.
All equipment, and materials shall be removed and located off the highway during non-working
hours. A highway opening permit does not authorized parking or servicing vehicles within such
right-of-way.
2. Removal and Protection of Utilities
The permit holder/contractor shall not interfere with any existing utility other than their own
facilities without the written consent of the utility company or person owning the utility. If it
becomes necessary to remove an existing utility, this shall be done by its owner. No utility owned
by the Town shall be moved to accommodate the permit holder unless the cost of such work be
borne by the permit holder/contractor. The cost of moving privately owned utilities shall be borne
by the permit holder unless he makes other arrangements with the utility owner. The permit
holder/contractor shall support and protect all pipes, conduits, poles, wire or other apparatus which
may be in any way affected by the excavation work. In case any of said pipes, conduits poles, wire
or apparatus should be damaged, they shall be repaired by the utility or person owning them and the
expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permit holder/contractor. The permit
holder/contractor shall be responsible for any damage done to any public or private property by
reason of the damage any water, sewer, gas pipe, electric conduit or other utility. Permit
holder/contractor shall inform itself as to existence and location of all underground utilities and
protect the same against damage. Above ground utilities abandoned as a result of relocation or
replacement shall be removed in its entirety.
3. Protection of Adjoining Property
The permit holder/contractor shall at all times and at his own expense preserve and protect from
damage any adjoining property by providing proper protection and taking other measures necessary
for the purpose. Where the protection of such property is necessary to enter upon private property
for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permit holder/contractor shall obtain a
release from the owner of such private property. The permit holder/contractor shall, at its own
expense shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged
Amended September 6, 2016
13
during the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or
private property resulting from its failure properly to protect said work facilities.
4. Restoration and Replacement
The Permit Holder/Contractor shall be responsible for permanently restoring or replacing roadway
items damaged as a consequence of any construction operations. These items are to be permanently
replaced in kind, in the same thickness and to the same grade as originally found and shall include,
but not be limited to, the following items:
a) Bituminous pavement;
. b) Portland Cement Concrete Pavement, including that displaced by blasting, undermined, or
broken by construction equipment. Concrete pavement under, bituminous pavement shall be
replaced with a digable concrete fill of equal thickness;
c) Bituminous, concrete and brick sidewalks;
d) Aggregate base and subbase material under roadways, shoulders, and walks;
e) Curbing, all types
f) Gravel surfacing and shoulders;
g) Turf slopes and ditches;
h) Drainage pipes, structures, and ditches;
i) Guard rail and fencing;
j) Property and other survey monuments
The contractor shall guarantee the restoration/ replacement against defects in material and
workmanship for a period of one (1) year from the date of acceptance, and shall replace any
defective work at the written directive of the Director. Failure to replace any defective work shall be
cause for the Director to revoke the contractor’s license and remove his firm from the list of
approved contractors.
5. Emergency Coordination
a) The permit holder/contractor shall furnish the Director, local and State Police Departments with
a list of names, addresses and telephone numbers of Contractor personnel who may be reached in
case of emergency during hours when no work is being performed. On weekends and during
storms the Permit Holder/Contractor shall assign certain personnel to stand-by duty and shall
inform the Director of the arrangements.
E. Construction Standards
1. All excavations on paved street surfaces shall be precut in a neat straight line with pavement
breakers or saws. Cutouts of the trench lines must be normal or parallel to the trench line. Pavement
edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and neatly aligned with the centerline of the trench.
Unstable pavement over cave-ins shall be removed and aggregate bases restored. Jointed or broken
pavement within one (1) foot of the restoration edge shall be removed. Prior to permanent surfacing
the pavement shall be saw cut an additional six inches beyond the disturbed edge and removed.
2. When multiple openings are located with less than five (5) feet of original pavement remaining
between adjacent openings, the permit holder/contractor shall neatly cut and remove the area of
pavement between these adjacent areas and shall patch as one trench.
3. All previous sections shall also apply to sidewalks in all cases except concrete sidewalks. Concrete
sidewalks shall be saw cut. Use of pavement breakers will not be allowed. On concrete sidewalks,
Amended September 6, 2016
14
all cuts shall be made to the nearest joint or score line on either side of the excavation. All sidewalk
restorations shall be in accordance with the requirement of paragraph B4.
4. All backfilling of street openings shall be done in accordance with the following standards:
a) All work must be conducted in strict accordance with the latest regulations of OSHA for
excavations, and other applicable safety regulations;
b) All work must be protected from freezing;
c) Whenever water is found standing in the excavation area, the water shall be removed by pump or
other means before backfilling operations can commence.
d) Backfilling of excavations shall be performed by the Permit Holder/Contractor as soon as
practicable so that the least possible subsequent settling will occur. Backfill material shall be
spread in layers not exceeding eight (8²) inches in loose depth and compacted to no less than
95% of the maximum dry density of the material as established by ASTM D1557. Rocks, broken
pavement, or ledge particals larger than six (6) inches will not be allowed in the backfill. The
Permit Holder/contractor shall notify the Director, prior to beginning the backfilling operations
to allowing adequate time for inspection.
e) Where the excavated material is primarily silt or rock, it shall be allowed for use as backfill only
upon the express approval of the Director, with the intention of minimizing differential settling.
f) All remaining excavated material shall be removed from the job site and disposed of by the
permit holder/contractor, in such a manner that will minimize interference with pedestrian and
vehicular traffic. No material shall be left within the right-of-way once the repair and/or
installation is complete.
5. Temporary resurfacing shall be provided on all arterial and connector type streets and when directed
by the Director. Temporary resurfacing shall consist of a minimum of two (2) inches of compacted
temporary bituminous surfacing. Such temporary material shall be cold-mix except that the permit
holder under this article may use or the Town may require hot-mix. The temporary surface material
shall be placed and compacted to provide smooth even surface for the safe passage of pedestrian
traffic and safe vehicular travel at the legal posted speed. The permit holder/contractor shall
maintain the temporary paving for a period not to exceed 15 calendar days. At such time, the
permanent restoration shall be made.
6. Permanent restoration of the pavement structure shall consist of aggregate subbase and base and hot
bituminous pavement base and surface conforming to the following:
a) Minimum
Compacted
Layer M.D.O.T. Specification Thickness
Subbase Course Aggregate Subbase – 703.06 Type D 18²
Base Course Aggregate Base – 703.06 Type A 4²
Pavement Base 19.0 MM Superpave 3²
Pavement Surface 9.0 MM Superpave 1 1/2²
b) Aggregate material shall be spread in layers not exceeding eight (8²) inches in loose depth and
compacted to no less than 95% of the maximum dry density of the material as established by
ASTM D1557.
c) The maximum dry density of the material to be used in the trench along with the corresponding
moisture contents, in accordance with ASTM D1557, shall be filed at the time of application to
obtain a permit. The Town reserves the right to verify maximum density and field density at any
time.
d) Hot bituminous pavement (Superpave) shall be placed and compacted in accordance with the
latest MDOT specification.
Amended September 6, 2016
15
7. All Temporary resurfacing shall be maintained for the safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic until
the permanent restoration is made. The permit holder shall erect and maintain warning signs, barriers,
lights, as specified in the MUTCD until a permanent surfacing has been installed.
F. Excavations in reconstructed or repaved roads.
1 After a public road has been reconstructed or repaved, a Highway Opening Permit shall not be granted
for five (5) years unless an emergency condition exists or unless the necessity for making such
installation could not have been reasonably foreseen at the time of the reconstruction or repaving. This
section shall be void unless the Town shall have given sixty (60) days notice by registered and/or
certified mail of the impending work to all public utilities serving the road.
Article 4. Regulation of Heavy Loads
A. Heavy Load Limits.
Under authority of 29-A MRSA, Section 2395, all public roads may be temporarily posted to prevent abuse by
heavy vehicles. The following rules and regulations restrict Heavy Loads on posted Freeport roads at any time.
B. Definitions
1. Freeport Roads: any maintained public road within the Town of Freeport
2. Gross weight: is the combined weight of the vehicle and its load.
3. Permit: A Posted Road Permit is required to operate on a Posted Road for all vehicles that are not Exempt
Vehicles (see below).
C. Administration
1. In order to prevent excessive damage to Freeport Roads, the Director or their designee may close and/or
post all or part of a highway to heavy vehicles at any time. No vehicles shall travel over closed or posted ways
except those permitted by this regulation.
2. Posted Road Notice. Notice shall be given by erecting at each end of the closed road, a poster indicating
the following: (1) the date of the posting, (2) a description of the road closed, (3) name of the Director or
Superintendent of Freeport Public Works.
3. Exempt Vehicles. The following vehicles are exempt from this regulation:
a) Any vehicle or combination of vehicles of a gross weight of 23,000 pounds or less.
b) Town of Freeport highway maintenance vehicles or vehicles under the direction of a public
jurisdiction with permission of the department engaged in emergency maintenance of public road or
appurtenances thereto.
c) Passenger cars, pickup trucks, emergency vehicles, school buses, a wrecker towing a disabled vehicle
of legal weight from a posted road, and vehicles with three axles or less under the direction of a public
utility and engaged in plant maintenance or repair.
d) Any vehicle transporting home heating fuel (oil, gas, coal, stove size wood, propane and wood
pellets) to a private consumer or gasoline, groceries, bulk milk, bulk feed, solid waste, rubbish, animal
bedding, returnable beverage containers, removing sewage from private septic tank or providing port-apotty
services, are exempt.
e) Town of Freeport, at their discretion, may allow heavy loads over posted roadways involving
singular, nonrecurring moves. Such permission shall be made in writing specifying limitations and shall
accompany the vehicle at all times.
Amended September 6, 2016
16
4. Permittee Responsibilities/Damage. If the Director or has evidence that the permittee has caused damage
to the roads, the permittee will be responsible for providing the full cost to repair the damage. No future permits
will be issued until this damage is fully repaired.
5. Permit Cost and Penalty. The permit fee and violation penalty shall be established by the Town Council
as shown in the Schedule of Fees at the end of the ordinance. If a vehicle is found to be operating without a
permit, no future permits will be issued for at least 5 calendar days.
Article 5 – Approved Contractors
A. Purpose
The purpose of this Article is the regulation of Contractors and Utilities performing work in public rights-ofways
in the interest of public safety and protection of public works infrastructure.
B. License Required
No person, including utilities, shall perform work in any public right-of-way without first obtaining license
from the Director.
C. Administration
1. A license will be issued upon written request to the Director accompanied by proof of insurance listed
below and a license fee.
a) The Director shall issue licenses annually to companies who have been identified as having the
ability to perform work to Town standards in the right-of-way.
b) The annual contractor license fee (set by the Town Council).
c) Each license holder shall maintain at all times a minimum of $400,000.00 public liability insurance
coverage protecting himself, his agents and the Town from all such claims for damages or injuries
and naming the Town of Freeport as an additional insured. Evidence of such coverage shall be a
condition precedent to the issuance of any license hereunder and shall be submitted in a form
satisfactory to the Director. Coverage shall be maintained throughout the period of work performed
under this ordinance and shall not be less than the following amounts:
1) General liability including comprehensive form, premises/operations, underground explosion and
collapse hazard, products/completed operations, contractual, independent contractors, broad form
property damage and personal injury.
$300,000 Bodily Injury and Property Damage Each Occurrence
$500,000 Bodily Injury and Property Damage Aggregate
$300,000 Personal Injury Aggregate
2) Automobile liability including any vehicle, hired vehicle and non-owned vehicle- $300,000
bodily injury and property damage combined.
3) Workers’ Compensation and Employers' Liability
$100,000 each accident
d) A license, issued to a contractor, may be revoked after notice and hearing, when the Licensee has
willfully disobeyed any portion of this article.
Amended September 6, 2016
17
Amended September 6, 2016
18
TOWN OF FREEPORT
SCHEDULE OF FEES
As of September 6, 2016
1. Highway Entrance Permit $150.00
(Per Application)
2. Highway Opening Permit $150.00
(Per Application)
3. Approved Contractor License $180.00
(Annual Fee)
4. Winter Openings Permit $900.00
5. Posted Road Permit $20.00 per vehicle
6. Penalty for Operating Without Posted Road Permit $300.00 per vehicle
Contractor License fees are non-proratable or non-refundable and are issued on a calendar year basis.
Adopted 12/20/05
1
TOWN OF FREEPORT
CHAPTER 16
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
CONTENTS
ARTICLE PAGE
I. PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT ................................................................................ 2
II. PERMIT REQUIRED ......................................................................................................... 2
III. APPLICATION FOR PERMIT .......................................................................................... 2
IV. APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE ...................................................................... 4
V. REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATIONS ................................................................................................................ 4
VI. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ...................................................................................... 6
VII. CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW ...................................................................................... 12
VIII. CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE ................................................................................ 13
IX. REVIEW OF SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS ......................... 14
X. APPEALS AND VARIANCES ........................................................................................ 14
XI. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES ............................................................................. 16
XII. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY ................................................................................ 17
XIII. CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES ................................................................... 17
XIV. DEFINITIONS .................................................................................................................. 17
XV. ABROGATION ................................................................................................................ 22
60.3 (e) Rev. 4/05
Adopted 12/20/05
2
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT
Certain areas of the Town of Freeport, Maine are subject to periodic flooding, causing serious damages to
properties within these areas. Relief is available in the form of flood insurance as authorized by the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
Therefore, the Town of Freeport, Maine has chosen to become a participating community in the National
Flood Insurance Program, and agrees to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as delineated in this Floodplain Management Ordinance.
It is the intent of the Town of Freeport, Maine to require the recognition and evaluation of flood hazards
in all official actions relating to land use in the floodplain areas having special flood hazards.
The Town of Freeport has the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures to reduce future
flood losses pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA, Sections 3001-3007, 4352, 4401-4407, and Title 38 MRSA,
Section 440.
The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid Act, provides that areas of the Town
of Freeport having a special flood hazard be identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
and that floodplain management measures be applied in such flood hazard areas. This Ordinance
establishes a Flood Hazard Development Permit system and review procedure for development activities
in the designated flood hazard areas of the Town of Freeport, Maine.
The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A, A1-30, and V1-30, are identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a report entitled "Flood Insurance Study - Town of Freeport, Maine, Cumberland
County," dated July 17, 1984 with accompanying “Flood Insurance Rate Map” dated January 17, 1985,
which are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE II - PERMIT REQUIRED
Before any construction or other development (as defined in Article XIV), including the placement of
manufactured homes, begins within any areas of special flood hazard established in Article I, a Flood
Hazard Development Permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer except as provided in
Article VII. This permit shall be in addition to any other permits which may be required pursuant to the
codes and ordinances of the Town of Freeport, Maine.
ARTICLE III - APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
The application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement
Officer and shall include:
A. The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and contractor;
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site;
C. A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed development, including but not limited to
structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut and filled, and lot
dimensions;
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or development;
E. A statement of the cost of the development including all materials and labor;
Adopted 12/20/05
3
F. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
G. Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or development;
[Items H-K.3. apply only to new construction and substantial improvements.]
H. The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), or to a locally
established datum in Zone A only, of the:
1. base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved structures, which is
determined:
a. in Zones A1-30, and V1-30 from data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study - Town of
Freeport, Maine," as described in Article I; or,
b. in Zone A:
(1) from any base flood elevation data from federal, state, or other technical sources (such
as FEMA’s Quick-2 model, FEMA 265/July 1995), including information obtained
pursuant to Article VI.K. and IX.D.;
(2) from the contour elevation extrapolated from a best fit analysis of the floodplain
boundary when overlaid onto a USGS Quadrangle Map or other topographic map
prepared by a Professional Land Surveyor or registered professional engineer, if the
floodplain boundary has a significant correlation to the elevation contour line(s); or, in
the absence of all other data,
(3) to be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of the floodplain boundary and a
line perpendicular to the shoreline which passes along the ground through the site of the
proposed building.
2. highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the proposed building;
3. lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such structures contain a basement; and,
4. level, in the case of non-residential structures only, to which the structure will be floodproofed;
I. A description of an elevation reference point established on the site of all developments for which
elevation standards apply as required in Article VI;
J. A written certification by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer or architect,
that the base flood elevation and grade elevations shown on the application are accurate;
K. The following certifications as required in Article VI by a registered professional engineer or
architect:
1. a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65, 01/03, as amended), to verify that the
floodproofing methods for any non-residential structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of
Article III.H.4.; Article VI.G.; and other applicable standards in Article VI;
Adopted 12/20/05
4
2. a V-Zone Certificate to verify that the construction in coastal high hazard areas, Zone V1-30,
will meet the criteria of Article VI.P.; and other applicable standards in Article VI;
3. a Hydraulic Openings Certificate to verify that engineered hydraulic openings in foundation
walls will meet the standards of Article VI.L.2.a.;
4. a certified statement that bridges will meet the standards of Article VI.M.;
5. a certified statement that containment walls will meet the standards of Article VI.N.;
L. A description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development; and,
M. A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each applicable development standard in
Article VI will be met.
ARTICLE IV - APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE
A non-refundable application fee of $25.00 for all minor development and $50.00 for all new construction
or substantial improvements shall be paid to the Town Clerk and a copy of a receipt for the same shall
accompany the application.
An additional fee may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer and/or Board of Appeals needs the
assistance of a professional engineer or other expert. The expert's fee shall be paid in full by the applicant
within 10 days after the town submits a bill to the applicant. Failure to pay the bill shall constitute a
violation of the ordinance and be grounds for the issuance of a stop work order. An expert shall not be
hired by the municipality at the expense of an applicant until the applicant has either consented to such
hiring in writing or been given an opportunity to be heard on the subject. An applicant who is dissatisfied
with a decision to hire expert assistance may appeal that decision to the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE V - REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATIONS
The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
A. Review all applications for the Flood Hazard Development Permit to assure that proposed
developments are reasonably safe from flooding and to determine that all pertinent requirements of
Article VI (Development Standards) have been, or will be met;
B. Utilize, in the review of all Flood Hazard Development Permit applications:
1. the base flood and floodway data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study - Town of Freeport,
Maine," as described in Article I.;
2. in special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data are not provided, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation
and floodway data from federal, state, or other technical sources, including information obtained
pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article VI.K.; and Article IX.D., in order to administer Article VI
of this Ordinance; and,
Adopted 12/20/05
5
3. when the community establishes a base flood elevation in a Zone A by methods outlined in
Article III.H.1.b., the community shall submit that data to the Maine Floodplain Management
Program in the State Planning Office.
C. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas shown on the maps
described in Article I of this Ordinance;
D. In the review of Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, determine that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those federal, state, and local government agencies from which prior
approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344;
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Maine
Floodplain Management Program in the State Planning Office prior to any alteration or relocation of
a water course and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency;
F. If the application satisfies the requirements of this Ordinance, approve the issuance of one of the
following Flood Hazard Development Permits, based on the type of development:
1. A two part Flood Hazard Development Permit for elevated structures. Part I shall authorize the
applicant to build a structure to and including the first horizontal floor only above the base flood
level. At that time the applicant shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer with an Elevation
Certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer or
architect based on the Part I permit construction, “as built”, for verifying compliance with the
elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, H, or P. Following review of the
Elevation Certificate data, which shall take place within 72 hours of receipt of the application,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue Part II of the Flood Hazard Development Permit. Part
II shall authorize the applicant to complete the construction project; or,
2. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Floodproofing of Non-Residential Structures that are
new construction or substantially improved non-residential structures that are not being elevated
but that meet the floodproofing standards of Article VI.G.1.a.,b., and c. The application for this
permit shall include a Floodproofing Certificate signed by a registered professional engineer or
architect; or,
3. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Minor Development for all development that is not
new construction or a substantial improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or
additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value of the structure. Minor development
also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Article VI.J., mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or
materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or
water supply facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges,
dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers.
For development that requires review and approval as a Conditional Use, as provided for in this
Ordinance, the Flood Hazard Development Permit Application shall be acted upon by the Planning Board
as required in Article VII.
G. Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all Flood Hazard Development Permit Applications,
corresponding Permits issued, and data relevant thereto, including reports of the Board of Appeals on
Adopted 12/20/05
6
variances granted under the provisions of Article X of this Ordinance, and copies of Elevation
Certificates, Floodproofing Certificates, Certificates of Compliance and certifications of design
standards required under the provisions of Articles III, VI, and VIII of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE VI - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following applicable standards:
A. All Development - All development shall:
1. be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation (excluding piers and
docks), collapse or lateral movement of the development resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
3. use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage; and,
4. use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and other service
facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during flooding conditions.
B. Water Supply - All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
C. Sanitary Sewage Systems - All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
and located to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from
the system into flood waters.
D. On Site Waste Disposal Systems - On site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed
to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during floods.
E. Watercourse Carrying Capacity - All development associated with altered or relocated portions
of a watercourse shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that no reduction occurs in the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse.
F. Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure located
within:
1. Zone A1-30 shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above
the base flood elevation.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article V.B.; or
Article IX.D.
3. Zone V1-30 shall meet the requirements of Article VI.P.
G. Non Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any non-residential structure
located within:
Adopted 12/20/05
7
1. Zone A1-30 shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above
the base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall:
a. be floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood elevation so that below that
elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing design
and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for
meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the
application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit, as required by Article III.K. and shall
include a record of the elevation above mean sea level to which the structure is
floodproofed.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article V.B.; or
Article IX.D., or
a. together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities meet the floodproofing standards of
Article VI.G.1.
3. Zone V1-30 shall meet the requirements of Article VI.P.
H. Manufactured Homes - New or substantially improved manufactured homes located within:
1. Zone A1-30 shall:
a. be elevated such that the lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at
least one foot above the base flood elevation;
b. be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured masonry slab or foundation walls, with
hydraulic openings, or may be reinforced piers or block supports, any of which support the
manufactured home so that no weight is supported by its wheels and axles; and,
c. be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to:
(1) over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four corners of the manufactured home,
plus two additional ties per side at intermediate points (manufactured homes less than
50 feet long require one additional tie per side); or by,
(2) frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five additional ties along each side at
intermediate points (manufactured homes less than 50 feet long require four additional
ties per side).
(3) all components of the anchoring system described in Article VI.H.1.c.(1)&(2) shall be
capable of carrying a force of 4800 pounds.
Adopted 12/20/05
8
2. Zone A shall:
a. be elevated on a permanent foundation, as described in Article VI.H.1.b., such that the
lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article
V.B; or Article IX.D.; and
b. meet the anchoring requirements of Article VI.H.1.c.
3. Zone V1-30 shall meet the requirements of Article VI.P.
I. Recreational Vehicles - Recreational Vehicles located within:
1. Zone A1-30 shall either:
a. be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
b. be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use
if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or,
c. be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes" in Article VI.H.1.
2. Zone V1-30 shall meet the requirements of either Article VI.I.1.a. or b., or Article VI.P.
J. Accessory Structures - Accessory Structures, as defined in Article XIV, located within Zones A1-
30 and A, shall be exempt from the elevation criteria required in Article VI.F. & G. above, if all other
requirements of Article VI and all the following requirements are met. Accessory Structures shall:
1. be 500 square feet or less and have a value less than $3000;
2. have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation;
3. have hydraulic openings, as specified in Article VI.L.2., in at least two different walls of the
accessory structure;
4. be located outside the floodway;
5. when possible be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters and be placed further from the source of flooding than is the
primary structure; and,
6. have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electric service disconnect shall be
located above the base flood elevation and when possible outside the Special Flood Hazard Area.
K. Floodways -
Adopted 12/20/05
9
1. In Zone A1-30 riverine areas, encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvement, and other development shall not be permitted within a regulatory floodway which
is designated on the community's “Flood Insurance Rate Map” unless a technical evaluation
certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such
encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
2. In Zones A1-30, and A riverine areas, for which no regulatory floodway is designated,
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other
development shall not be permitted in the floodway as determined in Article VI.K.3. unless a
technical evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing
development and anticipated development:
a. will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
point within the community; and,
b. is consistent with the technical criteria contained in Chapter 5 entitled "Hydraulic
Analyses," Flood Insurance Study - Guidelines and Specifications for Study Contractors,
(FEMA 37/ January 1995, as amended).
3. In Zones A1-30, and A riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designated, the
regulatory floodway is determined to be the channel of the river or other water course and the
adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain as measured from the
normal high water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
L. Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor - New construction or substantial improvement of any
structure in Zones A1-30, and A that meets the development standards of Article VI, including the
elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, or H and is elevated on posts, columns, piers,
piles, "stilts," or crawl spaces may be enclosed below the base flood elevation requirements provided
all the following criteria are met or exceeded:
1. Enclosed areas are not "basements" as defined in Article XIV;
2. Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood water. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either:
a. be engineered and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or,
b. meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of the enclosed area;
(2) the bottom of all openings shall be below the base flood elevation and no higher than
one foot above the lowest grade; and,
(3) openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the entry and exit of flood waters automatically without any
Adopted 12/20/05
10
external influence or control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical
and other non-automatic mechanical means;
3. The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and,
4. The enclosed areas are usable solely for building access, parking of vehicles, or storage.
M. Bridges - New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge in Zones A1-30, A, and V1-
30 shall be designed such that:
1. when possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the pilings, or columns) is elevated to at
least one foot above the base flood elevation; and
2. a registered professional engineer shall certify that:
a. the structural design and methods of construction shall meet the elevation requirements of
this section and the floodway standards of Article VI.K.; and
b. the foundation and superstructure attached thereto are designed to resist flotation, collapse
and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
structural components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood.
N. Containment Walls - New construction or substantial improvement of any containment wall located
within:
1. Zones A1-30, A, and V1-30 shall:
a. have the containment wall elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the
provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the application for a
Flood Hazard Development Permit, as required by Article III.K.
O. Wharves, Piers and Docks - New construction or substantial improvement of wharves, piers, and
docks are permitted in Zones A1-30, A, and V1-30, in and over water and seaward of the mean high
tide if the following requirements are met:
1. wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations;
and
2. for commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered professional engineer shall develop or
review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction.
Adopted 12/20/05
11
P. Coastal Floodplains -
1. All new construction located within Zones A1-30, A, and V1-30 shall be located landward of the
reach of mean high tide except as provided in Article VI.P.6.
2. New construction or substantial improvement of any structure located within Zone V1-30 shall:
a. be elevated on posts or columns such that:
(1) the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the
pilings or columns) is elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation;
(2) the pile or column foundation and the elevated portion of the structure attached thereto
is anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects of wind
and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components; and,
(3) water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading
values used shall be those required by applicable state and local building standards.
b. have the space below the lowest floor:
(1) free of obstructions; or,
(2) constructed with open wood lattice-work, or insect screening intended to collapse under
wind and water without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting piles or columns; or,
(3) constructed with non-supporting breakaway walls which have a design safe loading
resistance of not less than 10 or more than 20 pounds per square foot.
c. require a registered professional engineer or architect to:
(1) develop or review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction,
which must meet or exceed the technical criteria contained in the Coastal Construction
Manual, (FEMA-55/June, 2000); and,
(2) certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the criteria of Article VI.P.2.
3. The use of fill for structural support in Zone V1-30 is prohibited.
4. Human alteration of sand dunes within Zone V1-30 is prohibited unless it can be demonstrated
that such alterations will not increase potential flood damage.
5. The area below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parking vehicles, building access, and
storage.
6. Conditional Use - Lobster sheds and fishing sheds may be located seaward of mean high tide
and shall be exempt from the elevation requirement in Article VI.G. only if permitted as a
Adopted 12/20/05
12
Conditional Use following review and approval by the Planning Board, as provided in Article
VII, and if all the following requirements and those of Article VI.A., VI.K., and VI.L. are met:
a. The conditional use shall be limited to low value structures such as metal or wood sheds 200
square feet or less and shall not exceed more than one story.
b. The structure shall be securely anchored to the wharf or pier to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement due to the effect of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
building components.
c. The structure will not adversely increase wave or debris impact forces affecting nearby
buildings.
d. The structure shall have unfinished interiors and shall not be used for human habitation.
e. Any mechanical, utility equipment and fuel storage tanks must be anchored and either
elevated or floodproofed to one foot above the base flood elevation.
f. All electrical outlets shall be ground fault interrupt type. The electrical service disconnect
shall be located on shore above the base flood elevation and when possible outside the
Special Flood Hazard Area.
ARTICLE VII - CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW
The Planning Board shall hear and decide upon applications for conditional uses provided for in this
Ordinance. The Planning Board shall hear and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove all
applications for conditional uses. An applicant informed by the Code Enforcement Officer that a
Conditional Use Permit is required shall file an application for the permit with the Planning Board.
A. Review Procedure for a Conditional Use Flood Hazard Development Permit
1. The Flood Hazard Development Permit Application with additional information attached
addressing how each of the conditional use criteria specified in the Ordinance will be satisfied,
may serve as the permit application for the Conditional Use Permit.
2. Before deciding any application, the Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the
application within thirty days of their receipt of the application.
3. If the Planning Board finds that the application satisfies all relevant requirements of the
ordinance, the Planning Board must approve the application or approve with conditions within
45 days of the date of the public hearing.
4. A Conditional Use Permit issued under the provisions of this Ordinance shall expire if the work
or change involved is not commenced within 180 days of the issuance of the permit by the
Planning Board.
Adopted 12/20/05
13
5. The applicant shall be notified by the Planning Board in writing over the signature of the
Chairman of the Planning Board that flood insurance is not available for structures located
entirely over water or seaward of mean high tide.
B. Expansion of Conditional Uses
1. No existing building or use of premises may be expanded or enlarged without a permit issued
under this section if that building or use was established or constructed under a previously issued
Conditional Use Permit or if it is a building or use which would require a Conditional Use
Permit if being newly-established or constructed under this Ordinance.
ARTICLE VIII - CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no structure which is constructed or
substantially improved shall be occupied until a Certificate of Compliance is issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer subject to the following provisions:
A. For New Construction or Substantial Improvement of any elevated structure the applicant shall
submit to the Code Enforcement Officer:
1. an Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional
engineer, or architect, for compliance with Article VI, paragraphs F, G, H, or P and,
2. for structures in Zone V1-30, certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction used are in compliance with Article VI.P.2.
B. The applicant shall submit written notification to the Code Enforcement Officer that the development
is complete and complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
C. Within 10 working days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall:
1. review the required certificate(s) and the applicant’s written notification; and,
2. upon determination that the development conforms with the provisions of this ordinance, shall
issue a Certificate of Compliance.
ARTICLE IX - REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed developments that require
review under other federal law, state law or local ordinances or regulations and all projects on 5 or more
disturbed acres, or in the case of manufactured home parks divided into two or more lots, assure that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
Adopted 12/20/05
14
D. All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in a riverine floodplain, floodway
data. These determinations shall be based on engineering practices recognized by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
E. Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan approval requiring that structures
on any lot in the development having any portion of its land within a Special Flood Hazard Area, are
to be constructed in accordance with Article VI of this ordinance. Such requirement will be included
in any deed, lease, purchase and sale agreement, or document transferring or expressing an intent to
transfer any interest in real estate or structure, including but not limited to a time-share interest. The
condition shall clearly articulate that the municipality may enforce any violation of the construction
requirement and that fact shall also be included in the deed or any other document previously
described. The construction requirement shall also be clearly stated on any map, plat, or plan to be
signed by the Planning Board or local reviewing authority as part of the approval process.
ARTICLE X - APPEALS AND VARIANCES
The Board of Appeals of the Town of Freeport may, upon written application of an aggrieved party, hear
and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board in the
administration or enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance.
The Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the requirements of this Ordinance consistent with state
law and the following criteria:
A. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge would result.
B. Variances shall be granted only upon:
1. a showing of good and sufficient cause; and,
2. a determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood occur, the granting of a
variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, public
expense, or create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances; and,
3. a showing that the issuance of the variance will not conflict with other state, federal or local laws
or ordinances; and,
4. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in "undue hardship," which in this
sub-section means:
a. that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted; and,
b. that the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the
general conditions in the neighborhood; and,
c. that the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and,
d. that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
Adopted 12/20/05
15
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and the Board of Appeals may impose such conditions
to a variance as it deems necessary.
D. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements, or other development for
the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
1. other criteria of Article X and Article VI.K. are met; and,
2. the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during
the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
E. Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of Historic
Structures upon the determination that:
1. the development meets the criteria of Article X, paragraphs A. through D. above; and,
2. the proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
F. Any applicant who meets the criteria of Article X, paragraphs A. through E. shall be notified by the
Board of Appeals in writing over the signature of the Chairman of the Board of Appeals that:
1. the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in greatly
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 per $100 of insurance
coverage;
2. such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property; and,
3. the applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of all the risks inherent in the use
of land subject to flooding, assumes those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the
municipality against any claims filed against it that are related to the applicant's decision to use
land located in a floodplain and that the applicant individually releases the municipality from any
claims the applicant may have against the municipality that are related to the use of land located
in a floodplain.
G. Appeal Procedure for Administrative and Variance Appeals
1. An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an aggrieved
party within thirty days after receipt of a written decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or
Planning Board.
2. Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as
appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the
decision appealed from.
3. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within thirty-five days of its
receipt of an appeal request.
4. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
Adopted 12/20/05
16
5. The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals within thirty-five days after the close of the
hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all appeals.
6. The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer a report of all variance
actions, including justification for the granting of the variance and an authorization for the Code
Enforcement Officer to issue a Flood Hazard Development Permit, which includes any
conditions to be attached to said permit.
7. Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings before the Board of
Appeals may take an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State laws within forty-five
days from the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE XI - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance
pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA § 4452.
B. The penalties contained in Title 30-A MRSA § 4452 shall apply to any violation of this Ordinance.
C. In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer, upon determination that a violation
exists, shall submit a declaration to the Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration
requesting a denial of flood insurance. The valid declaration shall consist of;
1. the name of the property owner and address or legal description of the property sufficient to
confirm its identity or location;
2. a clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a cited State or local law,
regulation, or ordinance;
3. a clear statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to do so and a citation
to that authority;
4. evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation and the prospective
denial of insurance; and,
5. a clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section 1316 of the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
ARTICLE XII - VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
If any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall
not invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE XIII - CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
This Ordinance shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other
applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw, permit, or provision of law. Where this Ordinance imposes
a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings, or structures, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
control.
Adopted 12/20/05
17
ARTICLE XIV - DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have the same meaning
as they have at common law and to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application. Words used in
the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
Accessory Structure - means a small detached structure that is incidental and subordinate to the principal
structure.
Adjacent Grade - means the natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Area of Special Flood Hazard - means the land in the floodplain having a one percent or greater chance
of flooding in any given year, as specifically identified in the Flood Insurance Study cited in Article I of
this Ordinance.
Base Flood - means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year, commonly called the 100-year flood.
Basement - means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway Wall - means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended
through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing
damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Building - see Structure.
Certificate of Compliance - A document signed by the Code Enforcement Officer stating that a structure
is in compliance with all of the provisions of this Ordinance.
Code Enforcement Officer - A person certified under Title 30-A MRSA, Section 4451 (including
exceptions in subsection 4451, paragraph 1) and employed by a municipality to enforce all applicable
comprehensive planning and land use laws and ordinances.
Conditional Use - means a use that because of its potential impact on surrounding areas and structures,
is permitted only upon review and approval by the Planning Board pursuant to Article VII.
Development - means any man made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated Building - means a non-basement building
a. built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, and A, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the
case of a building in Zone V1-30, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of
the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns, post, piers, or
"stilts;" and
b. adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to
one foot above the magnitude of the base flood.
Adopted 12/20/05
18
In the case of Zones A1-30, or A, Elevated Building also includes a building elevated by means of fill or
solid foundation perimeter walls with hydraulic openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement
of flood waters, as required in Article VI.L. In the case of Zone V1-30, Elevated Building also includes
a building otherwise meeting the definition of elevated building, even though the lower area is enclosed
by means of breakaway walls, if the breakaway walls meet the standards of Article VI.P.2.b.(3).
Elevation Certificate - An official form (FEMA Form 81-31, 01/03, as amended) that:
a. is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program; and,
b. is required for purchasing flood insurance.
Flood or Flooding - means:
a. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
b. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of
erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or
by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph
a.1. of this definition.
Flood Elevation Study - means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if
appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - means an official map of a community, on which the Federal
Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study - see Flood Elevation Study.
Floodplain or Flood-prone Area - means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from
any source (see flooding).
Floodplain Management - means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations - means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building
codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance,
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or
local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
Adopted 12/20/05
19
Floodproofing - means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property,
water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents.
Floodway - see Regulatory Floodway.
Floodway Encroachment Lines - mean the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state, and
local floodplain maps.
Freeboard - means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of
floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors, such as wave
action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed, that could
contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions.
Functionally Dependent Use - means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities
that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Historic Structure - means any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical
significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Locally Established Datum - means, for purposes of this ordinance, an elevation established for a
specific site to which all other elevations at the site are referenced. This elevation is generally not
referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or any other established datum and is used
in areas where Mean Sea Level data is too far from a specific site to be practically used.
Lowest Floor - means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements
described in Article VI.L. of this Ordinance.
Adopted 12/20/05
20
Manufactured Home - means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term manufactured home also includes park
trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level - means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
Minor Development - means all development that is not new construction or a substantial improvement,
such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value
of the structure. It also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Article
VI.J., mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or
materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply
facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing,
pipelines, wharves, and piers.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) - means the national vertical datum, whose standard was
established in 1929, which is used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). NGVD was based
upon mean sea level in 1929 and also has been called “1929 Mean Sea Level (MSL)”.
New Construction - means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
100-year flood - see Base Flood.
Recreational Vehicle - means a vehicle which is:
a. built on a single chassis;
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, not including slideouts;
c. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor vehicle; and
d. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory Floodway -
a. means the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved
in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot, and
b. when not designated on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, it is considered to be the
channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width
of the floodplain, as measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
Adopted 12/20/05
21
Riverine - means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard Area - see Area of Special Flood Hazard.
Start of Construction - means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of
piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, or modification of any construction element, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Structure - means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building. A gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground is also a structure.
Substantial Damage - means, damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement - means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of
a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
b. Any alteration of a Historic Structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure, and a variance is obtained from the Board of Appeals.
Variance - means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management
regulation.
Violation - means the failure of a structure or development to comply with a community's floodplain
management regulations.
ARTICLE XV - ABROGATION
This ordinance repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously enacted to comply with the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended).
60.3(e)
Amended 01/08/2019
CHAPTER 17 ELECTRICAL CODE ORDINANCE FOR
THE TOWN OF FREEPORT, MAINE
1. Adoption of National Electrical Code
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of regulating all new design, construction and installation of
electrical conductors, equipment and systems and all alterations to existing wiring systems within the
Town of Freeport the 2017 edition of the National Electrical Code as amended by the State of Maine
Electrician Examining Board, and as published by the National Fire Protection Association (the "Code").
One (1) copy of the Code will be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk available for public use,
inspection and examination during normal working hours. The provisions of the Code shall govern all
electrical work within the Town of Freeport, except that the administrative provisions of this Ordinance
shall control in the event of conflict with the Code. The Code is adopted by reference pursuant to Title
30-A M.R.S.A. § 3003.
2. Permit Required
No person shall commence any electrical work of the type described in Section 1. above without first
obtaining the required permit from the Codes Enforcement Officer and paying the permit fee established
by the Town Council. Application shall be made on a form provided by the Codes Enforcement Officer,
and the applicant shall present his license to the Codes Enforcement Officer at the time the application
and fee are tendered.
In accordance with Title 32 M.R.S.A. § 1102-D, a person may make an electrical installation in a newly
constructed single-family dwelling that is occupied by that person and used solely as a single-family
dwelling, or will be occupied by that person as the person's bona fide personal abode and used solely as a
single family home, as long as the electrical installations conform to the Code and as long as the person
obtains a permit from the Codes Enforcement Officer and pays the permit fee established by the Town
Council.
3. Fees
Upon application for a permit under the Code, the applicant shall pay a permit fee in accordance with the
fee schedule established by the Town Council, as such may be amended by the Town Council from time
to time.
4. Electrical Inspector
Inspections under this Ordinance shall be performed by an Electrical Inspector, appointed pursuant to
Title 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4171 by the Town Manager and serving as an assistant to the Codes Enforcement
Officer. The Electrical Inspector shall hold a valid Masters Electrical License issued by the State of
Maine.
5. Inspection Required
No person shall install insulation over or otherwise cover any electrical work for which a permit is
required under the Code until the Electrical Inspector has inspected and approved the work. Upon
inspection, the Electrical Inspector shall either approve the work in writing or disapprove the work in
writing with all violations of the Code noted. The Electrical Inspector shall post the results of his
Amended 01/08/2019
inspection on the job site and submit copies to the Codes Enforcement Officer within twenty-four (24)
hours after completing the inspection. Where the work is disapproved, the Electrical Inspector shall
advise the applicant that the work can be reinspected upon completion in accordance with the Code and
upon the payment of a reinspection fee in accordance with the fee schedule established by the Town
Council.
6. Connections Must Be Approved
No person shall connect electrical service to or cause electrical service to be connected to any building,
structure or property on which electrical work governed by the Code has been performed until the permit
required by this Ordinance has been obtained, the Electrical Inspector has inspected the work and the
Electrical Inspector has approved the work under the provision of this Ordinance.
The Electrical Inspector shall have the authority, whenever in his/her opinion the public safety requires
it, to direct any person using or operating any wires to shut off the electric current for such period of
time as he/she may deem necessary. The Electrical Inspector shall have authority in case of any
emergency to have the current shut off in such wires that he/she knows or believes to be dangerous to
life or property.
7. Violation Penalties
Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance shall commit a civil violation and shall be
subject to fines and penalties as provided in Title 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
8. Board of Appeals
Appeals from any decision, order, or interpretation of the Codes Enforcement Officer or the Electrical
Inspector under this ordinance may be taken to the Board of Appeals as an administrative appeal pursuant
to the provisions of the Freeport Zoning Ordinance.
RULES FOR DUNNING BOAT YARD
General
1. The Town Manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for
management of the Boat Yard.
2. The Yard shall be open all year during daylight hours only unless
closed by the Town Manager or his/her designee.
3. Alcohol or other controlled substances are prohibited.
4. Refuse must be carried off site by the generator.
5. Ball playing, Frisbee throwing and similar activities shall not
interfere with the enjoyment and safety of other boat yard uses.
6. No swimming will be permitted at any time.
7. Picnics are permitted during daytime hours in designated areas
only.
8. Open fires or grills are prohibited.
9. Overnight storage of boats is prohibited.
10. Wholesaling of clams shall be permitted in the designated area
only from Memorial Day to October 1 each year.
11. Wholesaling of clams shall be permitted from the time of low tide
plus four (4) hours only during daylight hours.
12. Public use of the building located on the site is prohibited.
13. The Town of Freeport is not responsible for any items lost or
stolen on the premises.
14. Violation of Boat Yard Rules may result in removal or expulsion.
15. All other uses not described in these rules are prohibited.
Boat Ramp
16. There shall be no charge for Freeport residents to use the ramp to
launch or haul their boats.
17. There shall be no charge for commercial haulers to launch/haul
boats belonging to Freeport residents.
18. There shall be no commercial launching/hauling of non-Freeport
residents' boats.
19. Non-Freeport residents may use the ramp for one launch/haul
combination of their own boat per day at no charge.
20. Cradle launching/hauling shall be prohibited.
21. Users of the ramp do so at their own risk.
22. Use of the ramp shall be on a first-come, first served basis.
23. Boat launches and recoveries are limited to twenty (20) minutes per
occurrence.
Parking
24. Vehicles shall park in designated areas only.
25. Boat trailers shall be parked in designated areas only.
26. All vehicles and vessels shall conform to posted regulations for
parking.
27. One handicapped parking space shall be designated directly south of
the boat ramp.
28. Vehicle parking shall be perpendicular to the road.
29. There shall be no overnight parking.
30 Four (4) parking spaces shall be designated at the most southerly
32. The Town of Freeport reserves the right to tow any vehicle or
vessel found in violation of these regulations.
TOWN OF
FREEPORT
ZONING ORDINANCE
May 2008
- 2 -
Amendments
July 15, 2008 Section 526: Peddlers on Private Property
December 2008 Section 514: Correction – Parking Standards
April 7, 2009 Section 514: Parking Standards
July 01, 2009 Shoreland Zoning (multiple sections)
January 26, 2010 Section 104: Definitions (Dwelling Unit – Residential)
January 26, 2010 Zoning Map Amendment – Village Mixed Use District 3 changed to Village
Mixed Use District 2
January 26, 2010 Section 419: Village Mixed Use District 3 - Deleted
April 6, 2010 Section 602: Site Plan Review
April 6, 2010 Zoning Map Amendment: Addition of 6 acres to previously approved First
Atlantic Retirement Community Overlay District on Old County Road
December 7, 2010 Section 414. Village Commercial II “VC-II”
February 8, 2011 Section 602: Site Plan Review
February 8, 2011 Section 104: Definitions (Initiate Construction)
February 12, 2012 Section 532: Accessory Apartments
February 12, 2012 Section 104: Definitions (Dwelling, Two-Family, setback, solar building,
accessory use or structure, structure, condominium)
February 12, 2012 Section 601.G.2.d: Limited Setback Reductions
February 12, 2012 Section 533: Small Wind Energy Systems (new section)
February 12, 2012 Section 201.B: General Restrictions
June 19, 2012 Section 201.I: General Restrictions
June 19, 2012 Section 104: Definitions (Municipal Facility)
June 19, 2012 Section 601.D & E: Building Permit and Certificate of Occupancy
January 22, 2013 Sections 407, 414, 415, 417 & 418: Amendments pertaining to Affordable
Housing
January 22, 2013 Sections 521 & 602: Amendments pertaining to Site Plan Review
February 26, 2013 New Digital Zoning Map Adopted (Section 302: Date reference added)
April 2, 2013 Updated Article V: Leased Parking Standards (per amendments adopted to
Chapter 48: Traffic and Parking Ordinance)
April 11, 2013 Correction – typographical error to cross reference in Section 406 regarding
setbacks for certain uses
June 18, 2013 Sections 104, 402, 403, 404, 405, 306, 409, 421, 422, 425, 426 & 504A:
Amendments pertaining to Agriculture
September 17, 2013 Sections 413, 514: Amendments Pertaining to Parking
January 7, 2014 Section 406: Medium Density Districts – “MD-A and MD-B”
August 5, 2014 Section 202: Amendments pertaining to the expansion of non-conforming
buildings in the Shoreland Zone
August 5, 2014 Section 601: Limited setback reduction
December 2, 2014 Sections 514, 402, 403, 404, 405, 406, 407, 408, 409, 411, 412, 413, 414, 415,
416, 417, 418, 420, 421, 422, & 425: Amendments pertaining to parking at Open
Spaces.
- 3 -
December 2, 2014 Sections 104, 406, 409, 411, 412, 413, 414, 415, 416, 420, 421, 422 and new
Section 526.A: Amendments pertaining to Artisan Food and Beverage (including
a food truck(s) as an accessory use.) (Note: Amendments effective 12/17/14)
January 6, 2015 Section 501: Temporary Activity
August 4, 2015 Sections 402, 403, 425: Amendments pertaining to sheds and reduced setbacks
December 15, 2015 Section 504 C: Rural Flexible Lot Development
March 15, 2016 Section 407.A: Village I-R - “V-IR”
Zoning Map Amendment: Amend portion of V-I and replace with V-IR
October 4, 2016 Sections 104, 412 Medication Assisted Treatment Facility for Opiod Addiction
June 6, 2017 Section 602.C.1.m As Built Plans and Section 602.D.4 Plans
Section 521.A Exterior Lighting, Section 521.B Athletic Field Lighting in the
Village I District, & Section 515 Noise Regulations
June 28, 2017 Section 202.C.1 Non-conformance (correction of omitted text)
September 12, 2017 Correction – Section 416: typographical error pertaining to multi family
dwellings
October 3, 2017 Various amendments to update or correct standards – Section 104, Section 201,
Section 407, Section 409, Section 413, Section 414, Section 415, Section 417,
Section 418, Section 501, Section 509, Section 512, Section 520, Section 525,
Section 532, and Section 602
January 2, 2018 Various amendments pertaining to the Commercial Districts – Section 409,
Section 411, Section 412, and Section 527.
Various amendments pertaining to parking requirements in the Village
Commercial I – Section 413, Section 514 and Section 602.
October 2, 2018 Section 409.D.6: Commercial District I (C-I) pertaining to overhead doors
December 18, 2018 Various amendments pertaining to parking- Section 104, Section 413,Section 514
(repeal and replace). Note: Some amendments from this date have an effective
date of March 18, 2019, as noted.
March 19, 2019 Section 104, Section 409 and Section 411 to allow car washes, and clarify
setback reductions in C-1 District and to clarify combined setback requirements
in C-3 District; Section 426 to differentiate islands that are connected to the
mainland with a causeway and those only accessible by water, and to establish
restrictions accordingly, to update timber harvesting language, and update the
use of “nature interpretation” to outdoor recreation and outdoor recreation
school; and, Section 104, Section 406 to allow boatyards in the MD-A and MD-B
Districts (Route 1 North) and to clarify flexible setback reductions.
June 18, 2019 Section 409 and Section 527 regarding overhead doors
August 6, 2019 Amendments pertaining to Subdivision – Commercial Open Space – Section 104,
Section 412, & Section 504.D
September 17, 2019 Repeal of Freeport Living, LLC Retirement Community originally approved by
the Freeport Town Council on 10/17/06 (Tax Assessor Map 23, Lots 43, 45, &
49).
September 17, 2019 Section 104, 426 & 507 pertaining to the Island District and Individual Private
Campsites.
- 4 -
Freeport Zoning Ordinance - Table of Contents
Section 101. Title ........................................................................................................................................... - 7 -
Section 102. Purpose ...................................................................................................................................... - 7 -
Section 103. Word Usage............................................................................................................................... - 7 -
Section 104. Definitions ................................................................................................................................. - 7 -
Section 201. General Restrictions ................................................................................................................ - 35 -
Section 202. Non-Conformance ................................................................................................................... - 37 -
Section 203. Changes and Amendments ...................................................................................................... - 43 -
Section 204 Contract Zoning........................................................................................................................ - 45 -
Section 301. Zoning Districts....................................................................................................................... - 48 -
Section 302. Zoning Map ............................................................................................................................. - 48 -
Section 303. Zoning District Boundaries ..................................................................................................... - 49 -
Section 304. Map Corrections - Shoreland Zone and Resource Protection District..................................... - 49 -
Section 401. Purpose and Land Use Controls .............................................................................................. - 51 -
Section 402. Rural Residential District I “RR-I” and Rural Residential District IA “RR-IA” .................. - 51 -
II. RR-IA ....................................................................................................................................................... - 54 -
Section 403. Rural Residential District II “RR-II”....................................................................................... - 56 -
Section 404. Medium Density Residential District I “MDR-I”.................................................................... - 59 -
Section 405. Medium Density Residential District II “MDR-II” ................................................................. - 62 -
Section 406. Medium Density Districts - “MD-A and MD-B”.................................................................... - 65 -
Section 407. Village I - “V-I”....................................................................................................................... - 71 -
Section 407.A Village I-R - “V-IR” {Amended, Effective 03/15/16}........................................................... - 74 -
Section 408. Village II “V-II” ...................................................................................................................... - 75 -
Section 409. Commercial District I “C-I” .................................................................................................... - 76 -
Section 411. Commercial District III - “C-III”............................................................................................. - 81 -
Section 412. Commercial District IV “C-IV” .............................................................................................. - 83 -
Section 413. Village Commercial “VC-I”.................................................................................................... - 86 -
Section 414. Village Commercial II “VC-II”............................................................................................... - 89 -
Section 415. Village Commercial III “VC-III” ............................................................................................ - 93 -
Section 416. Village Commercial IV “VC-IV”............................................................................................ - 96 -
Section 417. Village Mixed Use District 1 –VMU-1 .................................................................................. - 98 -
Section 418. Village Mixed Use District 2 –VMU-2 ................................................................................ - 102 -
- 5 -
Section 419. Village Mixed Use District 3 –VMU-3 {deleted 01/26/10} ................................................. - 106 -
Section 420. Local Business District “LB” ................................................................................................ - 106 -
Section 421. Industrial District I “I-I” ........................................................................................................ - 108 -
Section 422. Industrial District II “I-II” ..................................................................................................... - 109 -
Section 423. Marine Waterfront District “MW” (Section removed and replaced with Section 507.E.4 and
Table 1) ........................................................................................................................................... - 111 -
Section 424. Resource Protection District I “RP-I” (Section removed and replaced with Section 507.E.1 and
Table 1) ........................................................................................................................................... - 111 -
{Amended, Effective 07/01/09}.................................................................................................................... - 111 -
Section 425. Resource Protection II “RP-II”.............................................................................................. - 111 -
Section 426. Island District “ID”................................................................................................................ - 114 -
Section 427 - Mining and Extraction Overlay District - “MEOD” ............................................................. - 116 -
Section 501. Temporary Activity {Amended, effective 01/06/15} {Amended, Effective 10/03/17}............ - 118 -
Section 502. Temporary Structures ............................................................................................................ - 119 -
Section 503. Home Occupations ................................................................................................................ - 119 -
Section 504A. OPEN SPACE, EXPANDED OPEN SPACE, AND LARGE LOT .............................................
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS.............................................................................................. - 121 -
Section 504B. VILLAGE OPEN SPACE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS....................................... - 124 -
Section 504 C. RURAL FLEXIBLE LOT DEVELOPMENT {Amended, Effective 12/15/15}................. - 126 -
Section 504D. COMMERCIAL OPEN SPACE SUBDIVISIONS............................................................. - 129 -
Section 505. Campgrounds......................................................................................................................... - 130 -
Section 506. Buffer Zones.......................................................................................................................... - 130 -
Section 507. Shoreland Zone Regulations {Amended, Effective 07/01/09} ............................................... - 131 -
Section 508. Sanitary Standards................................................................................................................. - 147 -
Section 509. Extraction ............................................................................................................................. - 148 -
Section 510. Design Review....................................................................................................................... - 159 -
Section 511. Signs ...................................................................................................................................... - 159 -
Section 512. Access to Property................................................................................................................. - 159 -
Section 513. Corner Clearances ................................................................................................................. - 162 -
Section 514. Off-Street Parking and Loading ............................................................................................. - 162 -
Section 515. Noise Regulation ................................................................................................................... - 171 -
Section 516. Odorous and Toxic Matter..................................................................................................... - 172 -
Section 517. Electromagnetic Interference................................................................................................. - 172 -
Section 518. Smoke and Particulate Matter................................................................................................ - 172 -
- 6 -
Section 519. Vibrations .............................................................................................................................. - 173 -
Section 520. Fire and Explosive Hazards {Amended, Effective 10/03/17}................................................. - 173 -
Section 521.A Exterior Lighting ................................................................................................................. - 174 -
Section 521.B – Athletic Field Lighting in the Village 1 district {Amended, Effective 06/06/17}.............. - 175 -
Section 522. Water Quality Protection....................................................................................................... - 176 -
Section 523. Groundwater Protection......................................................................................................... - 177 -
Section 524. Mobile Home Parks............................................................................................................... - 178 -
Section 525. Filling of Lands and Creation of Ponds................................................................................. - 183 -
Section 526. Peddlers on Private Property ................................................................................................. - 186 -
Section 526.A Food Trucks {Effective 12/17/14}....................................................................................... - 193 -
Section 527. Performance Standards for Commercial Districts ................................................................ - 194 -
(C-I, C-III, C-IV)......................................................................................................................................... - 194 -
Section 528 Regulation of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities ........................................................ - 197 -
Section 529. Stormwater Management........................................................................................................ - 206 -
Section 530. Location of Adult Business .................................................................................................... - 207 -
Section 531. Retirement Community Overlay District .............................................................................. - 208 -
Section 532. Accessory Apartments........................................................................................................... - 213 -
Section 533 – SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS {Amended, Effective 02/07/12} .............................. - 215 -
Section 601. Enforcement .......................................................................................................................... - 218 -
Section 602. Site Plan Review {Amended, Effective 01/22/13} ................................................................ - 226 -
Section 603. Validity and Severability....................................................................................................... - 238 -
Section 604. Conflict with Other Ordinances............................................................................................. - 239 -
Section 605. Effective Date........................................................................................................................ - 239 -
Article 5 Leased Parking Standards………………………………………………………………………....-240-
Zoning Map Attachment: Please visit the Town Office to view the Official Zoning Map (and any
amendments) which supplement this document.............................................................................. - 242 -
Addendum 1 – Freeport Village Overlay Design Standards
Addendum 2 – Village Open Space Map 1 and Village Open Space Map 2
- 7 -
ARTICLE I
TITLE, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
Section 101. Title
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Freeport,
Maine”.
Section 102. Purpose
A. The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the health, safety and general welfare; to encourage the
most appropriate use of land throughout the Town; to promote traffic safety; to provide adequate
light and air; to encourage the preservation of the historical heritage of Freeport; to prevent
overcrowding of real estate; to promote a wholesome home environment; to prevent housing
development in unsanitary areas; to provide an adequate street system; to regulate the location,
density and rate of development so that the rural environment is retained in appropriate locations; to
provide an allotment of land areas in new development sufficient for all the requirements of
community life; to conserve natural resources, and to provide for adequate public services.
B. The purpose of this Ordinance is to implement the land use policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
Section 103. Word Usage
In this Ordinance, if not inconsistent with the context, the singular may be taken for the plural and
the plural for the singular; “person” may include an association, a partnership, a corporation, or other
entity; the present tense includes the future; the word “building” includes the word “structure”; the
word “lot” includes the word “plot”; and the word “shall” is mandatory and not directory.
Section 104. Definitions
The definitions listed in this Section 104 are an integral part of this Zoning Ordinance. Where the
definitions include regulations, restrictions, limitations or prohibitions, the definitions shall
constitute enforceable requirements of this Ordinance. Diagrams and illustrations are not governing
provisions, and are included only as aids in understanding the written regulations. Definitions with
asterisks (*) apply only to the Shoreland Zone.
Access Point – a public or private point of entry or exit used by on-road vehicles from land adjacent
to U.S. Route One between the Freeport and Yarmouth boundary and the intersection of Desert
Road. An access point may serve any permitted use in the underlying zoning district. Access points
may have a gravel, asphalt or other man-made surface or may be created by repeated passage of onroad
vehicles.
- 8 -
Accessory Apartment in a Single Family Dwelling: A small dwelling unit that meets
the performance standards for accessory apartments and is located on the same lot as and
is accessory to a single family dwelling. One accessory apartment per dwelling unit is
allowed.
Accessory Use or Structure: A use or structure customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or structure and located on the same lot. Where an accessory building or structure,
including but not limited to a deck or garage, is attached in a substantial manner by a wall to a
principal building or structure, it shall be considered a part of said principal structure or building.
Roof or wall mounted solar panels are considered part of said principal structure. Accessory
structures shall conform to the space standards of each district. {Amended, Effective 02/07/12}
Adult Business: “Adult business” means any business in any use category, a substantial or
significant portion of which consists of selling, renting, leasing, exhibiting, displaying, or otherwise
dealing in materials or devices of any kind which appeal to prurient interest and which depict or
describe specified sexual activities.
Agriculture: Agriculture is the utilization of natural resource systems to produce commodities
which maintain life, including food, fiber, forest products, horticultural crops, and their related
services.* (From Title 7 Definitions *derived from 1997 Maine Department of Education
workshops, building upon 1988 Natural Research Council definition.) The production of these
commodities is further described in the following subsections: “Agricultural Products”,
“Agricultural Product Farm Stands”, “Agricultural Product Farm Store”, “Farm”, “Farm
Operation”, and “Farming or Ranching”.
The following activities are conducted on a farm, by a farm operation or by farming or ranching
and are permitted by Maine State Statute Title 7: Maine Agricultural Protection Act (more
commonly known as the Right To Farm Law). {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
o Agricultural products. "Agricultural products" shall be as defined as stated in 7
MRSA §152 as amended from time to time, meaning those plants and animals
and their products that are useful to humans and includes, but are not limited to,
forages and sod crops, grains and grain products, feed crops, dairy and dairy
products, poultry and poultry products, bees and bees' products, livestock and
livestock products and fruits, berries, vegetables, flowers, seeds, grasses and
other similar products, or any other plant, animal or plant or animal products that
supply humans with food, feed, fiber or fur. "Agricultural products" does not
include trees grown and harvested for forest products. {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
o Agricultural Product Farm Stands – hereafter known as Farm Stands are a
booth, stall or structure, from which agricultural products are sold to the general
public. A Farm Stand is not considered a peddler on private property. Farm
Stands that are 300 square feet or less do not have to meet the setback
requirements of the district in which it is located. {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
o Agricultural Product Farm Stores – hereafter known as Farm Stores are a
structure, from which agricultural products are sold to the general public. A Farm
- 9 -
Store is not considered a peddler on private property. Farm Stores are structures
that are more than 300 square feet. {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
o Farm. "Farm" shall be defined as stated in 7 MRSA §152 as amended from time
to time and shall mean the land, plants, animals, buildings, structures, ponds and
machinery used in the commercial production of agricultural products. {Amended,
Effective 06/18/13}
o Farm operation. "Farm operation" be defined as stated in 7 MRSA §152 as
amended from time to time and shall mean a condition or activity that occurs on
a farm in connection with the commercial production of agricultural products and
includes, but is not limited to, operations giving rise to noise, odors, dust, insects
and fumes; operation of machinery and irrigation pumps; disposal of manure;
agricultural support services; and the employment and use of labor. {Amended,
Effective 06/18/13}
o Farming or ranching. "Farming" or "ranching" be defined as stated in 7 MRSA
§251 as amended from time to time and shall mean primarily engaging in the
commercial production of agricultural products as a livelihood and includes dairy
farming; raising livestock, freshwater fish, fur-bearing animals or poultry;
producing, cultivating, growing and harvesting fruit, produce or floricultural or
horticultural commodities; or any practices on a farm or ranch that are incident to
or in conjunction with these farming operations. In addition to the State
definition of farming and ranching, for the purposes of this Ordinance, ranching
shall also include commercial equestrian facilities for the keeping, breeding,
raising, and training of horses and related activities including raising hay and
feed and maintaining pasturage. {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
Agritourism Activity: "Agritourism activity" means any agricultural activity carried out on a
farm or ranch that members of the general public are allowed to view or participate in, including
farming, ranching, historical and cultural activities, harvest-your-own activities and attractions
related to farming or ranching. An activity is an agritourism activity whether or not the
participant pays to view or participate in the activity. These activities apply to farmer/rancher,
where the farmer/rancher desires to engage in activities which meet the definitions in this
section “Agriculture”, “Agricultural Products”, “Farm”, “Farm Operation”, “Farming or
Ranching”, “Farm Stand”, “Farm Store”. Allowable under this section are farm stands/stores,
farm tours, hands-on-chores, self-harvesting of farm products, hay or sleigh rides, corn mazes,
community supported agriculture (CSA), educational services such as cooking, gardening, and
animal raising classes, farm stays where up to 7 rooms can be designated for guests, and general
observation of nature in fields and woodlands. {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
Agricultural Farm Stand: {Deleted, Effective 06/18/13}
Agriculture - General: {Deleted, Effective 06/18/13}
Animal Feedlot: {Deleted, Effective 06/18/13}
- 10 -
Animal Husbandry: {Deleted, Effective 06/18/13}
Antenna: Any structure or device used for the purpose of the wireless transmitting or receiving
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals),
wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals, including but not limited to
directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and omni-directional
antennas, such as whip antennas.
Antenna Support Structure: Any pole, telescoping mast, tower tripod, or any other structure
which attaches to a tower and supports one or more antenna(e).
Aquaculture*: Structures and land-based activities required by the growing or propagation of
harvestable freshwater, estuarine, or marine plant or animal species.
Aquifer: Geologic unit composed of rock or sand and gravel, which unit contains sufficient
saturated permeable materials to conduct groundwater and to also yield economically significant
quantities of groundwater to wells and springs. For purposes of this Ordinance, economically
significant quantities of groundwater shall be taken to be any unit capable of yielding 10 gallons per
minute or more of water to a single well or spring.
Arboriculture: The business location of an arborist as defined in 32 M.R.S.A., Section 1951 and
which is conducted pursuant to a state license issued pursuant to 32 M.R.S.A., Section 2051, et seq.
Art Center – Indoor – A structure or complex of structures for housing the visual and/or
performing arts.
Arts center – Outdoor – grounds which are used for display of the visual arts or for the
performing arts.
Art Gallery/Museum: A type of “public assembly - indoor” use which consists of a building
containing objects such as, but not limited to, paintings, prints, sculptures, scientific and historical
objects which are either for sale to the general public or are displayed for viewing only. Outdoor
display is permitted only as an accessory use and shall permit only the display of large objects, such
as sculptures, which are affixed to the ground and incorporated into a garden setting with or without
pedestrian paths whose purpose is to permit viewing of the large objects.
Artisan Food and Beverage: Small scale production, preparation of food and/or beverages
made on site with minimal automated processes involved and may include direct sales to
consumers and product tasting. This definition includes uses such as small batch food producers
and bakeries, craft breweries, micro-distilleries, small batch candy shops, cheese makers, and
herbal remedies. Outdoor seating is allowed. {Effective 12/17/14}
Auto Repair Service Garage: A place where the following services may be carried out: general
repair, engine rebuilding, parts replacement, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles, collision
- 11 -
service such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair, overall painting and undercoating and
mechanized washing of automobiles but where no engine fuels are sold at retail.
Auto Sales: The offering and sale of automobiles, light trucks, vans, and accessories, parts, supplies
and equipment to the general public at a facility and location pursuant to the requirements, and a
license issued by the Maine Secretary of State pursuant to 29 M.R.S.A, Section 341 et seq. In the
RR-IA District, such sales shall be limited to used vehicles, plus accessories, parts, supplies and
equipment.
Auto Sales, Antique: Sales and/or indoor storage of automobiles and light trucks that are twentyfive
years old or older and eligible for operation on public roads ("antique autos"). Sales and storage
of vehicles which are not antique autos may occur only if the activity is secondary and incidental to
the sale of antique autos. Outdoor storage of vehicles is prohibited. Outdoor display of vehicles
offered for sale shall be limited to 20 vehicles, no more than 4 of which may be vehicles which are
not antique autos. Auto repair service garages are allowed as an accessory use to antique auto sales.
This use shall have the same parking requirement as Auto Service Station as listed in Section 514.4
below.
Auto Service Station: A place where gasoline, or any other vehicular engine fuel (stored only in
underground tanks), kerosene, or motor oil and lubricants or grease (for operation of motor vehicles)
are retailed directly to the public on the premises; including the sale of minor accessories and the
servicing and minor repair of automobiles, not including storage of unlicensed vehicles and not
including body, frame, or fender straightening and repair. Convenience stores with fuel pumps as an
accessory use are not classified as auto service stations.
Average Lot Size: average lot size shall be calculated by adding up the area of all of the lots within
a subdivision and dividing by the number of lots. Open spaces and right-of-ways shall not be
included in this calculation.
Basal Area: The area of cross section of a tree stem at 4 ½ feet above ground level and inclusive of
bark.
Bed and Breakfast Inn: A single family dwelling in which the resident or residents of the dwelling
provide short-term overnight lodging to paying guests in a maximum of seven guest rooms located
within the dwelling or permitted attached structures. Breakfast shall be the only meal served and
shall be limited to overnight guests. Commercial kitchens and rentals for more than one month in a
calendar year are prohibited. The inn shall function like a private home with house guests. A bed
and breakfast inn with three guest rooms or less shall be considered a home occupation accessory to
the principal use of the dwelling and shall be allowed under the conditions and regulations
applicable to home occupation.
Boat Yard: A business or gainful occupation for the retail sale of boats and/or where boats are
hauled, stored, repaired and/or constructed. The retail sale of gasoline and other fuels is prohibited.
{Amended, 03/19/19}
Building: Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of
persons, domestic animals, chattels or property. For purposes of determining exterior measurements
- 12 -
or footprint in order to locate the setback line, building shall include all attached structures such as
open or closed porches, car-ports, garages, balconies, roof overhangs, all stairways and other similar
structures.
Building Coverage: That percentage of the lot which is covered by buildings.
Building Front Line: A line parallel to the front lot line transecting that point of the building face
which is closest to the front lot line.
Business and Professional Offices: A building in which there is located the offices of a profession
or business including, but not limited to, banks, insurance offices, realtors, barber shops or beauty
salons.
Campgrounds: A parcel which is used as a recreational site for tents, trailers, or recreational
vehicles or other forms of temporary shelter and for which use a fee is charged.
Cemetery: A burial ground maintained by the Town or other public or non-profit body or private
individual. A crematory is allowed as an accessory use to a cemetery.
Coastal Wetlands*: All tidal and subtidal lands all lands with vegetation present that is tolerant of
salt water and occurs primarily in a salt water or estuarine habitat; and any swamp, marsh, bog,
beach, flat or other contiguous low land that is subject to tidal action during the highest tide level for
the year in which an activity is proposed as identified in tide tables published by the National Ocean
Service. {Amended, Effective 07/01/09}
Codes Enforcement Officer: A person appointed by the Municipal Officers to administer and
enforce this Ordinance. Reference to the Codes Enforcement Officer may be construed to include
Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Electrical Inspector, and the like where applicable.
Commercial Fishery: The commercial harvesting and/or sale of fish or shellfish but excluding the
processing of such fish or shellfish.
Commercial Recreation-Indoor: Any recreational use in which the primary use is within a
structure, such as a bowling alley, roller or ice skating rink, swimming pools, tennis courts, or
arcades operated primarily for profit.
Commercial Recreation-Outdoor: Any outdoor recreational use such as, but not limited to, golf
courses, tennis courts, riding stables, swimming pools, or ice skating rinks operated primarily for
profit, but not including campgrounds, drive-in movie theaters, race tracks and mechanical or
motorized rides.
Commercial Sales and Service: A business in which the principal use is the sale of goods and/or
services in large quantities either to the general public or to other businesses. Indoor storage of
goods or equipment is permitted as an accessory use. Outdoor storage is prohibited.
- 13 -
Commercial Sales and Service - Outdoor: Commercial sales and service which permits both
indoor and outdoor storage as principal uses.
Commercial School : A building or buildings which is principally used to conduct commercial
educational classes including, but not limited to trade schools, schools of art, beauty, business,
dancing, driving, music, martial arts, but not including private nursery, elementary or secondary
schools. Retail sales of items related to the school are allowed as an accessory use to commercial
schools.
Common Lot Development: a development on 2 or more contiguous lots owned in common or
separately, or a single lot that is being subdivided for sale or lease as a separate lot or when lots
are created for financing purposes only.
Community Centers and Services: A building used for some combination of social,
educational, recreational, governmental, cultural activities, and uses accessory to those uses,
open to and for the benefit of the public, owned by the municipality and/or a 501(c)(3) nonprofit
organization or a group of 501(c)(3) organizations.
Condominium: means real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and
the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those
portions under a declaration, or an amendment to a declaration, duly recorded pursuant to this
Act. Real estate is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements
are vested in the unit owners. Any real estate development consisting exclusively of clustered,
detached, single family residences is not a condominium, unless so designated in the
declaration. {Amended, Effective 02/07/12}
Conforming Use: A use of buildings, structures, or land which complies with all applicable
provisions of this Ordinance.
Conservation Area – Primary (Unbuildable land): The most severely constrained land with
regard to development and environmentally sensitive land as defined in net residential acreage
as unbuildable land.
Conservation Area – Secondary: Land within seventy five (75) feet of rivers or streams as
defined by the Department of Environmental Protection and other natural resource areas of local
importance included in the Freeport Open Space Plan dated July 20, 1999 and as amended from
time to time, but not those areas considered to be primary conservation areas. In village open
space subdivisions, the secondary conservation areas are those areas shown on the Freeport
Village Open Space Map 1 and Freeport Village Open Space Map 2, dated August 2, 2005, and
attached as addendum 2 of this Ordinance. Freeport Village Open Space Map 1 shows the
location of gullies, streams, and wetlands of significance and a 200’ buffer along Interstate 295.
Freeport Village Open Space Map 2 identifies civic destinations and employment centers to
determine if land within a proposed subdivision could provide a connection or link between
destinations or to a trail that has a history of use by the public.
- 14 -
Conservation Land: The portion of required open space to be set aside as part of an open space
subdivision, expanded open space subdivision, village open space subdivision or commercial
open space subdivision. For open space subdivisions, fifty percent (50%) of the net residential
acreage shall be conservation land. For expanded open space subdivisions, sixty-five percent
(65%) of the net residential acreage shall be conservation land. For village open space
subdivisions, thirty percent (30%) of the net residential acreage shall be conservation land. For
commercial open space subdivisions, twenty percent (20%) of net residential acreage shall be
conservation land. {Amended, Effective 08/06/19}
Construction Services: The performance of work or the furnishing of supplies to members of the
building trades such as but not limited to plumbing, painting, building, well drilling, carpentry,
masonry, or electrical installation, which requires the storage of materials and/or the location of
commercial vehicles at the site.
Convenience Store: A retail establishment which accommodates neighborhood needs for groceries
and sundries and which may sell, as accessory uses, prepared food for carry-out.
Convenience Store With Gas Pumps: A convenience store which sells, as an accessory use,
gasoline at the pump(s).
Day Care Centers: Facilities providing, for remuneration, day care for children under 16 years of
age who are not residents of the facility.
Family Day Care Home: A facility serving up to 6 children and classified as a home
occupation if it is located in the operator’s residence.
Group Day Care Home: A facility serving 7 to 12 children and classified as a home
occupation if it is located in the operator’s residence.
Day Care Center Facilities: Facilities serving more than 12 children either on a regular or a
non-recurring basis.
Drive-Up/Drive-Through: An accessory use which by design, physical facilities, service, or by
packaging procedures, encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods, or be
entertained while remaining in their motor vehicle.
Dwelling: A fixed structure containing one or more dwelling units.
Dwelling, One-Family: A dwelling designed for or occupied exclusively by one family;
Dwelling, Two-Family: A dwelling designed for or occupied exclusively by two
families living independently that are similar in size but in no way shall one unit be less
than 40% in size than the other unit unless the land area per dwelling unit can be met for
each unit; for the purposes of this Ordinance a group of one or two family dwellings on
commonly owned land shall not be considered a multiple family dwelling. {Amended,
Effective 02/07/12}
- 15 -
Dwelling, Multiple Family: A dwelling or group of dwellings in one structure containing
separate living units for three or more families.
Dwelling Unit - residential: A room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use
as permanent, seasonal, or temporary living quarters for only one (1) family at a time, and containing
living, sleeping, toilet, cooking facilities. The term shall include prefabricated or modular housing,
mobile homes, and rental units that contain cooking, sleeping, and toilet facilities regardless of the
time-period rented. This does not include hotels, motels, rooming houses, temporary trailers, or
recreational vehicles with its tires on the ground and registered with the State Division of Motor
Vehicles is not considered a residential dwelling unit. {Amended, Effective 07/01/09, 01/26/10}
Emergency operations*: operations conducted for the public health, safety or general welfare to
protect human beings, property, and livestock from the threat of death, destruction or injury.
{Amended, Effective 07/01/09}
Essential Services*: all equipment, wires, pipes, poles, towers and like associated with and
necessary for the distribution of utilities such as electricity, gas, phone, cable, water, and sewer.
This does not include buildings which are necessary for these services. {Amended, Effective 07/01/09}
Excavation: Any extraction, removal, mining, separation or disturbance of earth or earth material
from its original position. Earth materials include, but are not limited to, gravel, clay, soil, topsoil,
loam, sand, rock, stone, ore, minerals, mineral substances and organic materials other than
vegetation.
FAA: Federal Aviation Administration
Family: One or more individuals occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single household in a
domestic relationship as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house,
club, fraternity, hotel or similar structure.
FCC: Federal Communications Commission
Filling: Depositing or dumping any matter on or into the ground or water.
Fire Wall: A wall of non-combustible construction, capable of resisting the spread of fire.
Flea Market: An occasional or periodic market held in an open area or structure where groups of
individual sellers offer goods for sale to the public. There are no long term leases between the
sellers and operators. Flea markets are not considered retail trade or commercial sales and service.
Flood: A temporary rise in stream flow or tidal surge that results in water overtopping its banks and
inundating adjacent areas.
Flood Plain: Low lying, generally flat area consisting of either a.) that portion of a river valley
which is built of sediments during the present stream regimen, and which is covered with water
when the river or its tributaries overflow their banks at flood stages; or b.) that portion of land
abutting tidal waters which is built of sediments during the present regimen of tidal water and which
- 16 -
is covered with water when tidal water overflows its banks at flood stages. The land area is subject
to the 100-year flood.
Floor Area, Gross: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building measured from
the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the center line of a wall separating two buildings, but not
including interior parking spaces, loading space for motor vehicles, or any space where the floor-toceiling
height is less than six feet.
Food Truck: A truck which has a current registration from the Maine Department of Motor
Vehicles from which prepared and/or unprocessed food and drinks are sold. Food trucks are not
the same as peddler trucks and/or peddler carts. {Effective 12/17/14}
Forest Management Activities: Timber cruising and other forest resource evaluation activities,
pesticide or fertilizer application, management planning activities, timber stand improvement,
pruning, regeneration of forest stands, and other similar or associated activities, exclusive of timber
harvesting, clearing of land for development, and the construction, creation or maintenance of roads.
Forested Wetlands: A freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six (6) meters
(19 ½ feet) tall or taller.
Foundation – the supporting substructure of a building or other structure, excluding wooden sills
and post supports, including basements, slabs, or other base consisting of concrete, block, brick or
similar material. {Amended, Effective 07/01/09}
Freeport based: any religious, charitable, educational and other non-profit institution which owns or
leases a building or parcel of land in Freeport and/or whose charter or by-laws states that the Town
of Freeport is specifically included in its geographical area of operation, such as Freeport Rotary,
Freeport Lions Club, AMVETS, etc.
Freeport Village Design Standards: That document entitled “Freeport Village Design Standards”
dated August 2, 2005 and attached to this Ordinance as Attachment 1. The Freeport Village Design
Standards are part of this Ordinance. In those instances where a requirement of this Ordinance is
described by reference to the Freeport Village Design Standards, the Freeport Village Design
Standards shall modify or supersede any different or conflicting requirement or standard of this
Ordinance.
Freshwater Wetland*: Freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs or similar areas, excluding forested
wetlands, which are shown on the official Town of Freeport Zoning Map and are:
1. Ten or more contiguous acres or less than 10 contiguous acres and adjacent to a
surface water body, excluding any river, stream or brook such that in a natural state,
the combined surface area is in excess of 10 acres; and
2. Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration
sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils.
- 17 -
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not
conform to the criteria of this definition.
Frontage-Road: That lot line abutting a road and ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot. On any
lot bounded on more than one property line by a road, the road frontage shall be that property line of
the lot designated as “road frontage” in any building permit application for such lot.
Frontage-Shore: The length of a lot bordering on a water body or wetland measured in a straight
line, between the intersections of the side lot lines with the shoreline. {Amended, Effective 07/01/09}
Ground cover: small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the partially decayed organic
matter of the forest floor. {Amended, Effective 07/01/09}
Ground level – for the purposes of Section 514 of this ordinance, each building must have at
least one ground level. The ground level is the level of a building that is closest to the sidewalk.
A building that has storefronts on Main St. and another street other than Bow St., the ground
level is considered the level of the building closest to the sidewalk on Main St. A building that
has a storefront(s) on Main St. and Bow St. may have more than one ground level if a storefront
has an entrance on Bow St. that is accessible from the sidewalk without any exterior stairs, all
other levels of the building are not considered ground level. {Amended, Effective 12/18/18}
Groundwater: All of the water found beneath the surface of the ground. For purposes of aquifer
protection, this term refers to the slowly moving sub-surface water present in the aquifers and
recharge areas.
Height: The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished
grade within 20’ of the building’s contiguous perimeter, to the highest point of the roof for flat and
mansard roofs and to a point which includes 30% of the height between eaves and ridge for other
types of roofs. Height limitations shall not apply to chimneys, steeples, water standpipes, detached
barns used for agricultural purposes, spires or other similar non-habitable structures. Height
limitations do apply to wireless telecommunications facilities, as defined in this Section 104, and
those regulations are listed below and in Section 528.
C
D B
A
Steps:
1. Find the average grade of points A, B, C & D
2. Add average grade of each point together and divide by 4. That number is the total
average elevation.
20’
?
?
20’
Building
- 18 -
3. The resulting number is the base elevation from which the height is measured.
Height, Wireless Telecommunication Tower: The vertical distance measured from the lowest
point within ten (10) feet of the base of the structure on the ground to the highest point of the tower,
including the base pad, all antennas and other attachments. When towers are mounted upon
buildings or other structures, the total vertical height is measured from the lowest point within ten
(10) feet of the ground level of the supporting structure to the highest point of all appurtenances on
the tower.
High Water Elevation: {Amended, Effective 07/01/09}
Normal High Water (Tidal): The shoreline elevation at which vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. In the case where this is difficult or
impossible to determine, or where a determination by the land owner or Codes Enforcement
Officer is challenged, this elevation shall be determined by accurate survey with reference to
the 1929 National Geodetic Vertical Datum to be 7.2’ above 1929 datum.
10% + Exceedance High Water (Tidal): The shoreline elevation which marks the upper limit
of the typical highest tide of each year. In the case where this is difficult or impossible to
determine, or where a determination by the land owner or Codes Enforcement Officer is
challenged, this elevation shall be determined by accurate survey with reference to the 1929
National Geodetic Vertical Datum to be 7.2’ above 1929 datum.
High Water Elevation (Non-tidal): That line which is apparent from visble markings,
changes in the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in
vegetation, and which distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and predominantly
terrestrial land. Areas contiguous with rivers that support non-forested wetland vegetation
and hydric soils and that are at the same or lower elevation as the water level of the river
during the period of normal high-water are considered part of the river.
Home Occupation: An occupation or profession carried out for gain by a resident and conducted as
an accessory use in or about the resident’s dwelling unit or accessory structure and subject to the
performance standards of Section 503.
Hotel/Motel – A facility which is not a bed and breakfast inn or and Inn as defined herein,
which offers transient lodging accommodations to the general public and may provide
additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms and/or recreational facilities.
Impervious Surface: Structures and other man-made improvements to land and materials covering
the land with low-permeability material such as asphalt or concrete. Common impervious areas
include, but are not limited to, roads, rooftops, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots or storage
areas, concrete or asphalt paving, or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of
stormwater. {Amended, Effective 10/03/17}
Individual private campsite – an area of land which is not associated with a campground,
outdoor recreation and/or outdoor recreation school, and does not meet the definition of rustic
- 19 -
campsite, but which is developed for repeated camping by only one group not to exceed ten (10)
individuals and which involves site improvements which may include but not be limited to a
gravel pad, parking area, fire place, or tent platform.* {Amended, Effective 09/17/19}
Industrial Park: A large tract of land that is planned, developed and operated as an integrated
facility for a number of individual industrial uses, with special attention to circulation, parking,
utility needs, aesthetics and compatibility.
Initiate Construction: The completion of a portion of the site improvements which represents no
less than thirty (30) percent of the costs of the proposed site improvements within an approved
project. For the purposes of this ordinance, improvements shall mean roads or parking lots,
sidewalks, utilities, stormwater facilities, and erosion control. {Amended, Effective 02/08/11}
Inn – A facility which is not a bed and breakfast inn or a hotel as defined herein, which offers
transient lodging accommodations to the general public but does not provide meeting or
function rooms. An Inn may include one restaurant that is open to the public. Inns may have
recreational facilities such as a pool and/or a fitness room; however, such facilities shall only be
available for use by guests and shall not be open to the public.
Junkyard:
a) Automobile Graveyard: “Automobile graveyard” means a yard, field or other
outdoor area used to store 3 or more unregistered or uninspected motor vehicles, as
defined in Title 29-A, section 101, subsection 42, or parts of the vehicles.
“Automobile graveyard” includes an area used for automobile dismantling, salvage
and recycling operations.
“Automobile graveyard” does not include:
(1) An area used for temporary storage of vehicles or vehicle parts by an
establishment or place of business that is primarily engaged in doing vehicle
repair work to make repairs to render a motor vehicle serviceable. In order for a
vehicle’s storage to be considered temporary, it must be removed from the site
within 180 calendar days of its receipts;
(2) An area used by an automobile hobbyist to store, organize, restore or display
antique autos, antique motorcycles, classic vehicles, horseless carriages,
reconstructed vehicles, street rods or parts of these vehicles as these vehicles are
defined in Title 29-A, section 101 as long as the hobbyist’s activities comply
with all applicable federal and state statutes and rules and municipal ordinances,
other than ordinances that are more restrictive than this subsection regarding the
storage of vehicles or vehicle parts that are collected by a hobbyist. For the
purposes of this subparagraph, an automobile hobbyist is a person who is not
primarily engaged in the business of selling any of those vehicles or parts from
those vehicles;
(3) An area used for the parking or storage of vehicles, vehicle parts or equipment
intended for use by a municipality, quasi-municipal entity or state or federal
agency;
- 20 -
(4) An area used for the storage of operational farm tractors and related farm
equipment, log skidders, logging tractors or other vehicles exempted from
registration under Title 29-A, chapter 5.
(5) An area used for the parking or storage of vehicles or equipment being offered
for sale by a dealer, equipment dealer, trailer dealer or vehicle auction business
as defined in Title 29-A, section 851;
(6) An area used for the storage of vehicles by an establishment or place of business
that is primarily engaged in business as a new vehicle dealer as defined in Title
29-A, section 851;
(7) An area used for temporary storage of vehicles by an establishment or place of
business that is primarily engaged in business as an insurance salvage pool. In
order for a vehicle’s storage to be considered temporary under this subparagraph,
the vehicle must be removed from the site within 180 days of receipt of title by
the business; or
(8) An area used for the parking or storage of operational commercial motor
vehicles, special equipment or special mobile equipment as defined in Title 29-
A, section 101 that is temporarily out of service but is expected to be used by the
vehicle or equipment owner or by an operator designated by the owner. This
subsection does not exempt an area used for the parking or storage of equipment
or vehicles that are not operational while stored or parked in the area.
b) Junkyard: Any area, lot, land, parcel, building or structure or part thereof used for the
temporary storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale or abandonment of wastepaper,
rags, scrap metal or other scrap or discarded goods, materials, machinery and their related
recycling operations. Bottle redemption facilities are not included in this definition.
Landscaping: The business location of a person engaged in the commercial practice of landscape
gardening and who performs labor or services or furnishes labor, materials or services in the laying
out or construction of any road, path or walk, or in improving or beautifying any land in a manner
commonly known as landscape gardening, by virtue of a contract with or by consent of the owner
and shall also include nurseries and the places where nursery stock and vegetation is grown, stored
or offered for sale as defined in 7 M.R.S.A., Section 2201 and subject to the regulation and
inspection of the Maine Department of Agriculture, Food and Rural Resources and licensing
pursuant to 32 M.R.S.A., Section 1901 and as hereafter amended.
Leachable Materials: Materials including, but not limited to, solid wastes, sludges, industrial
wastes, and agricultural wastes capable of releasing contaminants to the surrounding environment.
Local Convenience Goods Store: a structure where goods accommodating local needs, such as
but not limited to, retail bakeries, delicatessens, fish stores, meat markets, farmers’ markets,
grocery and food stores, florist shops and combinations thereof are sold. Local convenience
goods stores licensed as a state liquor store may have spirit distribution as an accessory use.
Postal services, and/or seating up to 20 seats are also allowed as accessory uses.
Local Retail Trade: Any business engaged in the sale of local convenience goods and personal
services. Local convenience goods include, without limitation, health and beauty products,
- 21 -
jewelry, arts and crafts, books, toys and games, hardware, sporting goods, postal services, hand
crafted goods, and antiques Accessory seating up to 20 seats is permitted. Local retail trade
does not include, without limitation, commercial sales, auto or power equipment sales or
service, gasoline sales, any type of restaurants except Village cafes, or new furniture, large
appliance or electronic sales.
Lot: A parcel of land having distinct and defined boundaries and described in a deed, plan or similar
legal document. Lands on opposite sides of a public way shall be considered separate lots.
Lot Area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines excluding any street rights-of-way. In the
Shoreland Zone, land below the normal high water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland
shall be excluded from the calculation of the lot area.
Lot Corner: A lot with at least two contiguous sides abutting a road and/or private way.
Lot Coverage: That portion of the lot that is covered by buildings, structures and/or impervious
surfaces.
Lot Lines: The lines bounding a lot.
Front Lot Line: The line separating the lot from a road. On any lot bounded on more than
one property line by a road, the front lot line shall be that property line of the lot designated
as “road frontage” in any building permit application for such lot.
Rear Lot Line: The lot line opposite the front lot line. On a lot pointed at the rear, the rear
lot line shall be a line between the side lot lines parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten
(10) feet long, lying farthest from the front lot line.
Side Lot Line: Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line.
Lot of Record: A parcel of land, a legal description of which or the dimensions of which are
recorded on a document or map on file with the County Registry of Deeds.
LotWidth: The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at right angles to its
depth along a straight line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required building setback line.
Manufactured Housing: A structural unit or units designed for occupancy and constructed in a
manufacturing facility and transported, by the use of its own chassis or an independent chassis, to a
building site. The term includes any type of building which is constructed at a manufacturing
facility and transported to a building site where it is used for housing and may be purchased or sold
by a dealer in the interim. For purposes of this section, 2 types of manufactured housing are
included. Those 2 types are mobile homes and modular homes.
Manufacturing/Processing: A use which involves the manufacture, compounding, assembly, or
treatment of articles or materials.
- 22 -
Marina: A place adjacent to tidal waters which offers, for rent or sale to the public, moorings, dock
space, boats or marine equipment, and gasoline and other related oil products, and where boats may
be hauled, stored, repaired and/or constructed and subject to the performance standards of Section
508.C.
Medication Assisted Treatment Facility for Opiod Addiction – a fully licensed facility used to
dispense FDA approved medications for the purpose of treating opiod dependence. {Amended, Effective
10/04/16}
Mixed Use Development: A structure with at least three residential units and at least one other
use that is permitted within the District.
Mobile Home: A detached, single-family residence with the following characteristics:
a) Manufactured as a relocatable living unit without a permanent foundation, designed for
long-term, year-round occupancy and containing sleeping accommodations, a toilet, a tub
or shower bath, and kitchen facilities, including major appliances, with plumbing and
electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems;
b) Designed to be transported, after fabrication, on its own chassis, and connected to utilities
upon being placed on a permanent foundation or mobile home stand on its own
permanent chassis; and
c) Designed to be installed with only incidental unpacking and assembling operations;
d) Constructed after June 15, 1976, and which the manufacturer certifies is constructed in
compliance with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development standards
established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards
Act of 1974, U.S. Code, Title 42, Section 5401, et. seq. and amendment or meets the
safety standards for older mobile homes which have been adopted by the State
Manufactured Housing Board;
e) A mobile home which does not comply with the requirements of subsection (d) above but
which was lawfully in use as a dwelling in the Town of Freeport on the date of adoption
of this Ordinance may be relocated to any lot where a mobile home is permitted by the
district regulations of this Ordinance.
A mobile home shall be construed to remain a mobile home, subject to all regulations applying
thereto, whether or not the wheels, axles, hitch or other appurtenances of mobility are removed and
the interior facilities are modified.
Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land, under unified ownership, approved by the municipality for
the placement of 3 or more manufactured homes.
Mobile Home Park Lot: The area of land on which an individual home is situated within the
mobile home park and which is reserved for use by the occupants of that home. The lot shall be
designated on the site plan and subdivision plan for the mobile home park. The lot shall not be
owned separately from the remainder of the mobile home park.
Modular Homes: A type of manufactured housing which the manufacturer certified is constructed
in compliance with Title 10, Chapter 957, and rules adopted under that chapter, meaning structures,
transportable in one or more sections, which are not constructed on a permanent chassis and are
- 23 -
designed to be used as dwellings on foundations when connected to required utilities, including the
plumbing, heating, air-conditioning or electrical systems contained in the unit.
Motel: See Hotel.
Municipal Facility: A facility which is open to the public and which is owned and operated
under the direct supervision of the Town of Freeport or the public school entity serving the
Town of Freeport. {Amended, Effective 06/19/12}
Neighborhood Shopping Center: for the purpose of calculating the parking requirement, a
neighborhood shopping center in the C-I, C-II, C-III, and C-IV Districts, is a development with a
gross floor area of 30,000 to 100,000 square feet which includes a grocery store and/or drug store
and other retail uses.
Net Residential Acreage: The area of a tract or parcel of land which, as determined by the Project
Review Board, is suitable for development or conservation land as part of a residential subdivision.
The area shall be calculated by subtracting the following from the total acreage of the tract or parcel:
A. Portions of the tract or parcel subject to rights-of-way and easements for vehicular
traffic:
1. For multi-family developments: total acreage of the tract or parcel used for roads
and parking.
2. For any other subdivisions: total acreage used for street right-of-way.
B. Unbuildable Land (Primary conservation area). The following environmentally
sensitive land which, if disturbed, may adversely impact the ecological balances in the
environment. No construction or development shall occur on the land areas listed below
unless otherwise permitted as provided below.
1. Deer wintering areas as identified in the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife, Identification and Management of Significant Fish & Wildlife Resources
in Southern Coastal Maine, provided in digital format dated October 2003 as
amended from time to time.
2. Wetlands; Forested wetlands shall not be considered an unbuildable area (primary
conservation area), except those forested wetlands that are mapped as having very
poorly drained soils in the USDA SCS Cumberland County Soil Survey, or forested
wetlands flooded during the 100-year storm event, or areas that support breeding
habitat for vernal pool-dependent amphibian species.
3. Portions of the tract or parcel containing slopes over twenty percent (20%)
which, because of unstable soils, would be subject to erosion if development
were to be located on them.
4. Portions of the tract or parcel in the 100-year floodplain, floodway and/or coastal
high hazard area as designated on the most recently adopted Flood Insurance rate
map of the National Flood Insurance Program for the Town of Freeport.
- 24 -
5. Portions of the tract or parcel below high water elevation (non-tidal) and below ten
percent (10%) exceedance high water (tidal) as defined above.
6. Portions of the tract or parcel covered by surface water bodies.
Where an interpretation of the geographical boundaries of the unbuildable land is necessary,
the Planning Board shall be guided by the following standards:
1. Whether a portion of the unbuildable area could be incorporated into a minimum
sized subdivision lot in such a manner that an adequate developable area for
buildings and site improvements with conforming setbacks is retained;
2. Whether the environmentally sensitive land is adequately protected from
disturbance or degradation.
Net Residential Density: Net residential density shall mean the number of dwelling units per net
residential acre.
Non-Conforming Building or Structure: A building or structure lawfully existing at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance which does not conform to the requirements of the
district in which it is located.
Non-Conforming Lot: A lot lawfully existing at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this Ordinance which does not conform to the requirements of the district in which it is located.
Non-Conforming Use: A use of land, buildings or structures lawfully existing at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance which does not conform to the requirements of the
district in which it is located.
Nursery School: Facility serving three or more children seven years of age and under. No session
is longer than 3 ½ hours and no more than 2 sessions are offered. Each child attends only one
session. No hot meals are served.
Nursing Home: An institution which provides nursing or convalescent care for consideration to
chronic or convalescent patients, but does not provide hospital services such as an operating room,
x-ray facilities and laboratory facilities, except as incidental to the delivery of the nursing,
convalescent or assisted living care. Where a permitted use, nursing homes served by public sewer
and water shall have a density no greater than one bed per (2,000) square feet of net residential
acreage; nursing homes not served by public sewer and water shall have a density no greater than
one bed per (6,000) square feet of net residential acreage.
When incorporated into a retirement community within a Retirement community Overlay District,
the net residential density requirements for a nursing home shall be as set forth in the Retirement
Community Overlay District.
Open Space Use: Any area of land or water set aside, dedicated, designed or reserved for public or
private use or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or
neighboring such open space. Open space shall be used for recreation, protection of natural resource
- 25 -
areas, passive amenity or agriculture; be accessible to all residents of the development, except when
used for agricultural purposes; and be accessible to the general public, if accepted by a public
agency.
Outdoor Recreation: activity engaged in the outdoors without the use of motorized recreational
products in a natural environment such as but not limited to hiking, camping, hunting, fishing,
canoeing, kayaking, sailing, biking, snowshoeing and cross country skiing. Outdoor recreation may
also include rustic campsites. {Amended, 03/19/19}
Outdoor Recreation School: A building or buildings and/or associated grounds which is principally
used for providing instruction in outdoor recreational activities and sports, including the use of nonmotorized
outdoor recreation products. The term Outdoor Recreation School shall not include any
outdoor use of motorized recreational products such as personal watercraft (as defined in 12
M.S.R.A. section 7791). An Outdoor Recreation School may not engage in retail sales on the
premises of the recreation school unless Retail Trade is a permitted use in the zoning district where
the outdoor recreation school is located.
Outdoor Storage – the keeping of goods and/or materials in the same place for more than 24 hours
that are not for sale to the public, including, but not limited to: landscaping materials, construction
materials.
Owner: Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity which controls a parcel of land by a fee
or less than fee title, or holds a valid contract or option to purchase said title.
Parking Structure – a building or structure of more than one level that is used to store motor
vehicles.
Peddler on Private Property: Any person, firm, corporation or other entity operating on property
outside of the street right-of-way and the public sidewalk and selling, or offering for sale, to the
general public, food from a peddler cart. A lemonade stand operated by a minor on the parent’s
property; an agricultural farm stand; a peddler truck; and peddler activities including the sale of
goods, as well as the preparation, sale and service of food, conducted by Freeport based religious,
charitable, educational and other non-profit institutions, are excluded from this definition. Non-
Freeport based religious, charitable, educational, and other non-profit institutions are regulated as
temporary activities under Section 501 of this Ordinance.
Peddler Cart: Any stand, cart or push cart capable of being moved, which is designed and
constructed to permit the preparation, sale and serving of food exclusively to the public. This cart is
a temporary, mobile structure which is located in a specific place on a parcel of land and is not
permanently affixed to either the ground or to a permanent structure. Any stand, cart or push cart
which is not capable of being moved shall be considered to be a structure and shall be regulated as
such by this Ordinance.
Peddler Truck: A truck, which has a current Department of Motor Vehicle license, from which only
unprocessed food such as, but not limited to, seafood, fruits and vegetables are sold and is located
- 26 -
either on private property or on the street right-of-way subject to conformance with all traffic
regulations.
Permitted Use: A use specifically allowed in a zoning district.
Personal services – businesses primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of an
individual and his/her goods or apparel including, but not limited to: beauty and barber shops,
laundromats, dry cleaners, photography studios, alteration services, shoe, jewelry and household
appliances repair services.
Pond: An artificially created body of water constructed by excavation of earth materials and/or
creation of a dam to create an impoundment. Ponds include, but are not limited to, farm ponds and
fire ponds.
Postal services: the use of a building for the sale of stamps, sending packages, and post office
boxes and other typical functions of a post office, but not including the sole distribution of mail
in Freeport.
Principal Building: The building in which the primary use of the lot is conducted.
Principal Use: The primary use to which the premises are devoted, and the main purpose for which
the premises exist.
Private Assembly: A building which is owned and used as a meeting place for private or semiprivate
social organizations and clubs such as grange halls, fraternal organizations, religious
institutions, etc. in which the principal use is exclusively for members. Rental of the facilities to
outside groups is clearly incidental to the principal use and shall not significantly increase the
intensity of the use of the site, especially regarding parking and traffic.
Private Way: Any way, designated for private use and maintained by a property owner or group of
property owners, and which is not an accepted town road.
Prohibited Use: All uses not specifically allowed as Permitted Uses.
Public Area: Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths, and other recreational and open spaces and other
places where the public is permitted to congregate. These areas may be owned publicly or
privately.
Public Assembly - Indoor: A building which is available to the public on a nonprofit or for-profit
basis. Examples include auditoriums, meeting rooms and halls available for functions.
Public Building: A building owned, operated or funded in whole or in part by the Town of Freeport
which members of the general public have occasion to visit, either regularly or occasionally, such as,
but not limited to, the Town Hall, the Public Library, the Police Station and Fire Stations.
- 27 -
Public or Private School: a building or buildings and its associated grounds which is principally
used to conduct educational classes including public and private elementary and secondary schools
and nursery schools, including post-secondary schools, but not including Commercial Schools. If
the public or private school is a residential boarding school the following standards apply:
1. The lot shall be at least three times the required minimum lot size for the district in which the
school is located
2. There shall be no more than 50 students that reside at the school, and
3. The impervious surface of the school and associated parking shall be not greater than 25%,
unless the district in which the school is located has a maximum impervious surface to lot
area ratio in which case that standard shall apply.
Public Utility Facilities: A facility, whether publicly or privately owned, which provides direct or
indirect utility service to the public, such as, but not limited to, sewage and water pumping stations
and treatment facilities, telephone electronic equipment structures, electric power sub-stations and
transformer stations, and major electrical power lines or pipelines whose major purpose is transport
through a municipality. Local utility transmission lines are excluded from this definition. Wireless
telecommunications facilities, as defined in this Section 104, are not considered public utility
facilities.
Recent Flood Plain Soils: The following soil series as described and identified by the National
Cooperative Soil Survey:
Charles Medomak Rumney
Coastal Beaches Ondawa Saco
Limerick Podunk Tidal Marsh
Recharge Area: Areas composed of porous sand and gravel, or other areas that collect precipitation
or surface water and carry it to aquifers.
Reconstruction: The restoration, remodeling or rebuilding of a non-conforming structure, whether
necessitated by deterioration, obsolescence, casualty or other occurrence, where the costs of such
work equal or exceed the value of the property in its existing condition. In determining the total cost
of such work, the costs of all work other than repair performed within the preceding five years or
since the effective date of the Ordinance, whichever period is shorter, shall be taken into account.
Religious Institution: A building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures, which by design
and construction are primarily intended for the conducting of organized religious services and
accessory uses associated with the mission of the institution. Accessory uses include but are not
limited to schools, meeting halls and kitchens.
Repair: The routine maintenance of a structure for the purpose of preserving but not substantially
extending its useful life. Repair shall not include the construction or reconstruction of a structure.
Required Open Space: The sum of the land area of conservation land and unbuildable land
(primary conservation areas) as defined in net residential acreage. This land is within a
subdivision with uses as permitted in Sec. 504A, Sec. 504.B and 504.D of the Freeport Zoning
Ordinance and which is permanently restricted from future development. Subsurface
- 28 -
wastewater disposal systems, or individual wells serving units within an open space or
expanded open space subdivision may be located within the required open space if approved by
the Project Review Board. {Amended, Effective 08/06/19}
Research and Development Facility – A facility for investigating the technological, natural,
physical, and biological sciences, which may include engineering and product development.
Residence: Any place of abode which is more than temporary.
Residential Health Care Facility – Residences for individuals that provide rooms, and may provide
meals, personal care, and/or supervision of self-administered medication. Other services such as
recreational activities, cultural activities, financial services, and transportation may also be provided.
These facilities may be part of another building such as a nursing home.
Restaurant: A commercial establishment where food and drink are prepared, served and consumed
primarily within the principal building. Outdoor seating is permitted and drive-up facilities are
prohibited.
Restaurant - Carry-out: A restaurant which by design of physical facilities or by service or
packaging procedures permits as a principal use the purchase of prepared, ready-to-eat food
primarily intended to be consumed off the premises.
Restaurant - Drive-up: A restaurant which permits customers to obtain food and drink while
remaining in their vehicles. A drive-up restaurant must contain a minimum of seventy-five (75)
indoor seats. In the C-I district a drive-up restaurant may contain fewer than seventy-five indoor
seats provided the following criteria are met: the drive-up restaurant contains a minimum of twentyfour
(24) indoor seats, and the drive-up restaurant is part of a building with a minimum of 6,500
square feet of gross floor area that contains or has the ability to contain, a permitted use other than a
drive-up restaurant. In addition, a drive-up restaurant may contain outdoor seating.
Retail Trade: Any business engaged primarily in the sale, rental or lease of goods and/or services
individually or in small quantities to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption and/or use, and
not for resale. The term Retail Trade shall not include auto service stations, auto repair service
garage, and all types of restaurants.
The term Retail Trade shall include Furniture/Large Appliance Showrooms which are retail trade
establishments where the major activity is display area for furniture such as but not limited to tables,
chairs, bureaus and sofas, and/or large appliances such as but not limited to refrigerators, stoves,
washers, and dryers. The furniture and large appliances are large pieces which are placed on the
floor for customers to view. Specific parking requirements for this type of retail trade are listed in
Section 514.4. below.
Riprap*: Rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least six (6) inches in diameter, used for erosion control
and soil stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two (2) units horizontal to one (1) unit
vertical or less.
- 29 -
River*: A free-flowing body of water including its associated flood plain wetlands from that point
at which it provides drainage for a watershed of twenty-five (25) square miles to its mouth. The
only river meeting this definition is the Cousin’s River.
Road: For the purposes of this Ordinance and for determining minimum road frontage requirements,
a road is considered to be any one of the following:
• any public way maintained by public authority, except a limited access highway, or
• a public or private way in an approved subdivision, or
• a private way fifty (50) feet in width, or
• a private way of thirty (30) feet in width serving 2 or fewer lots provided all of the road or
driveway and associated drainage and utilities will be contained within the private way and
the Fire Chief determines that the private way is adequate for public safety vehicles.
Construction of a private way or minimum road frontage requirements shall in no way be construed
to imply acceptance by the Town of Freeport for purposes of maintenance, improvements or other
Town services. {Amended, Effective 10/03/17}
Rustic campsite: An area for tent camping only. Rustic campsites may include a platform. A
portable yurt no greater than 14’ in diameter is considered a tent for the purposes of this
Ordinance. {Amended, 03/19/19}
Salt Marsh*: Areas of coastal wetlands (most often along coastal bays) that support salt tolerant
species, and where at average high tide during the growing season, the soil is irregularly inundated
by tidal waters. The predominant species is salt march cordgrass (Spartina alterniflora). More open
areas often support widgeon grass, eelgrass, and Sago pondweed. {Amended, Effective 07/01/09}
Salt Meadow*: Areas of a coastal wetland that support salt tolerant plant species bordering the
landward side of salt marshes or open coastal water, where the soil is saturated during the growing
season but which is rarely inundated by tidal water. Indigenous plant species include salt meadow
cordgrass (Spartina patens) and black rush; common three-square occurs in fresher areas. {Amended,
Effective 07/01/09}
Service Road: A road running parallel to Route One and serving abutting properties through limited
access points. A two-way service road shall contain pavement no less than twenty (20) feet in width.
Limited
Access service road
Points landscaped area
Route One
Setback: A line that is a required minimum distance from the road right-of-way line or any
other lot line that establishes the area within which principal and accessory buildings or
structures must be erected or placed. The Codes Enforcement Officer or the Project Review
Board may reduce the front, side, and/or rear setback requirements up to 25% for a proposed
solar building if the reduction is necessary to allow for a more efficient orientation of a building
that would otherwise meet the setback requirements. For projects requiring a permit from the
Codes Enforcement Officer, he or she may issue a reduction in the setback requirements. For
- 30 -
projects requiring approval from the Project Review Board, that Board may approve a reduction
in the setback requirements. {Amended, Effective 02/07/12}
Front Setback: Setback between the front lot line and front line of a building extended to the
side lot lines of the lot. The depth of the front setback shall be measured from
the front lot line to the front line of the building.
Side Setback: Setback between the side lot line and side line of a building extended to the
front and rear lot lines of the lot. The depth of the side setback shall be
measured from the side lot line to the side line of a building. A combined side
setback is the total of both side setbacks.
Rear Setback: Setback between the rear lot line and the rear line of a building extended to the
side lot lines of the lot. The depth of the rear setback shall be measured from
the rear lot line to the rear line of the building.
Shore Setback: the nearest horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of a water
body or tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, to the nearest part of a
structure, road, parking space or other regulated structure or area. {Amended,
Effective 07/01/09}
Shared Parking: Parking spaces open to the general public and not restricted to customers or
employees of specific non-residential activities. Restrictions include, but are not limited to signs that
allow customers of certain businesses to use parking spaces, gates or other types of barriers on
parking lots or parking lots that charge customers to park. For the purposes of shared parking,
parking spaces reserved for persons with valid disabled parking placards or plates are not considered
to be restricted. {Amended, Effective 12/18/18}
Ship Chandlery: A retail store specializing in the sale of marine related products.
Shoreland Zone*: The area shown on the official Town of Freeport Zoning Map which includes
the land area located within two hundred and fifty (250) feet horizontal distance of the normal highwater
line of any river or saltwater body; within 250 feet of the upland edge of a coastal wetland,
including all areas affected by tidal action or a freshwater wetland; or within seventy-five (75) feet
horizontal distance of the normal high-water line of a stream. {Amended, Effective 07/01/09}
Shoreline – the normal high-water line, or upland edge of a freshwater or coastal wetland. {Amended,
Effective 07/01/09}
Sludge: Residual materials produced by water or sewage treatment processes and by domestic
septic tanks.
Solar Building: a building that is designed so that windows, walls, and/or floors are made to
collect, store, and distribute solar energy in the form of heat in the winter and reject solar heat in
the summer with or without the use of mechanical, electrical devices, and/or solar panels.
{Amended, Effective 02/07/12}
- 31 -
Solid Waste: Useless, unwanted, or discarded solid material without sufficient liquid content to be
free flowing. This includes, but is not limited to, rubbish, garbage, scrap materials, junk and refuse,
and recyclable materials.
Specified Sexual Activities: Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; fondling or other erotic touching of
human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast.
Story: that portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface
of the floor or roof next above. A story is measured as the vertical distance from top to top of two
successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces and, for the topmost story, from the top of the
floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the roof
rafters. {Amended, Effective 08/06/19}
Stream*: A free-flowing body of water from the confluence of two (2) perennial streams as
depicted either on the most recent edition as of June 2, 1992 of the United States Geological Survey
7.5 minute series topographic map or the 15 minute series topographic map to the point where the
body of water becomes a river or flows to another water body or wetland within another Shoreland
Zone. {Amended, Effective 07/01/09}
Street: See “Road”.
Structure: A combination of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy or
ornamentation whether installed on, above or in the surface of land or water, excluding walls,
fences, mailbox, lamppost, bird house or similar construction. Outdoor swimming pools and
ground mounted solar panels are structures. {Amended, Effective 02/07/12}
Subdivision – Commercial Open Space: a higher-density residential development in a
Commercial Districts that permits higher density residential units with reduced road frontage,
setbacks and lot sizes, and that maintains open space. The area of the required open space shall
be equal or exceed the sum of the unbuildable land (primary conservation areas) as defined by
net residential acreage plus twenty percent (20%) of the net residential acreage. The required
open space must meet the standards of Section 504.D of this Ordinance. {Amended, Effective
08/06/19}
Subdivision – Open Space: A residential development design that permits reduced lot sizes,
road frontage, and setbacks, and that maintains required open space. The area of the required
open space shall equal or exceed the sum of the unbuildable land (primary conservation areas)
as defined by net residential acreage plus fifty percent (50%) of the net residential acreage.
Subdivision – Expanded Open Space: A residential development design that permits reduced
lots sizes, road frontage, and setbacks, and that maintains required open space. The area of the
required open space shall equal or exceed the sum of the unbuildable land (primary
conservation areas) as defined by net residential acreage plus sixty-five percent (65%) of the net
residential acreage.
- 32 -
Subdivision – Large Lot: A residential development design that requires lot sizes be at least
double the minimum lot size of the district in which the subdivision is located. The net
residential density of a large lot subdivision shall be fifty percent (50%) less than an open space
subdivision. A note on the plan and a deed restriction forbidding further subdivision of these
lots unless the appropriate density requirement for a large lot subdivision can be met must be
provided.
Subdivision – Village Open Space: A residential development design that permits reduced lot
sizes, road frontage, and setbacks, and that maintains open space within the Freeport Village
Overlay District. The area of the required village open space shall equal or exceed the sum of
the unbuildable land (primary conservation areas) as defined by net residential acreage plus
thirty percent (30%) of the net residential acreage. The required village open space may be met
with either land, a fee in lieu of land, or a combination of both land and fee in lieu of land as
further described in Section 504B of this Ordinance.
Tidal waters*: all waters affected by tidal action during the maximum spring high tide. {Amended,
Effective 07/01/09}
Timber Harvesting: A cutting of timber, consistent with sound forest management practices.
Timber harvesting does not include the construction or creation of roads or the clearing of land for
approved construction.
Travel Trailer: Any portable vehicle which is designed to be transported on its own wheels; which
is temporary living quarters for travel, recreational, vacation or construction purposes; and which
may or may not contain one or all of the accommodations and facilities included in a mobile home.
Tributary Stream*: A channel between defined banks created by the action of surface water,
which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial vegetation or by the presence of a bed devoid of
topsoil containing waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material or bedrock, and which is
connected hydrologically with other water bodies. Tributary stream does not include rills or gullies
forming because of accelerated erosion in disturbed soils where the natural vegetation cover has
been removed by human activity. {Amended, Effective 07/01/09}
Truck Facility: Any building, premises or land in which or upon which a business, service or
industry involving the sale, maintenance, servicing, storage or repair of commercial vehicles,
including heavy machinery, is conducted or rendered as a principal use. The sale of motor fuel and
accessories or equipment for trucks and similar commercial vehicles is permitted as an accessory
use.
Upland Edge of a wetland*: The boundary between upland and wetland. For the purposes of a
coastal wetland, this boundary is the line formed by the landward limits of the salt tolerant
vegetation and/or the maximum spring tide level, including all areas affected by tidal action. For
purposes of a freshwater wetland, the upland edge is formed where the soils are not saturated fro a
duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation; or where the soils support the growth of wetland
vegetation, but such vegetation is dominated by woody stems that are six (6) meters (approx. Twenty
(20) foot tall or taller. {Amended, Effective 07/01/09}
- 33 -
Use: The purpose for which land or a structure is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land
or a structure is or may be occupied. All uses shall meet all requirements specified in this Ordinance.
Variance: A departure from the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance as authorized by the Zoning
Board of Appeals only where strict application of the Ordinance would cause undue hardship.
Vehicle wash center – A structure containing facilities for washing vehicles, boats and other
equipment. Facilities may be automated and/or non-automated washing, cleaning and/or drying
and/or automated washing and drying. A wash center may also include a bay or bays for
washing pets and indoor and outdoor vehicle vacuuming. {Amended, 03/19/19}
Vegetation*: All live trees, shrubs, ground cover, and other plants including without limitation,
trees both over and under 4 inches in diameter measured at 4 ½ feet above ground level.
Village Café: a place where food and beverages are prepared, served, and consumed Carry-out
service is permitted as either the primary or accessory use. Village cafes are prohibited from the
use of deep fat fryers requiring mechanical ventilation.
Visitor center – a building or structure used for providing information to the public about
Freeport and the region. Minimal retail sales are allowed such as, vending machines and items
that promote Freeport such as t-shirts, mugs.
Warehouse and Storage Facility: A land area where goods or materials are stored in a warehouse
facility and/or in specific outdoor areas.
Warehouse Facility: An enclosed structure used primarily for the storage of goods or materials.
Outdoor storage is not permitted.
Water Body*: Any river, stream or tidal area.
Wetland*: A freshwater or coastal wetland, excluding forested wetland.
Wetlands Associated with Rivers*: Wetlands contiguous with or adjacent to a river and, which
during normal high water, are connected by surface water to the river. Also included are wetlands
which are separated from the river by a berm, causeway, or similar feature less than 100 feet in
width, and which have a surface elevation at or below the normal high water line of the river.
Wetlands associated with rivers are considered to be part of that river.
Wireless Telecommunications Facility: A facility that transmits, receives, distributes, provides or
offers telecommunications services, radio or television signals, or any other spectrum-based
transmissions/receptions, together with the facility's associated antennas, microwave dishes, horns,
cables, wires, conduits, ducts, lightning rods, electronics and other types of equipment for the
transmission, receipt, distribution or offering of such signals, wireless telecommunication towers,
antenna support structures and other structures supporting said equipment and any attachments to
those structures including guy wires and anchors, equipment buildings, generators, parking areas,
utility services, driveways and roads and other accessory features.
- 34 -
Wireless Telecommunication Facility Co-Located: A wireless telecommunications facility that
includes a telecommunication tower or building supporting one or more antennas, dishes, or similar
devices owned or used by more than one public or private entity.
Wireless Telecommunication Tower (Tower): Any new or existing ground mounted or structure
mounted pole, spire, structure or combination thereof, designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting, fixing or attaching one or more antennas, including supporting lines, cables,
wires, braces and masts. The term includes but is not limited to, radio and television transmission
towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular towers, personal communications
service towers, and other similar towers.
Yard: An open space that lies between the required setback of the principal or accessory building(s)
and the nearest lot line. Such yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except
as may be specifically provided in this Ordinance.
- 35 -
ARTICLE II
GENERAL USE REGULATIONS
Section 201. General Restrictions
A. No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, no new lot shall be created, and no
building or part thereof shall be erected, moved or structurally altered, as defined in the current
building code adopted by the Town of Freeport, except in conformity with the regulations herein
specified for the district within which it is located and in conformity with the regulations
contained within the definitions set forth in Section 104 of this Ordinance. Except as otherwise
provided in the District Regulations, accessory uses and structures, home occupations; a
lemonade stand operated by a minor on the parent’s property; agricultural farm stands; peddler
trucks; peddler activities including the sale of goods, as well as the preparation, sale and service
of food, conducted by Freeport-based religious, charitable, educational and other non-profit
institutions; forest management activities, state granted snowmobile trails and open space uses
are permitted in every district. {Amended, Effective 10/03/17}
The operation of a lemonade stand, an agricultural farm stand, a peddler truck or a peddler
activity pursuant to this Section 201-A shall not be considered a permanent use of the property
and shall not acquire the status of a lawful non-conforming use in the event of subsequent
changes to this Ordinance.
B. No part of a yard or other open space around any building required for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be included as a part of a yard or
other open space similarly required for another building, and no lot shall be changed in area
after the enactment of this Ordinance so as to reduce the dimensions of any lot below the
minimum herein required; except that a single lot of record containing more than one
principal structure that was in existence prior to February 20,1976 and used as dwelling
units may be divided so that each structure is contained on a separate lot, if the following
conditions are met:
1. The principal structures were in existence and functioning as a year round dwelling unit
prior to February 20, 1976 and there are no records in the Town’s possession indicating
that the structures were unlawful when originally constructed.
2. Each structure is a year round dwelling. As used in this section, the term “year round
dwelling” means a structure that is (i) constructed on a permanent foundation; (ii)
capable as being used as a permanent residence for one or more persons; (iii) serviced by
utilities (including but not limited to, heating, water supply, sewage treatment, electricity
and cooking facilities) which are functional during the full calendar year.
3. Each new lot complies individually to the fullest extent possible with the dimensional
requirements of this Ordinance.
4. Each lot is serviced by public sewer or a subsurface wastewater disposal system in
accordance with Maine law. Each lot is served by public water or a well.
- 36 -
5. A plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions of the new lots and the locations of
structures is submitted to the Codes Enforcement Officer.
6. The Codes Enforcement Officer determines that the division of land complies with all of
the requirements of this section and approves the plot plan.
{Amended, Effective 02/07/12}
C. No more than one principal building and its accessory buildings as regulated by this Ordinance
may be located in any one lot used as a residential lot. This section does not apply to Multifamily
Developments, as defined by the Freeport Subdivision Ordinance, and which are part of
an approved subdivision. {Amended, Effective 10/03/17}
D. Lots which abut more than one street shall provide the required front yard setbacks along every
street except as specifically provided for in the Freeport Subdivision Ordinance.
E. The use of any building, structure or land shall comply with the performance standards of this
Ordinance. The Codes Enforcement Officer, when reviewing an application for any permit
required by law, shall determine that a use complies with all performance standards applicable.
F. When a lot is transected by a zoning district boundary, the regulations set forth in this Ordinance
for each district shall apply to the area of the lot in each district, except as permitted by Section
201.H below.
G. Excavation or filling and earthmoving as described in Section 509 D.2. shall be permitted in any
district unless otherwise regulated by this Ordinance. Ponds, as regulated in Section 525, and
short term excavations, as regulated in Section 509, are permitted in any district unless otherwise
regulated by this Ordinance.
H. When part of a lot is in a Resource Protection District RPI, that area in the Resource Protection I
District shall be counted toward the required minimum lot area of the other District only if all
other applicable space standards can be satisfied within that part of the lot which is in the other
district.
I. If residential and non-residential uses are located on the same lot, the area of the lot must
equal or exceed the sum of the minimum lot sizes required for each user, except in the
Village District I (V-I), Village Commercial District I (VC-I), Village Commercial District
II (VC-II), Village Commercial District III (VC-III), Village Commercial District IV (VCIV),
Medium Density Residential District II (MDR II), Village Mixed Use District 1 (VMU-
1), Village Mixed Use District 2 (VMU-2), Village Mixed Use District 3 (VMU-3),
Commercial District I, Commercial District III, Commercial District IV, and as provided in
Section 402.II.C. below. For the purposes of this section, accessory structures and facilities
such as but not limited to sewage and water pumping stations, telephone electronic stations,
and electrical transformers, to public utilities are considered to be residential uses. {Amended,
Effective 06/19/12}
J. No building or structure which is not a dwelling unit as defined in this Ordinance may be used as
a residence.
- 37 -
K. Public sewer pump stations are exempt from the space standards and landscape setback
requirements of this Ordinance.
Public sewer pump stations shall be designed to be as unobtrusive as possible through the use of
such measures as landscaping and buffering.
Section 202. Non-Conformance
A. Continuance of Non-Conformance: The lawful use of any building, structure, or land which is
made nonconforming by reason of the enactment of this Ordinance, or which shall be made nonconforming
by reason of a subsequent amendment, may be continued, subject to the following
provisions:
B. Non-Conforming Uses
1. Repairs and Alterations: A building or structure devoted to a non-conforming use may be
repaired, maintained or improved, provided the number of square feet of floor area
devoted to the non-conforming use is not increased except in accordance with the
provisions of Section 202.C.(5). A non-conforming use may not be reconstructed except
in accordance with the provisions of Section 202.C.(2);
2. Extension of Use: The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a variance for a one-time
expansion of a non-conforming use up to a maximum of 15% of the gross floor area of
the existing structure(s). A non-conforming open use of land may not be extended to any
part of the remainder of the land except that excavation existing on January 16, 1990 may
expand without a variance if such expansion is allowed under Section 509 of this
Ordinance;
3. Change in Use: A non-conforming use of a building, structure or land may be changed to
another non-conforming use only when the impact of the new use on adjacent properties,
water bodies wetlands, and upon the Town is less adverse than the impact of the former
use and a permit is issued for such change by the Codes Enforcement Officer applying
the standards of and utilizing the procedures of Section 602. Upon such a change in use,
the prior use shall be deemed abandoned. Whenever a non-conforming use is changed to
a permitted use, such use shall not thereafter revert to non-conforming status;
4. Abandonment: A non-conforming use of a building, structure or land shall be considered
abandoned if, in the case of a building or structure, it remains vacant for a period of
eighteen (18) months, and in the case of an activity, it ceases for a period of eighteen (18)
months. Subsequent use shall conform to the regulations specified in this Ordinance for
the district in which it is located.
5. Use Begun Prior to Ordinance: Nothing herein contained shall require any change in
plans, construction or structure, the construction of which shall have been diligently
prosecuted previous to the date of enactment of this Ordinance, provided complete plans
- 38 -
for such a use, building or structure shall have been timely filed with and accepted by the
Codes Enforcement Officer;
6. In the Shoreland Zones the following additional requirements shall be met. In the case of
a conflict with another provision of this Ordinance, the standards of this section shall
prevail {Amended, Effective 07/01/09}
a. Resource Protection I: A residential use which becomes non-conforming as a
result of its location under this Ordinance in a Resource Protection I District
may be expanded, reconstructed, or accessory buildings added, if the Codes
Enforcement Officer determines that the project meets the criteria listed in
Section 602.F.1.L. of the Site Plan Review regulations and the requirements
of Section 507 and is subject to the restrictions described below:
a. Total lifetime expansion on the parcel is limited to the addition of 500
square feet of gross floor area to buildings existing as of September 7,
1988. If any portion of the expansion is located within the required shore
setback, that portion may be expanded by no more than 30 percent of the
floor area existing within the setback area and no more than 30 percent of
the volume existing within the setback area, and only upon the granting of
a variance by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
b. A seasonal use shall not be converted to a year-round use;
c. The expansion shall not increase the non-conformance of any existing
shore setback.
d. If the Zoning Board of Appeals grants a setback variance request under the
Sec. C.1. below, it shall be counted in the maximum total lifetime
expansion area permitted.
b. All other Shoreland Zones: -
(1) Expansions. Expansions of non-conforming uses are prohibited, except
that non-conforming residential uses may, after obtaining approval from the
Board of Appeals, be expanded within the existing residential structures or
within an expansion of a structure as allowed in Sec. 202.C.1 Expansions
below.
(2) Resumption prohibited. A lot, building or structure in or on which a nonconforming
use is discontinued for a period exceeding one year, or which is
superseded by a conforming use, may not again be devoted to a nonconforming
use.
- 39 -
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Ordinance or Section 302 of Title 1 of
MRSA, this Section 202.B.(6) shall apply to any application for any permit or approval filed
on or after September 7, 1988.
C. Non-Conforming Buildings
1. Expansion: A building or structure which is non-conforming with respect to the space
requirements of this Ordinance may not be expanded, enlarged or increased unless such
expanded or enlarged portion complies with the space requirements of this Ordinance.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a variance for a one-time expansion limited to
15% of the gross floor area of an existing non-conforming building or structure. {Note:
This paragraph was added back in on 6/28/17 as it was inadvertently when the Shoreland Zoning language
below was original amended on 04/07/09}
In the Shoreland Zone a non-conforming building or structure may be added to or
expanded after obtaining a permit from the Codes Enforcement Officer, if such expansion
does not increase the non-conformity of the structure and is in accordance with
subparagraphs (a) and (b) below: {Amended, Effective 08/05/14}
a. After January 1, 1989, if any portion of a building or structure is less than the
required shore setback, that portion of the building or structure shall not be
expanded, as measured in floor area or volume, by 30% or more, during the
lifetime of the building or structure. These provisions shall not restrict
expansion of portions of a building or structure located outside of the
required setback. If a replacement building or structure conforms with the
requirements of Sec.202 (C)2 below, and is less than the required shore
setback, the replacement building or structure may not be expanded if the
original building or structure existing on January 1, 1989 had been expanded
by 30% in floor area and volume since that date.
b. Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is constructed under
a non-conforming building or structure, the building or structure and new
foundation must be placed such that the setback requirement is met to the
greatest extent practical extent as determined by the Codes Enforcement
Officer, basing its decision on the criteria specified in Sec. 202(C)4 below.
If the completed foundation does not extend beyond the exterior dimensions
of the building or structure, except for expansion in conformity with Sec.
202(C)1 above, and the foundation does not cause the structure to be
elevated by more than three (3) additional feet, as measured from the uphill
side of the structure (from the original ground level to the bottom of the first
floor sill), it shall not be considered to be an expansion of the structure.
For purposes of this section, when determining the setback line, if minor
attachments such as stairs, landings and basement bulkhead doors are within
the required shore setback for buildings or structures, expansions of the
main portion of the building or structure toward the front edge of these
- 40 -
minor attachments shall be considered an increase in the non-conformity of
structure or attachment.
New stairways for the sole purpose of gaining access to, or egress from, a
building or structure need not be considered when determining its setback,
provided that the stairway and landing, if any, is no wider than five feet and
extends no closer to the water than is necessary to accomplish its purpose. If
the elevation at the top of the stairway or landing is greater than four feet
above ground level, the stairway must be constructed such that it parallels
the wall of the building or structure rather than extending toward the
shoreline.
2. Reconstruction or Replacement: If a non-conforming building or structure is destroyed
or damaged by less than 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
regardless of the cause, the owner retains the right to rebuild or restore the nonconforming
building or structure provided that a permit is obtained within a period of
twelve (12) months, or thereafter conform with the space requirements of this Ordinance
unless a variance from such requirement is granted by the Board of Appeals.
If a non-conforming building or structure is destroyed or damaged by more than 50% of
its value regardless of the cause, the building or structure may be reconstructed or
replaced provided that a permit is obtained within eighteen (18) months of said damage,
destruction, or removal, and provided compliance with all setback requirements is met to
the greatest practical extent as determined by the Codes Enforcement Officer in
accordance with the purposes of this Ordinance. In no case shall a building or structure
be reconstructed or restored so as to increase its non-conformity. If the reconstructed or
replacement structure is less than the required setback it shall not be any larger than the
original structure, except as allowed in Sec. 202.1 Expansions, above, as determined by
the non-conforming floor area and volume of the reconstructed or replaced structure at its
new location. If the total amount of floor area and volume of the original structure can be
relocated or reconstructed beyond the required setback area, no portion of the relocated or
reconstructed structure shall be replaced or constructed at less than the required setback
for the new structure. When it is necessary to remove vegetation in order to replace or
reconstruct a structure, vegetation shall be replanted in accordance with Sec.202.4 below.
In determining whether the building or structure reconstruction or restoration meets the
shore setback to the greatest practical extent, the Codes Enforcement Officer shall
consider, in addition to the criteria in Section 602.F.1.L. below, the physical condition
and type of the existing foundation, if any, and whether it is reasonably feasible to
relocate it. {Amended, Effective 07/01/09}
3. Use of Non-Conforming Building: Notwithstanding any space and bulk requirements of
this Ordinance, a non-conforming building or structure may be used for any use allowed
in the zoning district where it is located, unless the definition of such use contained in
Section 104 of this Ordinance or the district regulations contain specific dimensional
- 41 -
requirements peculiar to the use which cannot be met in the existing structure or on the
existing lot.
4. Relocation: In the Shoreland Zone, a non-conforming building or structure may be
relocated within the boundaries of the parcel on which the building or structure is
located provided that the site of relocation conforms to all setback requirements to
the greatest practical extent as determined by the Codes Enforcement Officer and
provided that the applicant demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage disposal
system meets the requirements of State law and the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules (Rules) or that a new system can be installed in
compliance with the law and said Rules. In no case shall a building or structure be
relocated in a manner that causes it to be more non-conforming.
In determining whether the building or structure relocation meets the setback to the
greatest practical extent, the Codes Enforcement Officer shall consider the size of the
lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion, the location of other buildings
and structures on the property and on adjacent properties, the location of the septic
system and other on-site soils suitable for septic systems, and the type and amount of
vegetation to be removed to accomplish the relocation. When it is necessary to
remove vegetation within the required setback in order to relocate a structure, the
Codes Enforcement Officer shall require replanting of native vegetation to
compensate for the destroyed vegetation. In addition, the area from which the
relocated structure was removed must be replanted with vegetation. Replanting shall
be required as follows:
a. Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted with at least one
native tree, three (3) feet in height, for every tree removed. If more than five (5)
trees are planted, no one species of tree shall make up more than 50% of the
number of trees planted. Replaced trees must be planted no further from the
water or wetland than the trees that were removed.
Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and ground cover, that are removed or
destroyed in order to relocate a structure must be re-established. An area at least
the same size as the area where vegetation and/or ground cover was disturbed,
damaged, or removed must be reestablished within the setback area. The
vegetation and/or ground cover must be similar in nature to the native vegetation
and/or ground cover that was disturbed, destroyed or removed.
b. Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel the original location of
the structure shall be replanted with vegetation which may consist of grasses,
shrubs, trees, or a combination thereof.
{Amended, Effective 08/05/14}
5. Construction Begun Prior to Ordinance: Nothing herein contained shall require any
change in plans, construction or structure, the construction of which shall have been
diligently prosecuted previous to the date of enactment of this Ordinance provided
- 42 -
complete plans for such a building or structure shall have been timely filed with and
accepted by the Codes Enforcement Officer.
6. Residential Dwelling: Any existing residential dwelling and accessory buildings which,
at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, becomes nonconforming
because of failure to satisfy either the use standards or the space standards of
the district in which it is located, may be extended or expanded or reconstructed provided
that said extension, expansion or reconstruction is in compliance with all provisions of
this Ordinance.
7. Hotels and Motels: Upon approval of a site plan by the Project Review Board, a hotel or
motel which existed on July 5, l995 and which at any time thereafter is non-conforming
because it exceeds the maximum number of units allowed by the district regulations may
increase the number of units by up to 30 units more than the number existing on July 5,
l995 and may, in connection with such increase, expand accessory facilities such as
restaurants, meeting rooms and recreational facilities. Such increase or expansion shall
not be considered an extension of use subject to Section 202 (B)(2). An increase or
expansion under this Paragraph 7 shall preclude any further increase or expansion under
Section 202 (B)(2). As used in this Paragraph 7, “unit” means every room which
provides sleeping accommodations for guests, except that a suite of no more than two
rooms may be counted as a single unit provided the rooms share an entry from the
exterior or an interior common area and share one toilet facility which is accessible only
from within that group of rooms.
D. Non-Conforming Lots of Record:
1. A single lot of record which, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance, does not meet the minimum lot size, minimum road frontage and/or minimum
shore frontage of the district in which it is located, may be built upon without a variance,
provided that such lot is in separate ownership and not contiguous with any other lot in
the same ownership and provided further that all other provisions of this Ordinance are
met, except that the minimum land area per dwelling unit or mobile home space standard
requirement shall not apply to the construction or placement of a single dwelling unit or a
single mobile home on such a lot of record;
2. If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in single ownership of record at the time of
adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, or at any time thereafter, and if all or part of
the lots do not meet the minimum lot size of this Ordinance, the lands involved shall be
considered to be a single parcel for the purposes of this Ordinance, and no portion of said
parcel shall be built upon or sold which does not meet the minimum lot size of this
Ordinance; nor shall any division of the parcel be made which creates any dimension or
area below the requirements of this Ordinance. This subsection (2) shall apply only to
lots which have not been improved separately with buildings or structures.
For the purposes of this sub-paragraph, lots shown on a subdivision plan approved by the
Planning Board or the Project Review Board and recorded in the Registry of Deeds shall
- 43 -
not be treated as lots held in common ownership if, within the three (3) years
immediately preceding the effective date of this Ordinance or within three (3) years from
the date on which such plan was approved, whichever is later, the owner or his
predecessor has improved each lot by the completed construction of roads and the
installation of utility services.
Section 203. Changes and Amendments
A. This Ordinance may be amended and its regulations, boundaries, and district classifications
changed by the Town Council at a regular or special meeting pursuant to the following
procedures:
1. Amendments or changes may be initiated by the Planning Board, Project Review Board
or Town Council, or may be requested by any owner of property (or authorized agent) or
other person with equivalent right, title or interest in the property (or authorized agent).
Amendments or changes may also be initiated by any person as permitted by the
Constitution and laws of the State of Maine;
2. All requests for amendments to the text of the Zoning Ordinance, or for changes in zone
boundary lines, or other requests to change the zoning map, initiated by persons other
than the Planning Board, the Town Council, or other Town Boards and Commissioners,
shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be set by the Town Council. No such request
shall be referred to the Planning Board for public hearing or otherwise considered as a
Planning Board agenda item until the required fee has been paid;
3. For request for amendments or changes shall be referred to the Town Council for
consideration until the Planning Board has held a public hearing on that request, notice of
which shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town of Freeport and to all abutters of the affected property if a zoning
map change is being considered. Abutters shall include owners of property separated
from the affected property by a public or private way;
4. Submissions: All requests for amendment or changes other than those initiated by the
Planning Board, Project Review Board, or Town Council shall include:
a. A map showing existing and proposed zone lines;
b. Address or exact location of the request;
c. Name and address of property owner and applicant;
d. Statement regarding existing and proposed land use;
e. Existing and proposed zone classification;
f. Statement, where applicable, indicating the developer has the financial ability to
complete the proposed development.
g. If the request is for designation as a MEOD District, the following additional
submissions are required:
(1) Total project acreage;
- 44 -
(2) Approximate acreage and locations of areas to be excavated and areas to
be left undisturbed;
(3) Locations of wetlands, water bodies, flood zones and environmentally
sensitive land as defined in subparagraph (e) of the definition of Net
Residential Acreage in Section 104 of this Ordinance;
(4) General description of the extraction methods, amount of extraction,
shipping procedures and land reclamation.
(5) Description of visual impact on abutting residential properties of the
extraction operation and methods of screening the view of the operation
from surrounding properties;
(6) Explanation of how the project will meet the standards listed in Section
509 G.
5. On the initiative of a person requesting an amendment or change (“petitioner”) or at the
request of the Planning Board, Project Review Board or the Town Council, a proposed
amendment or change may be based upon, and the amendment or change conditioned
upon and limited to, development of the affected property in accordance with a site plan
drawn in accordance with the Site Plan Review requirements; and the property shall not
be rezoned unless the petitioner has posted a performance bond equal to at least 25% of
the estimated cost of the development. The bond shall become payable to the
municipality if the petitioner fails to begin construction in a substantial manner within
two years of the effective date of the rezoning or fails to construct the project in
accordance with the final site plan approved by the Project Review Board, except that the
Town Council, upon a showing by the petitioner that due to extenuating circumstances
beyond the petitioner’s control, it is no longer economically or technically feasible to
construct the development, may waive payment and release the bond. If an amendment or
change under this paragraph 5 is finally approved by the Town Council, no changes or
alterations in the site plan shall be made without resubmitting the proposed changes for
approval by the Project Review Board.
Nothing in this paragraph 5 limits the authority of the Planning Board to consider and
make a recommendation regarding a proposed amendment or change which is submitted
without a site plan.
Nothing in this paragraph 5 limits the authority of the Town Council to consider and act
upon a proposed amendment or change which is submitted without a site plan.
Nothing in this paragraph 5 limits the ability of a petitioner to decline a request from the
Planning Board or the Town Council to condition the amendment or change on
development in accordance with a site plan, or to request a change or amendment not so
conditioned.
Nothing in this paragraph 5 prohibits a petitioner from submitting or the Planning Board
or Town Council from requesting the submission of conceptual plans not drawn in
accordance with the Site Plan Review requirements either as preliminary plans in
anticipation of a change or amendment conditioned upon development in accordance
- 45 -
with a site plan or as illustrative materials in support of a change or amendment not so
conditioned.
6. The Planning Board shall review all requests for amendments or changes and make its
recommendations to the Town Council regarding the land use implications of the request.
If the Planning Board has made recommendations on a proposed amendment or change
which is not conditioned upon and limited to development in accordance with a site plan
under paragraph 5 and the Town Council then requests that the proposal be so
conditioned and limited, the site plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board for its
recommendations before the Council takes final action on the proposed amendment or
change.
7. If the provisions of the Shoreland Zone are amended, copies of amendments, attested and
signed by the Town Clerk, shall be submitted to the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection following adoption by the Town Council and shall not be
effective unless approved by the Commissioner. If the Commissioner fails to act on any
amendment within forty-five (45) days of his/her receipt of the amendment, the
amendment is automatically approved. Any application for a permit submitted to the
Town within the forty-five (45) day period shall be governed by the terms of the
amendment, if such amendment is approved by the Commissioner.
If amendments are made in the Shoreland Zone boundaries, such changes shall be made
on the Official Zoning Maps within thirty (30) days after the amendment has been
approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection.
8. The Federal Insurance Administration and the State Coordinating Office shall be notified
before Flood Plain Management Regulations are amended based upon modified data
reflecting natural or man-made changes.
Section 204 Contract Zoning
204.1 Authority and purpose
Pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A., Section 4352, contract zoning is hereby authorized for
rezoning of property by the Town Council where, for reasons such as the unusual nature or
the unique location of a proposed development, the Town Council finds it appropriate and
in the best interest of the town to rezone the property by agreement with the property
owner. In such cases, the Town Council shall impose conditions or restrictions in order to
ensure that the rezoning is consistent with the town’s Comprehensive Plan, compatible with
the existing uses in the zone and with the other allowed uses in the zone. Nothing in this
section shall authorize an agreement which is inconsistent with the Town’s Comprehensive
Plan.
204.2 Applicability
- 46 -
Contract zoning is authorized in the following zoning districts only; Village Commercial 1
(VC-1), Village Commercial 2 (VC-2), Village Commercial 3 (VC-3), Village Commercial
4 (VC-4), Village Mixed Use 1 (VMU1), Village Mixed Use 2 (VMU 2), Industrial 1 (I-1),
Industrial 2 (I-2), Commercial 1 (C-1), Commercial 2 (C-2), Commercial 3 (C-3), and
Commercial 4 (C-4).
204.3 Notice and hearing
a. The Town Council shall conduct a public hearing as governed by Section 2.13 of the
Charter of the Town of Freeport prior to referring an application to the Project
Review Board. The purpose of this public hearing is for the Council to determine if
the proposed application is an appropriate use of contract zoning. In determining if
an application is an appropriate use of contract zoning the Council shall consider
factors such as, but not limited to, its sensitivity to the environment, its compatibility
with the surrounding properties or the ability to adequately buffer the project from
surrounding properties, it will not create an adverse traffic or circulation impact, and
the appropriate parts of the land are being developed and are being left in their natural
state.
b. Before a recommendation is made by the Project Review Board, the Planning Board
shall review requests for contract zoning and shall provide advisory comments to the
Project Review Board.
c. The Project Review Board shall conduct a public hearing prior to making a
recommendation to the Town Council on the request for contract zoning. Notice of
the hearing shall be:
i) posted in the town clerk’s office at least thirteen (13) days prior to the public
hearing,
ii) published in a newspaper of general circulation within the town at least two
(2) times, the date of the first publication to be at least seven (7) days prior to
the hearing, and
iii) mailed to the owner or owners of the property to be rezoned and to the
owners of all property within 900’ of the property to be rezoned at their last
known address. This notice shall contain a copy of the proposed conditions
and restrictions, with a map indicating the property to be rezoned.
d. Town Council procedure is governed by Section 2.13 of the Charter of the Town of
Freeport.
e. Notice also must be sent to a public drinking water supplier if the area to be rezoned
is within its source water protection area or if the area is within the water district
service area.
f. Notice also must be sent to the sewer district if the area is within the sewer district
service area.
204.4 Conditions and restrictions
- 47 -
Any zone change adopted pursuant to this section shall be subject to a contractual
agreement executed by authorized representatives of both the property owner and the
Town, providing for the implementation and enforcement of the conditions of the
agreement. Conditions may be met on the site or off the site. Conditions and restrictions
shall only relate to the physical development and operation of the development, such as,
but not limited to:
a. limitations on the number and type of uses allowed on the property;
b. the height and lot coverage of any structure;
c. the setback of any structure;
d. the installation, operation and maintenance of physical improvements such as
parking lots, traffic control devices, fencing, shrubbery and screening;
e. the creation of open space areas, public areas, or buffer zones;
f. the dedication of property for public purposes, such as streets, parks, utility systems;
and conservation easements;
g. the required number of parking spaces, not applicable in the VC-1 district, and/or
h. expansions of grandfathered (e.g., legal) non-conforming uses
204.5 Procedures
Applications for contract zoning shall also be subject to the provisions of Section 203.A,
subsections 1, 2, 4 and 7.
Adopted May 15, 2007, effective as of March 4, 2008 when the Town Council adopted
standards for contract zoning applications.
- 48 -
ARTICLE III
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 301. Zoning Districts
For purposes of this Ordinance the Town of Freeport is hereby divided into zoning districts:
Rural Residential District I “RR-I”
Rural Residential District IA “RR-IA”
Rural Residential District II “RR-II”
Medium Density Residential District I “MDR-I”
Medium Density Residential District II “MDR-II”
Medium Density District “MD”
Village District I “V-I”
Village District I-R “V-IR”
Village District II “V-II”
Commercial District I “C-I”
Commercial District III “C-III”
Commercial District IV "C-IV
Village Commercial District I “VC-I”
Village Commercial District II “VC-II”
Village Commercial District III “VC-III”
Village Commercial District IV “VC-IV”
Village Mixed Use District I “VMU-I”
Village Mixed Use District II “VMU-II”
Local Business District “L-B”
Industrial District I “I-I”
Industrial District II “I-II”
Marine Waterfront District “MW”
Resource Protection District I "RP-I”
Resource Protection District II “RP-II”
Island District “ID”
Mining & Extracting Overlay District “MEOD”
Freeport Village Overlay District “FVOD”
Section 302. Zoning Map
The Zoning Districts and Shoreland Zone of the Town are shown on a map entitled “Town of
Freeport, Official Zoning Map”, digital copy adopted February 26, 2013, by the Freeport Town
Council and certified by the Town Clerk, which accompanies and which, with all explanatory matter
thereon, is hereby made a part of this Ordinance.
- 49 -
Field verification of any distance indicated on the map from the normal high-water line of the water
body or the upland edge of the wetland or the 100-year flood plains when associated with rivers and
adjacent to tidal waters in the Shoreland Zone is required to determine the actual boundary of the
zone.
Regardless of the existence of other printed copies of the zoning map which from time to time may
be made or published, the official zoning map filed in the municipal office of the Town shall be the
final authority as to the current zoning status of the land and water areas, buildings and other
structures in the Town.
Before the Planning Board recommends changes to the Zoning Map, the Codes Enforcement Officer
shall notify, by mail, those property owners, as determined by the Planning Board, who would be
affected by such a change.
Section 303. Zoning District Boundaries
A. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundary of any district as shown on the Town of
Freeport Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Where district boundaries are so indicated as to approximately follow lot lines, such lot
lines shall be construed to be such district boundaries;
(2) Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the center lines of
roads, streets, highways, streams, rivers or other public/semi-public rights of way, such
center lines shall be construed to be such boundaries;
(3) Where uncertainty exists in determining the precise location of any district boundary line,
the Zoning Board of Appeals, shall interpret the intent and purpose of the zoning map.
Section 304. Map Corrections - Shoreland Zone and Resource Protection District
RP-1
Any person owning a parcel of land which is shown within the Shoreland Zone or the Resource
Protection District, RP-1 on the Town of Freeport Zoning Map, may apply to the Planning Board for
a map correction for his/her parcel. The Planning Board shall process the application using the
public hearing procedures described in Section 602.C.1.c.4.c of this Ordinance and the Planning
Board may recommend to the Town Council reimbursement of up to one-half of the cost of any
professional studies required for the determination. In making its decision, the Planning Board may
consider evidence from a Maine certified soil scientist, a Maine certified geologist, a Maine licensed
land surveyor, biologist, or other person with relevant training and experience.
If the Planning Board determines that the applicant’s land or any portion of the applicant’s land was
incorrectly included in the Shoreland Zone or in the Resource Protection District, RP-1, the Planning
Board shall issue a “Notice of Map Correction” finding that the applicant’s property or some
- 50 -
specifically described portion of the applicant’s property was incorrectly mapped. If the map
correction eliminates the applicant’s land or any portion thereof from the Resource Protection
District, RP-1, the affected land shall be governed by the regulations applicable in the zoning
district which abuts the affected land (or, if there is more than one abutting zoning district, by the
regulations applicable in the most restrictive abutting zoning district). The Notice of Map
Correction shall be recorded in the office of the Town Clerk and may be recorded by the applicant in
the registry of deeds.
A map correction under this Section 304 shall constitute administrative action by the Planning Board
and shall not constitute a rezoning or an amendment to the Town of Freeport Zoning Map or the
Town of Freeport Zoning Ordinance and shall not require action by the Town Council. Map
corrections do require review and approval by the Department of Environmental Protection.
However, any corrections established by a map correction under this Section 304 shall be
incorporated into any subsequent amendments of the Town of Freeport Zoning Map.
- 51 -
ARTICLE IV
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 401. Purpose and Land Use Controls
The following tables state the purpose and land use regulations for each of the zoning districts of this
Ordinance. Except as otherwise provided in Section 202 (Nonconformance), any structure or land
that hereafter is used or occupied, and any structure or portion thereof that is erected, moved,
constructed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, or altered shall be in conformity with the regulations
herein specified for the zoning district in which it is located and the general use regulations of this
Ordinance.
Section 402. Rural Residential District I “RR-I” and Rural Residential District IA
“RR-IA”
I. RR-I
A. Purpose: The Rural Residential District I is the most open and rural area in town and
extends generally beyond the area of Freeport that is serviced by public water and sewer. It is
intended that open space, agricultural and low-density residential uses be encouraged, in that
they tend to enhance, reinforce, and protect the rural, open space atmosphere now characterizing
much of the Town.
B. The following are permitted Uses:
1. Single Family Dwelling
2. Two-Family Dwelling
3. Mobile Home
4. Agriculture {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
5. Agritourism Activity {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
6. Timber Harvesting
The following uses are subject to subdivision review
7. Open Space Subdivisions for single family and two family dwellings
8. Expanded Open Space Subdivisions for single family and two family dwellings
9. Large Lot Subdivisions for single family and two family dwellings;
- 52 -
The following uses are subject to site review regardless of size:
10. Municipal Facility
11. Commercial Recreation, Outdoor
12. Public Utilities
13. Campgrounds
14. Religious Institution
15. Public or Private School
16. Outdoor Recreation School up to 5,000 square feet of gross floor area or up to 5,000
square feet total gross square footage of all buildings on any parcel. The lot size must be
at least 5 acres.
17. Cemeteries
18. Nursing Homes which may include congregate care multi-family units
19. Private Assembly
20. Bed and Breakfast Inn
21. Day Care Center Facilities
22. Wireless Telecommunication Facility only if the base of any on-site tower is located at
or above elevation 240 feet above mean sea level (See Sec. 528).
23. Parking area for open space {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
The following use is subject to a Coastal Waters Commission permit as described in Section 507.R.
24. Aquaculture
C. Space Standards for Lots Which Are Not Within Subdivisions as Listed in D Below:
1. Minimum lot size: 2.5 acres
2. Minimum road frontage: 200 feet
3. Maximum building height: 35 feet
4. Minimum setback- front: 50 feet
side: 50 feet
rear: 75 feet
shore: 75 feet
5. Minimum land area per dwelling unit: 1 .5 acres
6. Minimum shore frontage: See Section 507
7. Minimum lot width: 150 feet
8. Maximum Height - Wireless Telecommunication Facility (single user): 100 feet
Wireless Telecommunication Facility (co-located): 150feet
D. Space Standards for Lot in Subdivisions approved after April 9, 2002
1. Open Space Subdivisions requirements
A. Net residential density, single family: 1 unit per 2.5 acres of
net residential acreage
- 53 -
B. Net residential density, per dwelling unit, two-family dwelling:
1 unit per 1.5 acres of
of net residential acreage
C. Minimum lot size, single family: 20,000 s.f.
D. Average lot size for single family: not less than 1 acre
E. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit, two-family: 20,000 sq. feet
F. Average lot area per dwelling, two-family: not less than 30,000 sq. feet
2. Expanded Open Space Subdivisions requirements
A. Net residential density, single family: 1 unit per 2.1 acres of
net residential acreage
B. Net residential density per dwelling unit, two-family dwelling: 1 unit per
1.25 acres of net residential acreage
C. Minimum lot size, single family: 20,000 square feet
D. Average lot size, single family: not less than 25,000 sq. ft.
E. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit, two-family dwelling: 10,000 square feet
F. Average lot area per dwelling unit, two-family dwelling:
not less than 15,000 sq. ft.
3. Large Lot Subdivisions requirements
A. Net residential density, single family: 1 unit per 5 acres of
net residential acreage
B. Net residential density per dwelling unit, two-family dwelling: 1 unit per
3acres of net residential acreage
C. Large lot subdivision minimum lot size, single family: 5 acres
D. Large lot subdivision minimum lot size per dwelling unit, two-family
dwelling: 3 acres
E. Bulk Standards for Lot in Subdivisions approved after April 9, 2002
1. Minimum road frontage and lot width, open space and expanded open space
Subdivisions: 50 feet
2. Average road frontage and lot width, open space and expanded open space subdivisions:
not less than 80 feet
3. Minimum road frontage large lot subdivisions: 200 feet
4. Minimum lot width large lot subdivisions: 150 feet
5. Minimum setback for open space and expanded open space subdivisions
front: 25 feet
rear: 40 feet
side: 10 feet
combined side: 40 feet
6. Minimum setback for large lot subdivisions
front: 50 feet
rear: 75 feet
- 54 -
side: 50 feet
7. Maximum building height: 35 feet
8. Minimum shore frontage: See Section 507
F. Other Standards:
1. Parcels within the Shoreland Zone shall meet the requirements of Section 507
2. For the purposes of this section, a shed is defined as a structure that is no greater than 200
square feet with a building height of no more than 12 feet and that is used soley for the
storage of property, not shelter for animals, people, or passenger vehicles. Sheds as
defined in this section have a minimum side and rear setback requirement of 25 feet.
{Amended, Effective 08/04/15}
II. RR-IA
A. Purpose: The Rural Residential District I has in it, in limited areas along well-traveled roads or at
intersections, areas where historically and traditionally dispersed small businesses have been
located on property which is also the primary residence of the business owner. These rural uses
are more intense than Home Occupations but less intense and limited than other commercial and
industrial uses. They are a part of the rural character and diversity of housing types which the
Comprehensive Plan seeks to protect. These areas are sub-districts of RR-I and are Rural
Residential District IA or “RR-IA”. Except as provided herein, RR-IA shall in all other respects
be treated as RR-I.
The purpose is to restrict the RR-IA Zone to areas of the Town of Freeport in which a number of
businesses, not home occupations, had been and were in existence on the well-traveled ways for
which the zone has been established.
B. Permitted Uses:
1. All uses listed in Section 402.I.B. as permitted and all permitted uses subject
to site plan review regardless of size;
2. In addition, the following uses are permitted and subject to site plan review regardless of
size:
a. The following uses are permitted only when the owner of the property on which
the use is located uses the property as the owner’s primary residence and is also
the majority owner of the following permitted small business use located on the
property:
(1) Auto repair service garage;
(2) Auto sales, used;
(3) Landscaping;
(4) Arboriculture.
- 55 -
C. Space Standards:
Space standards shall be the same as those required for the RR-I District (Sec. 402.I.C.) except
that the minimum lot size shall be the total of the minimum required for the residential use of the
property plus a minimum of one acre for the uses listed in Sec. 402.II.B. above.
D. Other Standards Applicable only to uses listed in Sec. 402.II.B.2. above.
1. Non-Conformance: As used in this Subsection 1 and except as otherwise indicated, the
words “existing”, “non-conforming”, “legally”, “illegal” and “illegally” shall be applied
as of August 21, 1991, and the word “use” shall mean any of the uses listed in Section
402.II.B.2. An existing legally non-conforming use shall not require site plan review in
order to continue. An existing legally non-conforming use which is proposed to expand
shall require site plan review only for the expansion. An existing use, a portion of which
is legally non-conforming and a portion of which has expanded illegally prior to August
21, 1991, shall require site plan review only for the illegal expansion. An illegally
existing use shall require site plan review for the entire existing use as well as the any
proposed expansion.
2. Except for non-conforming uses or expansions which are exempt from site plan review
under Subsection 1 above, all uses listed in Section 402.II.B.2. are subject to the
following standards:
a. Setbacks: No exterior storage of materials, commercial vehicles used by the
business, parking areas or any other exterior indications of the business use shall
be permitted in any setback except that plantings rooted in the ground shall be
permitted in the side and rear setbacks. In the front setback, in a strip extending
along the entire frontage, for a depth of a minimum of fifty (50) feet, except for
accessways, landscaping is required.
b. Buffering: Buffers shall be provided in the setbacks at the district boundaries,
where required. In addition, except as permitted in Section 402.II.D.2.a., buffers
are required in the side and rear setbacks of each lot and shall meet the standards
listed in Sec. 506.A, B, C and D.
c. The performance standards of Article V, where applicable, shall be met.
Objectionable conditions such as, but not limited to, noise, smoke, dust, odors or
glare shall not be generated by any use, including those otherwise exempt from
these standards under Subsection 1 above.
d. In addition to the residents of the dwelling unit, no more than two full-time
employees or combination of full-time and part-time employees or a number of
part-time employees equivalent to the time worked by two full-time employees (a
maximum of 80 hours per week) may be employed by the business use and no
more than a total of five employees shall be on the site at any one time.
e. Size Limitations: The area used by the business shall not occupy more than fifty
percent (50%) or 20,000 square feet of the land area of the parcel, whichever is
less. Included in this business occupancy area calculation shall be all the primary,
accessory, and secondary structures, storage areas, display areas, parking areas
- 56 -
and accessory uses areas related to the business activity. Excluded from this
business occupancy area calculation shall be all of the residential uses and uses
accessory to the residential uses, open space, personal use areas, and all setbacks
except for business use accessways.
f. The owner of any existing use as defined in Section 402.II.D.1. must register with
the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) within sixty (60) days of the effective date
of the RR-IA zoning of the parcel on which the use is located. The registration
shall describe and calculate the existing business occupancy area as defined in
Section 402.II.D.2.e. The CEO shall verify the calculation within thirty (30) days
of the registration. This calculation shall be used thereafter for determining the
extent of any expansion. Failure to register shall cause any existing use to
become a new use and it must receive Project Review Board site review and
approval in order to continue.
3. For the purposes of this section, a shed is defined as a structure that is no greater than 200
square feet with a building height of no more than 12 feet and that is used soley for the
storage of property, not shelter for animals, people, or passenger vehicles. Sheds as
defined in this section have a minimum side and rear setback requirement of 25 feet.
{Amended, Effective 08/04/15}
Section 403. Rural Residential District II “RR-II”
A. Purpose:
The Rural Residential District II is similar to the RR-I District. It is generally rural and
underdeveloped and contains poor soils and some steep slopes which are constraints on
development. Its unique characteristic is that it comprises most of the Harraseeket Historic
District. The uses permitted within it are, therefore, limited to those which are compatible with
its historic and rural qualities.
B. The following are permitted Uses:
1. Single Family Dwelling
2. Two-Family Dwelling
3. Agriculture {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
4. Agritourism Activity {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
5. Timber Harvesting
The following uses are subject to subdivision review
6. Open Space Subdivisions for single family and two family dwellings,
7. Expanded Open Space Subdivisions for single family and two family dwellings
8. Large Lot Subdivisions for single family and two family dwellings;
The following uses are subject to site review regardless of size:
- 57 -
9. Municipal Facility
10. Public Utilities
11. Campgrounds
12. Religious Institution
13. Public or Private School
14. Outdoor Recreation School up to 5,000 square feet of gross floor area or up to 5,000
square feet total gross square footage of all buildings on any parcel. The lot size must be
at least 5 acres.
15. Cemeteries
16. Nursing Home with a maximum of 20 beds
17. Private Assembly
18. Bed and Breakfast Inn
19. Parking area for open space {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
The following use is subject to a Coastal Waters Commission permit as described in Section 507.R.
20. Aquaculture
C. Space Standards for Lots Which Are Not Within Subdivisions as Listed in D Below:
1. Minimum lot size: 2.5 acres
2. Minimum road frontage: 200 feet
3. Maximum building height: 35 feet
4. Minimum setback - front: 50 feet
side: 50 feet
rear: 75 feet
shore: 75 feet
5. Minimum land area per dwelling unit: 2 acres
6. Minimum shore frontage: See Section 507
7. Minimum lot width: 150 feet
D. Space Standards for Lot in Subdivisions approved after April 9, 2002
1. Open Space Subdivisions requirements
A. Net residential density, single family: 1 unit per 2.5 acres of
net residential acreage
B. Net residential density per dwelling unit, two-family dwelling: 1 unit per 2 acres
of net residential acreage
C. Minimum lot size, single-family: 20,000 sq. ft.
D. Average Lot Size Single Family: not less than 1 acre
E. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit, two-family dwelling: 15,000 sq. ft.
F. Average lot area per dwelling unit, two family dwelling:
not less than 30,000 sq. ft.
- 58 -
2. Expanded Open Space Subdivisions requirements
A. Net residential density, single family: 1 unit per 2.l acres of
net residential acreage
B. Net residential density per dwelling unit, two-family dwelling: 1 unit per 1.75
acres of net residential acreage
C. Minimum lot size, single family: 20,000 square feet
D. Average lot size, single family: not less than 25,000 sq. ft.
E. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit, two-family dwelling: 15,000 square feet
F. Average lot area per dwelling unit, two family dwelling:
not less than 20,000 sq. ft.
3. Large Lot Subdivisions requirements
A. Net residential density, single family: 1 unit per 5 acres of
net residential acreage
B. Net residential density per dwelling unit, two-family dwelling: 1 unit per 4 acres
of net residential acreage
C. Large lot subdivision minimum lot size, single family: 5 acres
D. Large lot subdivision minimum lot size per dwelling unit, two-family dwelling:
4 acres
E. Bulk Standards for Lot in Subdivisions approved after April 9, 2002
1. Minimum road frontage and lot width, open space and expanded open space
subdivisions:
50 feet
4. Average road frontage and lot width, open space and expanded open space subdivisions:
Not less than 80 feet
5. Minimum road frontage large lot subdivisions: 200 feet
6. Minimum lot width large lot subdivisions: 150 feet
5. Minimum setback for open space and expanded open space subdivisions
front: 25 feet
rear: 40 feet
side: 10 feet
combined side: 40 feet
6. Minimum setback for large lot subdivisions
front: 50 feet
rear: 75 feet
side: 50 feet
7. Maximum building height: 35 feet
8. Minimum shore frontage: See Section 507
F. Other Standards:
1. Parcels within the Shoreland Zone shall meet the requirements of Section 507
- 59 -
2. For the purposes of this section, a shed is defined as a structure that is no greater than 200
square feet with a building height of no more than 12 feet and that is used soley for the
storage of property, not shelter for animals, people, or passenger vehicles. Sheds as
defined in this section have a minimum side and rear setback requirement of 25 feet.
{Amended, Effective 08/04/15}
Section 404. Medium Density Residential District I “MDR-I”
A. Purpose:
It is the intent of this district to provide for locations where a diversity of residential housing
types is permitted at a higher density than in the rural districts. Since public water and sewer are
not available, densities are set at the maximum which would be compatible with on-site facilities.
B. The following are permitted Uses:
1. Single Family Dwelling
2. Two-Family Dwelling
3. Mobile Home
4. Agriculture {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
5. Agritourism Activity {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
6. Timber Harvesting
The following uses are subject to subdivision review
6. Open Space Subdivisions for single dwellings, two family, and multiple family dwellings
7. Expanded Open Space Subdivisions for single family, two family, and multiple family
dwellings
8. Large Lot Subdivisions for single family, two family, and multiple family dwellings;
The following uses are subject to site review regardless of size:
9. Municipal Facility
10. Multiple Family Dwelling - Maximum of 6 units per building
11. Public Utilities
12. Religious Institution
13. Public or Private School
14. Outdoor Recreation School up to 5,000 square feet of gross floor area or up
to 5,000 square feet total gross square footage of all buildings on any parcel.
The lot size must be at least 100,000 s.f.
15. Bed and Breakfast Inn
16. Expansion of existing mobile home park subject to the requirements of
Article V, Sec. 524.
- 60 -
17. Wireless Telecommunication Facility (See Sec. 528)
18. Parking area for open space {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
C. Space Standards for Lots Which Are Not Within Subdivisions as Listed in D Below:
1. Minimum lot size: 50,000 s.f.
2. Minimum road frontage: 150 feet
3. Maximum building height: 35 feet
4. Minimum setback front: 30 feet
side: 20 feet
rear: 30 feet
shore: 75 feet
5. Minimum land area per dwelling unit: 30,000 s.f.
6. Minimum shore frontage: See Section 507
7. Minimum lot width: 100 feet
8. Maximum Height B Wireless Telecommunication Facility
(single user): 100 feet.
Wireless Telecommunication Facility, Co-located: 150 feet.
D. Space Standards for Lot in Subdivisions approved after April 9, 2002
1. Open Space Subdivisions requirements
A. Net residential density, single family: 1 unit per 50,000 square feet of net
residential acreage
B. Net residential density, per dwelling unit, two family, and multiple family
dwellings: 1 unit per 30,000 square feet of net residential acreage
C. Minimum lot size, single family: 20,000 square feet
D. Average lot size, single family: not less than 25,000 square feet
E. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit, two family, and multiple family dwellings:
10,000 square feet
F. Average lot area per dwelling unit, two family and multiple family dwellings:
not less than 15,000 square feet
2. Expanded Open Space Subdivisions requirements
A. Net residential density, single family: 1 unit per 1 acre of net residential acreage
B. Net residential density, per dwelling unit, two family, and multiple family
dwellings: 1 unit per 25,500 square feet of net residential acreage
C. Minimum lot size, single family, if connected to public sewer:
12,000 square feet
D. Average lot size single family, if connected to public sewer: 17,000 square feet
E. Minimum lot size, single family, if not connected to public sewer:
20,000 square feet
F. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit, two family, and multiple family dwellings if
connected to public sewer: 10,000 square feet
- 61 -
3. Large Lot Subdivisions requirements
A. Net residential density, single family: 1 unit per 100,000 square feet
of net residential acreage
B. Net residential density, per dwelling unit, two family, and multiple family
dwellings: 1 unit per 60,000 square feet
C. Large lot subdivision minimum lot size, single family: 100,000 square feet
D. Large lot subdivision minimum lot size per dwelling unit, two family, and
multiple family dwellings: 60,000 square feet
E. Bulk Standards for Lot in Subdivisions approved after April 9, 2002
1. Minimum road frontage and lot width, open space and expanded open space subdivisions
45 feet
2. Average road frontage and lot width, open space and expanded open space subdivisions:
not less than 60 feet
3. Minimum road frontage, large lot subdivisions: 150 feet
4. Minimum lot width, large lot subdivisions: 100 feet
5. Minimum setback for open space and expanded open space subdivisions
front: 20 feet
rear: 25 feet
side: 10 feet
combined side: 30 feet
6. Minimum setback for large lot subdivisions
front: 30 feet
rear: 30 feet
side: 20 feet
7. Maximum building height: 35 feet
8. Minimum shore frontage: See Section 507
F. Other Standards:
1. Parcels within the Shoreland Zone shall meet the requirements of Section 507
- 62 -
Section 405. Medium Density Residential District II “MDR-II”
A. Purpose:
It is the intent of this District to permit a denser pattern of residential development than in the
rural district. Because of the historic nature of some of the areas located in this District, mobile
homes are not permitted. Large road frontages along major roads are required in order to limit
the number of access points and retain a more rural atmosphere.
B. Permitted Uses:
1. Single Family Dwelling
2. Two-Family Dwelling
3. Agriculture {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
4. Agritourism Activity {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
5. Timber Harvesting
The following uses are subject to subdivision review
5. Open Space Subdivisions for single family, two family, and multiple family dwellings.
Two family and multiple family dwelling units must be connected to the public water
system.
6. Expanded Open Space Subdivisions for single family, two family, and multiple family
dwellings,
7. Large Lot Subdivisions for single family, two family, and multiple family dwellings;
The following uses are subject to site review regardless of size:
8. Municipal Facility
9. Multiple Family Dwelling - Maximum of 6 units per building
10. Public Utilities
11. Religious Institution
12. Bed & Breakfast Inn
13. Public or Private School
14. Outdoor Recreation School up to 5,000 square feet of gross floor area or up to 5,000
square feet total gross square footage of all buildings on any parcel. The lot size must be
at least100,000 s.f.
15. Wireless Telecommunication Facility (see Sec. 528)
16. Parking area for open space {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
C. Space Standards for Lots Which Are Not Within Subdivisions as Listed in D Below:
1. Minimum lot size: 50,000 s.f.
2. Minimum road frontage: 150 feet
3. Maximum building height: 35 feet
- 63 -
4. Minimum setback front: 30 feet
side: 20 feet
rear: 30 feet
shore: 75 feet
5. Minimum land area per dwelling unit: 30,000 s.f.
6. Minimum shore frontage: See Section 507
7. Minimum lot width: 100 feet
8. Maximum Height B Wireless
Telecommunication Facility (single user): 100 feet
Wireless Telecommunication Facility, Co-located: 150 feet.
D. Space Standards for Lot in Subdivisions approved after April 9, 2002
1. Open Space Subdivisions requirements
A. Net residential density, single family: 1 unit per 50,000 square feet
of net residential acreage
B. Net residential density, per dwelling unit, two family, and multiple family
dwellings: 1 unit per 30,000 square feet
of net residential acreage
C. Minimum lot size, single family: 20,000 square feet
D. Average lot size, single family: not less than 25,000 square feet
E. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit, two family, and multiple family dwellings:
10,000 square feet
F. Average lot area per dwelling unit, two family, and multiple family dwellings:
not less than 15,000 square feet
2. Expanded Open Space Subdivisions requirements
A. Must be connected to the public sewer system
B. Net residential density, single family: 1 unit per 1 acre of
net residential acreage
C. Net residential density, per dwelling unit, two family, and multiple family
dwellings: 1 unit per 25,000 square feet of
net residential acreage
D. Minimum lot size, single family: 12,000 square feet
E. Average lot size, single family: not less than 17,000 square feet
F. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit, two family, and multiple family dwellings:
7,500 square feet
G. Average lot area per dwelling unit, two family, and multiple family dwellings,
Not less than 10,000 sq. ft.
Please consult the Freeport Village Design Standards for
additional standards that may apply.
- 64 -
3. Large Lot Subdivisions requirements
A. Net residential density, single family: 1 unit per 100,000 square feet
of net residential acreage
B. Net residential density, per unit, two family, and multiple family dwellings:
1 unit per 60,000 square feet
C. Large Lot subdivision minimum lot size, single family: 100,000 square feet
D. Large Lot subdivision minimum lot size per dwelling unit, two family, and
multiple family dwellings: 60,000 square feet
E. Bulk Standards for Lot in Subdivisions approved after April 9, 2002
1. Minimum road frontage and lot width, open space and expanded open space
subdivisions: 50 feet
2. Average road frontage and lot width, open space and expanded open space subdivisions:
Not less than 75’
3. Minimum road frontage, large lot subdivisions: 150 feet
4. Minimum lot width, large lot subdivisions: 100 feet
5. Minimum setback for open space and expanded open space subdivisions
front: 20 feet
rear: 25 feet
side: 10 feet
combined side: 30 feet
6. Minimum setback for large lot subdivisions
front: 30 feet
rear: 30 feet
side: 20 feet
7. Maximum building height: 35 feet
8. Minimum shore frontage: See Section 507
F. Other Standards:
1. Parcels within the Shoreland Zone shall meet the requirements of Section 507.
- 65 -
Section 406. Medium Density Districts - “MD-A and MD-B”
{Amended, Effective 01/07/14}
A. Purpose:
It is the intent of this District to maintain the present balance between residential and limited
business uses in an area which includes some moderately densely developed areas containing
structures of historical significance in sections which are more rural in nature. Route 1 is the
major roadway in this District and extends from the Village to the Town of Brunswick border.
Provisions below are intended to allow a mix of residential and commercial uses while protecting
the neighborhoods and residential properties.
B. Permitted Uses: {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
1. Single Family Dwelling
2. Two-Family Dwelling
3. Mobile Home
4. Agriculture {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
5. Agritourism Activity {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
6. Timber Harvesting
7. Peddler on Private Property subject to the requirements of Section 526.
The following uses are subject to subdivision review:
8. Open Space Subdivisions for single family, two family dwellings, and multiple family
dwelling,
9. Expanded Open Space Subdivisions for single family, two family, and multiple family
dwellings,
10. Large Lot Subdivisions for single family, two family, and multiple family dwellings;
The following uses are subject to site review regardless of size:
11. Municipal Facility
12. Multiple Family Dwelling
13. Hotel/Motel - Maximum of 30 units including retail trade as an accessory use up to
1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
14. Commercial Recreation - Outdoor
15. Commercial Recreation - Indoor
16. Public Utilities
17. Business and Professional Office
18. Hospital
19. Nursing Home and/or Residential Health Care Facility
20. Religious Institution
21. Public or Private School
22. Commercial School
- 66 -
23. Outdoor Recreation School up to 5,000 square feet of gross floor area or up to 5,000
square feet total gross square footage of all buildings on any parcel. The lot size must be
at least 100,000 s.f. in MD-A, 80,000 s.f. in MD-B without public water and sewer, and
40,000 s.f. in MD-B with public water and sewer.
24. Cemeteries
25. Private Assembly
26. Bed and Breakfast Inn
27. Convenience Store limited to a maximum of 2500 sq. ft. of gross floor area
28. Junkyard existing as of May 11, 1999
29. Mobile Home Park subject to the requirements of Article V, Sec. 524
30. Day Care Center Facilities
31. Wireless Telecommunication Facility (see Sec 528)
32. Auto Repair Service Garage up to 2,500 square feet of building footprint and up to 5,000
square feet of outdoor vehicle storage area. Auto sales may occur on the premises with
no limitation on the percentage of the above building and storage area used as long as
an auto repair service garage is operated on the premises within the enclosed building.
33. Construction services
34. Campgrounds
35. Art Gallery/Museum up to 2,500 square feet of building footprint
36. Manufacturing and processing and research and development facilities up to 10,000
square feet of gross floor area of building with up to 5,000 square feet of outdoor
storage area. The type of items to be stored outdoors must be approved by the Project
Review Board.
37. Restaurant limited to a maximum of fifty (50) seats.
38. Retail trade up to 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
39. Warehouse and Storage Facility, subject to the following limitations:
(a) On a lot less than three acres, a warehouse and storage facility may contain:
1) No more than one principal building
2) No more than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area
3) No more than 5,000 square feet of outdoor storage area, except that
total outdoor storage area may be increased to no more than 10,000
square feet when the storage includes at least 5,000 square feet of
lumber and wood products.
4) No outdoor storage of any items other than the types of items
approved by the Project Review Board.
(b) On a lot of three acres or more, a warehouse and storage facility may contain:
1) In the MD-A District, one or more principal buildings with a total
gross floor area of no more than 2,500 square feet for the first three
acres plus an additional 2,500 square feet for each additional 50,000
square feet of land area over three acres, up to a total of no more than
10,000 square feet of gross floor area per lot.
- 67 -
2) In the MD-B District, one or more principal buildings with a total
gross floor area of no more than 2,500 square feet for the first three
acres plus an additional 2,500 square feet for each additional 40,000
square feet of land area over three acres, up to a total of no more than
10,000 square feet of gross floor area per lot.
3) No more than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area in any single
building.
4) No greater than 40 feet of separation between any two buildings on
the lot.
5) No more than 10,000 square feet of outdoor storage area.
6) No outdoor storage of any items other than the types of items
approved by the Project Review Board.
40. Parking area for open space {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
41. Artisan Food and Beverage {Effective 12/17/14}
a. food truck(s) as an accessory use is allowed subject to the provisions
of Sec. 526A – Food Trucks
42. Boat Yard {Effective 03/19/19}
C. Space Standards for Lots Which Are Not Within Subdivisions as Listed in D Below:
1. Minimum lot size:
MD-A - 50,000 s.f.
MD-B - 40,000 s.f. without public water & sewer
20,000 s.f. with public water & sewer
2. Minimum road frontage:
Route 1 200 feet
All other roads: 100 feet
3. Maximum building height: 35 feet
4. Minimum setbacks: projects that meet the criteria of Sec. 406.G.4 are eligible for 50%
reduction of the setbacks listed below: {Amended, 03/19/19}
Minor Street:
front: 60 feet
side: 40 feet
rear: 40 feet
U.S. Route 1:
Front: 50 feet
Side: 50 feet
Rear: 50 feet
From residential buildings: In addition to the setback requirements listed above, new
buildings for the uses of auto repair service garage, construction services, manufacturing
and processing, and/or warehouse and storage facility that require Site Plan Review
approval shall not be located any closer than 100 feet from the closest point of a
residential building on an adjacent property. For the purposes of this section, a
residential building means a single family, two-family, multiple family or mobile home,
- 68 -
as well as commercial uses that are either temporary or permanent shelter such as
campgrounds, hotels and motels, and nursing homes.
5. Minimum land area per dwelling unit: 20,000 feet
6. Maximum impervious surface to lot area: 50%
7. Minimum lot width: 75 feet
8. Maximum Height B
Wireless Telecommunication Facility (single user): 100 feet
Wireless Telecommunication Facility, Co-located: 150 feet
D. Space Standards for Lot in Subdivisions approved after April 9, 2002
1. Open Space Subdivisions requirements
A. MD-A net residential density, single family:1 unit per 50,000 square feet of
net residential acreage
B. MD-B net residential density without public water and sewer, single family:
1 unit per 40,000 square feet of net residential acreage
C. MD-B net residential density with public water and sewer, single family:
1 unit per 20,000 square feet of net residential acreage
D. MD-A and MD-B net residential density, per dwelling unit, two family and
multiple family: 1 unit per 20,000 square feet
E. MD-A minimum lot size, single family: 25,000 square feet
F. MD-B minimum lot size, single family if not connected to public water and
sewer: 20,000 square feet
G. MD-B minimum lot size, single family if connected to public water and sewer:
10,000 square feet
H. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit, two family, and multiple family dwellings:
10,000 square feet
2. Expanded Open Space Subdivisions requirements
A. MD-A net residential density, single family: 1 unit per 41,500 square feet
of net residential acreage
B. MD-B net residential density without public water and sewer, single family:
1 unit per 33,000 square feet of net residential acreage
C. MD-B net residential density with public water and sewer, single family:
1 unit per 17,000 square feet of net residential acreage
D. MD-A and MD-B net residential density, per dwelling unit, two family and
multiple family: 1 unit per 17,000 square feet
E. MD-A minimum lot size, single family: 20,000 square feet
F. MD-B minimum lot size, single family if not connected to public water and
sewer: 20,000 square feet
G. MD-B minimum lot size, single family if connected to public water and sewer:
7,000 square feet
- 69 -
H. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit, two family, and multiple family dwellings:
7,000 square feet
3. Large Lot Subdivisions requirements
A. MD-A net residential density, single family: 1 unit per 100,000 square feet
of net residential acreage
B. MD-A net residential density, per dwelling unit, two family, and multiple family
dwellings: 1 unit per 40,000 square feet of net residential acreage
C. MD-B net residential density without public water and sewer, single family:
1 unit per 80,000 square feet of net residential acreage
D. MD-B net residential density without public water and sewer, per dwelling unit,
two family, and multiple family dwellings: 1 unit per 40,000 square feet of net
residential acreage
E. MD-B net residential density with public water and sewer, single family and per
dwelling unit, two family, and multiple family dwellings: 1 unit per 40,000
square feet of net residential acreage
F. MD-A minimum lot size, single family: 100,000 square feet
G. MD-B minimum lot size without public water and sewer, single family:
80,000 square feet
H. MD-B minimum lot size with public water and sewer, single family:
40,000 square feet
I. Minimum land area per dwelling unit, two family, and multiple family dwellings:
40,000 square feet
E. Bulk Standards for Lot in Subdivisions approved after April 9, 2002
1. Minimum road frontage and lot width, open space and expanded open space subdivisions:
75 feet
2. Minimum road frontage, large lot subdivisions: 100 feet
3. Minimum lot width, large lot subdivisions: 75 feet
4. Minimum setback for open space and expanded open space subdivisions
front: 30 feet
rear: 25 feet
side: 10 feet
combined side: 30 feet
5. Minimum setback for large lot subdivisions
front: 60 feet
rear: 40 feet
side: 40 feet
6. Maximum building height: 35 feet
7. Minimum shore frontage: See Section 507
F. Prohibited Uses:
- 70 -
Specifically include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Manufacture, fabrication, disposal or any use of asbestos products
2. Paper Manufacturing
3. Petroleum and petrochemical refining and reprocessing
4. Production of lubrication oils and grease
5. Manufacture of explosives including, but not limited to, ammunition and fireworks
6. Offal or dead animal disposal and reprocessing
7. Abattoirs and slaughterhouses
G. Other Standards:
1. Outdoor storage for home occupation uses is prohibited in the front setback.
2. For all lots other than those with single and two-family uses, the following buffer
requirements shall apply:
Landscaping is required in all front, side and rear setbacks for a minimum depth
of 25 feet. The purpose of the landscaping is to provide a buffer between low
density residential uses and commercial/industrial uses. The Project Review
Board shall determine the type of landscaping to be required and may use the
applicable standards listed in Section 506 (Buffer Zones) below.
3. Minimum outdoor storage standards for non-residential uses are:
a. The storage area shall be fully fenced with an opaque material 5 to 6 feet high.
b. Only materials and/or equipment used in the business shall be stored.
c. Stored materials shall be no higher than the height of the fence.
d. No outdoor storage shall be allowed in any setback areas.
4. A reduction of fifty percent of any setback requirement is allowed if doing so will
increase the distance between an existing residential building and a commercial
building, if environmentally sensitive areas will be avoided, or if a lot shares access
with another commercial building, and /or varying the setback will alter the front
lines of the buildings. {Amended, 03/19/19}
5. All buildings that are subject to Site Plan Review and that are plainly visible from a
public road shall be required to meet the building design standards of this section.
For the purposes of this section, buildings that are screened by a depth that is the
same or more than the front setback requirement of natural, mature vegetation, and/
or another building, and/or a change in elevation or other method as approved by the
Project Review Board are not considered to be visible from the road, These building
may be seen from the road, but they are not considered to be in plain sight.
a. Designs that are characterized by long monotonous unrelieved shape or form
or by the unbroken extension of line for any building are not permitted. Wall
projections, recesses, windows, roof elevation variations and design features
such as moldings, color changes, material changes, signs, awnings, dormers
and so on can be used to break up the visual expanse of a building facing a
public or private road.
a. Efforts should be made to vary the setback of the building on a parcel from
the setback of adjacent buildings to avoid a monotonous, visual building line
along a road. In situations where this is not possible landscaping, parking lot
- 71 -
design and building design are some examples of site features which can be
used to minimize the uniformity of the setback line.
6. Buildings that are subject to Site Plan Review that are not plainly visible as
described in Sec.406.G.5 above shall provide extra attention to the entrance rather
than the building. For example, signs for the business or a simple address sign might
be made of a distinctive material, or decorative plantings, lighting, or art work may
be included. The Project Review Board may base the appropriateness of an entrance
design on the amount of customer recognition that is needed for a business.
7. Non-residential uses are allowed one overhead door on a side of the building visible
from U.S. Route One. The Project Review Board may approve more than one
overhead door on a side of a building visible from Route One if the size and shape of
the lot are such that no other feasible alternative exists or if the building is not
plainly visible from U.S. Route One as described in Sec. 406.G.5.
Section 407. Village I - “V-I”
A. Purpose:
It is the intent of this District to begin the transition from the Village Commercial Districts to the
neighboring residential districts and to encourage a high density of residential development.
B. Permitted Uses:
1. Single Family Dwelling
2. Two-Family Dwelling
The following uses are subject to subdivision review
3. Subdivisions for one-family, two-family, or multiple family dwellings. Any such
subdivision must be designed as a Village Open Space Subdivision.
a. Buildings in existence prior to January 22, 2013 shall not be subject to the
provisions of Section 407.D.2, 4 and 6 below provided the provisions of
section 407.E.4 below are met {Amended, Effective 01/22/13}
The following uses are subject to site review regardless of size:
4. Multi-Family Dwelling
a. Buildings in existence prior to January 22, 2013 shall not be subject to the
provisions of Section 407.C.5 below provided the provisions of section
407.E.4 below are met {Amended, Effective 01/22/13}
5. Religious Institution
6. Public or Private School
a. Athletic field lighting subject to the standards of Sec.521B{Amended, Effective
06/06/17}
7. Commercial School
8. Outdoor Recreation School
9. Municipal Facility
- 72 -
10. Public Utilities
11. Private Assembly
12. Business and Professional Offices:
A minimum 20,000 sq. ft. lot or a nonconforming lot of record may contain one of the
following:
(a) New Structure: Gross floor area of a new structure shall not exceed 4,000 s.f. No
floor shall exceed a maximum of 2,000 s.f. A maximum of 4,000 s.f. of gross
floor area may be used for business and professional offices; or
(b) Existing Structure: A maximum of 5,000 s.f. of gross floor area may be used for
business and professional offices; or
(c) Combined New and Existing Structure: Total gross floor area shall not exceed
4000 sq. ft.
13. Bed and Breakfast Inn
14. Nursing Home
15. Day Care Center Facility
16. Construction Services, provided the use is:
(a) conducted in a building existing on November 17, 1999
(b) engages in no outdoor storage or outdoor parking of commercial vehicles except
for vehicles with load capacity of one ton or less except for loading and
unloading, and
(c) produces no noise, smoke, dust, odors or glare detectable beyond the boundaries
of the lot.
17. Parking area for open space {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
C. Space Standards for Lots Which Are Not Within Subdivisions as Listed in D Below:
1. Minimum lot size, except for lots that meet all of the standards in Sec. 407.E.4 below:
{Amended, Effective 01/22/13} 20,000 s.f.
2. Minimum road frontage: 50 feet
3. Maximum building height: 35 feet
4. Minimum setback front: 25 feet
side: 15 feet
rear: 25 feet
shore: 100 feet
5. Minimum land area per dwelling unit: 5,000 s.f.
D. Space Standards for Lots in Village Open Space Subdivisions approved after August 2, 2005
1. Net residential density; single family - 1 unit per 12,000 s.f. of net residential acreage
2. Net residential density per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family –
1 unit per 3,630 s.f. of net residential acreage
Please consult the Freeport Village Design Standards for
additional standards that may apply.
- 73 -
3. Average lot size for single family – not less than 6,000 s.f.
4. Average lot size area per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family –
not less than 1,800 s.f.
5. Minimum lot size; single family 3,000 s.f.
6. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family - 600 s.f.
7. Minimum road frontage 25 ft.
8. Average road frontage not less than 30 ft.
9. Maximum impervious surface to lot area ratio 80%
E. Other Standards:
1. Parking lots located in the V-I District, which were developed and existing on May 6,
1986, may be used to satisfy the parking requirements for the conversion of a use in the
VC-I District, made non-conforming by the enactment of this Ordinance, to a use
permitted in the VC-I District.
2. Any new construction, addition, or reconstruction in this District are also subject to
the Freeport Village Design Standards as indicated as being applicable in those
Standards.
3. Building height requirements and building setback requirements are included in the
Freeport Village Design Standards.
4. For Section 407.B.4.a, additions to the building are prohibited. Decks, open air
porches, garages used solely for storage and vehicles, and fire escapes necessary to
meet the Life Safety Code are not considered to be additions. The parking
requirements and maximum impervious surface to lot area ratio must be able to be
met on-site. No building may have more than 8 units unless the land area per
dwelling unit requirement can be met. All units must be connected to the public
water and sewer system. To encourage the development of affordable housing for
every three units that are created at least one of those units must be a one-bedroom
or efficiency unit that is no greater than 650 sf. {Amended, Effective 01/22/13} {Amended,
Effective 10/03/17}
5. To allow for a variety of housing types at a variety of prices, lots that are smaller
than the minimum lot size may be created and will be considered conforming lots
provided all of the following provisions are met:
a. The small lot is no less than 5,000 square feet.
b. The remaining lot is no less than 20,000 square feet.
c. Only one small lot may be created per lot of record as of January 22, 2013.
d. The gross floor area of the house and garage on a small lot can be no more
than 1,300 square feet. This does not include covered or uncovered open air
porches, decks, basements or outbuildings that are used solely for storage
such as sheds. This applies to the lifetime of the structure. This requirement
shall be set forth in a deed covenant or other legal instrument that binds the
lot owner and that runs with the land so that future lot owners are also bound
to the same restriction.
e. The house shall meet the minimum front and rear setback requirements as
established in the Freeport Village Design Standards.
f. The side setback requirements shall be as set forth in this section, not the
Freeport Village Design Standards. The side setback requirement that is
- 74 -
adjacent to the lot from which the small lot was created shall have a
minimum setback requirement of 5’and a maximum of 10’. Side lot lines
adjacent to lots other than the one that the small lot was created from shall
have a minimum setback requirement of 15’.
g. The road frontage requirement shall be no less than 50’.
h. Small lots must be connected to the public water and sewer system.
i. The lot may be used for single family houses only.
{Amended, Effective 01/22/13}
Section 407.A Village I-R - “V-IR” {Amended, Effective 03/15/16}
A. Purpose:
It is the intent of this District to begin the transition from the Village Commercial Districts and
Village 1 District to the neighboring residential districts and to encourage a high density of
residential development.
B. Permitted Uses:
1. Single Family Dwelling
2. Two-Family Dwelling
The following uses are subject to subdivision review
3. Subdivisions for one-family, two-family, or multiple family dwellings. Any such
subdivision must be designed as a Village Open Space Subdivision.
b. Buildings in existence prior to January 22, 2013 shall not be subject to the
provisions of Section 407.D.1
The following uses are subject to site review regardless of size:
4. Multi-Family Dwelling
5. Religious Institution
6. Public Utilities
C. Space Standards for Lots Which Are Not Within Subdivisions as Listed in D Below:
1. Minimum lot size, except for lots that meet all of the standards in Sec. 407.E.4 below:
20,000 s.f.
2. Minimum road frontage: 50 feet
3. Maximum building height: 35 feet
4. Minimum setback front: 25 feet
side: 15 feet
rear: 25 feet
shore: 100 feet
- 75 -
5. Minimum land area per dwelling unit: 5,000 s.f.
D. Space Standards for Lots in Village Open Space Subdivisions approved after August 2, 2005
1. Net residential density; single family –
1 unit per 12,000 s.f. of net residential acreage
2. Net residential density per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family –
1 unit per 3,630 s.f. of net residential acreage
3. Average lot size for single family – not less than 6,000 s.f.
4. Average lot size area per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family –
not less than 1,800 s.f.
5. Minimum lot size; single family 3,000 s.f.
6. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family - 600 s.f.
7. Minimum road frontage 25 ft.
8. Average road frontage not less than 30 ft.
9. Maximum impervious surface to lot area ratio 80%
E. Other Standards:
1. Any new construction, addition, or reconstruction in this District are also subject to
the Freeport Village Design Standards as indicated as being applicable in those
Standards.
2. Building height requirements and building setback requirements are included in the
Freeport Village Design Standards.
Section 408. Village II “V-II”
A. Purpose:
It is the intent of this District to recognize the existing South Freeport Village, which is an
historic, residential area, and adjacent neighborhoods.
B. Permitted Uses:
1. Single Family Dwelling
2. Two-Family Dwelling
The following uses are subject to site review regardless of size:
3. Religious Institution
4. Public or Private School
5. Commercial School
Please consult the Freeport Village Design Standards for
additional standards that may apply.
- 76 -
6. Outdoor Recreation School
7. Municipal Facility
8. Public Utilities
9. Private Assembly
10. Day Care Center Facility
11. Wireless Telecommunication Facility (see Sec 528)
12. Parking area for open space {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
C. Space Standards:
1. Minimum lot size: 20,000 s.f.
2. Minimum road frontage: 100 feet
3. Maximum building height: 35 feet
4. Minimum setback - front: 25 feet
side: 15 feet
rear: 25 feet
shore: 75 feet
5. Minimum land area per dwelling unit: 12,000 s.f.
6. Minimum shore frontage: See Section 507
7. Minimum lot width: 75 feet
8. Maximum Height B
Wireless Telecommunication Facility (single user): 75 feet
Wireless Telecommunication Facility, Co-located: 75 feet
D. Other Standards:
1. Parcels within the Shoreland Zone shall meet the requirements of Section 507.
Section 409. Commercial District I “C-I”
A. Purpose:
It is the intent of this District to provide for suitable locations for commercial uses which are
appropriately situated at highway locations and to encourage an attractive entrance to the Town
of Freeport. This District comprises land along the U.S. 1 corridor from Yarmouth to the plaza
just north of Desert Road and is the major local connector between Yarmouth and Freeport. This
district is intended to be flexible with regard to minimum lot size, road frontage requirement, and
setbacks from property lines provided points of access onto U.S. Route One are limited, and
design standards are met.
B. Permitted Uses:
1. Single Family Dwelling
2. Two Family Dwelling
- 77 -
3. Agriculture {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
4. Agritourism Activity {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
5. Timber Harvesting
6. Peddler on Private Property subject to the requirements of Section 526
The following uses are subject to site plan review regardless of size: {Amended, 03/19/19}
7. Public or Private School
8. Commercial School
9. Outdoor Recreation School
10. Auto Repair Service Garage subject to the standards of Sec. 409.D.6 listed below
11. Auto Service Station
12. Retail Trade up to 15,000 s.f. building footprint
13. Commercial Sales and Service - Outdoor
14. Business and Professional Offices
15. Commercial Recreation – Indoor and Outdoor
16. Public Utilities
17. Convenience Store with Gas Pumps
18. Restaurant
19 Restaurant - Drive-Up
20. Restaurant - Carry-Out
21. Bed and Breakfast Inn
22. Hotel/Motel
23. Boatyard
24. Public and Private Assembly Indoor
25. Parking Facility
26. Commercial Sales and Service
27. Manufacturing and Processing
28. Day Care Center Facilities
29. Auto Sales for up to 30 vehicles stored outdoors
30. Flea Markets
31. Art Gallery and Museum
32. Residential Health Care Facility
33. Nursing Home
34. Construction Services
35. Research and Development Facility
36. Parking area for open space {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
37. Artisan Food and Beverage {Effective 12/17/14}
a. food truck(s) as an accessory use is allowed subject to the provisions of
Sec. 526A – Food Trucks
38. Vehicle wash center {Amended, 03/19/19}
The following uses are permitted 300 feet or more from the easterly edge of the U.S. Route
One right-of-way or if closer than 300 feet from the easterly edge of U.S. Route One the
standards of Section 409.D.9 shall be met, and are subject to site review regardless of size:
- 78 -
38. Multiple Family Dwelling
39. Warehouse and Storage Facility
40. Wireless Telecommunication Facilities
41. Truck Facilities
C. Space and Bulk Standards
1. Minimum lot size and road frontage requirement if the building(s) or use(s) is/are connected
to the public water and sewer system and if one of the following conditions exists or is
provided1: {Amended, Effective 10/03/17}
a. there is no more than one access point (existing or proposed) per lot of record as
of May 6, 2008 on U.S. Route One, or
b. the only access point off U.S. Route One is shared with an adjacent lot or lots and
the lot or lots sharing the access points don’t have other access points on U.S.
Route One; or
c. a lot has more than one existing access point per lot of record as of May 6, 2008;
provided, however, that (i) in these situations the Project Review Board may
relocate some or all of the access points, (ii) the development shall not have more
access points than exist on May 6, 2008, and (iii) the Project Review Board may
in its discretion limit access points to a number less than the number existing on
May 6, 2008 if the Project Review Board shall determine that the maintenance of
the number of access points existing as of May 6, 2008 is likely to2:
A. detract from public safety considering such factors such as accidents in the
area, traffic volumes, road geometrics, types and frequency of traffic
moving to and from existing uses within 1,000’ of the proposed use; or
B. adversely effect the ability of vehicular traffic to maintain the existing speed
limit; or
C. threaten an environmentally sensitive area,
West side of U.S. Route One and lots in the C-1 District just prior to May 6,
2008
Minimum lot size 20,000 s.f.
Minimum land area per dwelling unit if part of a mixed use development
10,000 s.f.
Road frontage requirement none
East side of U.S. Route One other than lots in the C-1 District just prior to May 6,
2008
1 It is the intent of this section to provide the incentives of reduced minimum lot sizes and road frontage requirements for developments
that limit or share access points on to U.S. Route One. The limitation of access points on U.S. Route One applies to developments that
intend to take advantage of the incentives of reduced minimum lot sizes and road frontage requirements when a new lot is created. The
limitation of access points does not apply to existing developments, buildings, or uses or to existing developments, buildings, or uses that
propose a change of some sort but that are not creating a new lot. For more information on the intent of this section refer to the Freeport
Comprehensive Plan, Section VI.B – Future Land Use Directions – Commercial.
2 It is the intent of this section to give the Project Review Board the authority to consider allowing two access points if the two access
points existed prior to May 6, 2008. This exception was intended for proposed developments that are expected to have a minimal increase
in traffic such as small residential developments or commercial uses with limited traffic needs, and for proposed developments that can
easily meet the standards of this section.
- 79 -
Minimum lot size 40,000 s.f.
Minimum land area per dwelling unit within 300’ of U.S. Route One
40,000 s.f.
Minimum land area per dwelling unit 300’ or beyond U.S. Route One
15,000 s.f.
Minimum land area per dwelling unit if part of a mixed use development
10,000 s.f.
Road frontage requirement none
2. Minimum lot size and road frontage requirements for lots that do not meet the requirements of
Section 409.C.1 above
West side of U.S. Route One and lots in the C-1 District just prior to May 6, 2008
Minimum lot size 1 acre
Road frontage requirement 300 feet
East side of U.S. Route One other than lots in the C-1 District just prior to May 6,
2008
Minimum lot size 3 acres
Road frontage requirement 300 feet
3. Maximum building height: {Amended, 03/19/19} 35 feet
Projects that meet the criteria of Sec. 409.D.7 are eligible for a
maximum height of 45 feet.
4. Maximum impervious surface to lot area: 70%
5. Minimum setback {Amended, 03/19/19} front: 15 feet
side: 15 feet
rear: 15 feet
Projects that meet the criteria of Sec.409.D.5 are eligible for a
minimum side and rear setback of 5’.
D. Other Standards: {Amended, 06/18/19}
1. Outdoor storage for non-residential uses is prohibited in the front setback. Outdoor
storage areas shall be fenced.
2. For all uses subject to Site Plan Review, in the front setback, in a strip extending along the
entire frontage of Route One, except for driveways, for a depth of 15 feet, landscaping is
required. Landscaping is also required in all side setbacks for a depth of 15 feet extending
from the front property line to the furthest back edge of the developed area (buildings,
parking lots, other impervious surface). The Project Review Board shall determine
whether the side landscaping shall consist of plantings and/or retention of the natural
cover. Only accessways, walkways, pedestrian and vehicle connectors between parking
lots on abutting lots and common driveways for abutting lots are permitted in the side
landscaped setbacks. {Amended, 03/19/19}
3. Items for sale are allowed within all of the required setbacks.
- 80 -
4. If existing or proposed parking spaces are eliminated due to the creation of parking lot
connectors and/or common driveways for abutting lots, the property shall be credited for
each lost space so that no net loss of parking spaces shall occur.
5. The side and rear setback requirements may be reduced to a minimum of 5’ if the
proposed building is adjacent to an existing building used for commercial purposes, if a lot
shares access, parking, and/or other facilities with another lot, or if environmental
constraints on the property limit the logical location of buildings to be closer to the
property line. {Amended, 03/19/19}
6. Building heights up to 45’ are allowed provided the building can be adequately screened
from U.S. Route One, I-295, Old South Freeport Road and South Freeport Road as
applicable with existing trees and the building is 300’ or greater from U.S. Route One.
{Amended, 03/19/19}
7. The Performance Standards of Section 527 are applicable.
8. For uses that require outdoor storage of materials or the operation/storage of large
equipment (other than inventory for sale), or outdoor equipment that is accessory to
vehicle wash centers such as vacuuming devices, the Project Review Board shall require
screening that visually obscures the storage area(s) or accessory uses to vehicle wash
centers and/or reduces the ambient noise level of the use to the greatest extent practicable.
Such screening may include plantings, retention of existing vegetation, berms, fences, or
other vegetative or constructed barriers to mitigate the visual and auditory impact of the
development on the surroundings. {Amended, 03/19/19}
The final shape, size and location of all screening shall be determined, at the discretion of
the Project Review Board. In determining the shape and size of the screening, the board
shall consider the amount of land being used for outdoor storage, the type of screening
being used, the amount of noise that may be generated by the outdoor storage, the
proximity of the outdoor storage to the road, and the amount of natural vegetation being
maintained.
- 81 -
Section 411. Commercial District III - “C-III”
A. Purpose:
It is the intent of this District to create an attractive entrance to the Village. A mix of
commercial and residential uses are permitted with restrictions on building size and parking
locations. Landscaping requirements are mandated in the front setback. In order to limit access
points on heavily traveled U.S. Route 1, access on other streets and on service roads is
encouraged through decreased road frontage requirements. This District is part of the Design
Review District and contains historically and architecturally significant buildings and structures
which should influence the design of future development.
B. Permitted Uses:
1. Single Family Dwelling
2. Two Family Dwelling
The following uses are subject to site review regardless of size:
3. Public or Private School
4. Commercial School
5. Outdoor Recreation School
6. Cemeteries
7. Public Utilities excluding commercial communications towers
8. Municipal Use
9. Multiple-family Dwelling
a. Existing buildings shall not be subject to the provisions of Section 411.D.6 below
10. PUD (Subject to the provisions of Article V, Section 504)
11. Restaurant
12. Restaurant - Carry-Out
13. Bed & Breakfast Inn
14. Business and Professional Offices
15. Public Assembly - Indoor
16. Private Assembly
17. Auto Repair Service Garage
18. Religious Institutions
19. Hotel - Motel
20. Commercial Sales and Service, including up to 200 square feet of incidental, accessory
outdoor storage. This outdoor storage is permitted only on a seasonal basis (April to
October). Materials such as propane, which must be located outdoors at all times, are
exempt from the seasonal restriction, but they must be screened from abuttor and street
views.
21. Parking Facility
22. Retail Trade
23. Manufacturing and Processing
24. Day Care Center Facilities
- 82 -
25. Commercial Recreation – Indoor
26. Parking area for open space {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
27. Artisan Food and Beverage {Effective 12/17/14}
a. food truck(s) as an accessory use is allowed subject to the provisions
of Sec. 526A – Food Trucks
C. Prohibited Uses:
Specifically include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Manufacturing, fabrication, disposal, or any use of asbestos products.
2. Paper manufacturing
3. Petroleum and petrochemical refining and reprocessing
4. Production of lubrication oils and grease
5. Manufacture of explosives including, but not limited to, ammunition and fireworks
6. Offal or deer animal disposal and reprocessing
7. Abattoirs and slaughterhouses
D. Space Standards:
1. Minimum lot size: 2 acres
2. Maximum Building Height: 35 feet
3. Minimum Road Frontage
U.S. Route 1 and Pine Street: 300 feet
Other Streets: 150 feet
4. Maximum Impervious Surface to lot area ratio: 70%
5. Minimum Setback:
a. All setbacks except from I-95 boundary:
Front: 50 feet, if parking is located between the 25' front landscaped setback and
the 50' setback. 25' if parking is located beyond 50' of the front property
boundary line.
Side: On a lot with two side lot lines, the total combined minimum width of both
side setbacks shall be 75' and the minimum side setback shall be 25'. If a
parcel has only one side lot line, the minimum side setback shall be 35'.
{Amended, 03/19/19}
Rear: 35 feet
b. All setbacks from I-95 boundary: 25 feet
6. Minimum Land Area per Dwelling Unit: 7,000 s.f.
7. Maximum Gross Floor Area per lot: 40,000 s.f.
E. Other Standards:
1. Buffer strips, as required by Section 506, shall consist of at least the minimum required
setbacks.
2. Landscaping is required in the setback from U.S. Route 1 and in the front setback
- 83 -
from all other streets for a minimum of 25 feet except for driveways. Landscaping
is required in all side setbacks for a depth of 15 feet extending from the front
property line to the furthest back edge of the developed area (buildings, parking
lots, other impervious surface). The Project Review Board shall determine whether the
side landscaping shall consist of plantings and/or retention of the natural vegetative
cover. Only accessways, walkways, pedestrian and vehicle connectors between parking
lots on abutting lots and common driveways for abutting lots are permitted in the side
setback.
3. Outdoor storage is prohibited except as permitted in Section 411 B.17 above.
4. The Performance Standards of Section 527 are applicable. {Amended, Effective 01/02/18}
5. If existing or proposed parking spaces are eliminated due to the creation of parking
lot connectors and/or common driveways for abutting lots, the property shall be
credited for each lost space so that no net loss of parking spaces shall occur.
6. Curb cuts on Route One and Pine Street should be limited, where possible, to one per lot.
In addition, because of the limited sight distance at certain parcels containing frontage on
Pine Street, if any lot fronting on Pine Street is subdivided after May 1, 1997, one
common driveway location which provides access to all existing and new lots shall be
provided in the deed. The common driveway location shall meet MDOT requirements
for sight distance and all necessary easements shall be included in each deed.
Section 412. Commercial District IV “C-IV”
{Amended, Effective 08/06/19}
A. Purpose:
This District is intended to provide suitable locations for a variety of higher density
residential and commercial uses which benefit from nearby major highway connections
and existing public utilities. Open space and/or buffers are required to provide a buffer
between higher density development and adjacent lower density residential properties and
to protect environmentally sensitive areas.
B. Permitted Uses:
The following uses are subject to site plan review regardless of size:
1. Two-Family Dwelling
2. Multiple-Family Dwelling
3. Public or Private School
4. Commercial School
5. Outdoor Recreation School
6. Local convenience goods stores accommodating local needs such as but not limited to
retail bakeries, delicatessens, candy, nut and fish stores, fruit and vegetable stores,
grocery and food stores, 5 & 10 stores, hardware stores, auto parts supply, book stores,
branch banks, dry goods stores and florist shops;
- 84 -
7. Personal service stores such as but not limited to beauty and barber shops, laundromats,
cleaners, photography studios, shoe, jewelry and household appliance repair services and
alterations services;
8. Supermarket
9. Business and Professional Offices
10. Commercial Recreation - Indoor
11. Commercial Recreation - Outdoor
12. Municipal Facilities
13. Public Utilities
14. Warehouse and Storage Facilities
15. Commercial Sales and Service
16. Truck Facility
17. Manufacturing and Processing which does not involve the basic refinement of bulk raw
material
18. Hotel/Motel
19. Day Care Center Facilities
20. Convenience Store with Gas Pumps
21. Auto Service Station
22. Auto Repair Service Garage
23. Restaurant
24. Restaurant - Carry Out
25. Restaurant - Drive-up
26. Construction Services
27. Public Assembly
28. Private Assembly
29. Wireless Telecommunication Facility (See Sec. 528)
30. Parking area for open space {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
31. Artisan Food and Beverage {Effective 12/17/14}
a. food truck(s) as an accessory use is allowed subject to the provisions
of Sec. 526A – Food Trucks
32. Medication Assisted Treatment Facility for Opioid Addiction {Effective 10/04/16}
The following uses are subject to subdivision review:
33. Commercial Open Space Subdivision for two-family and/or multiple-family
dwellings.
C. Space Standards for Lots which are Not Within Subdivisions as Listed in Section D below:
1. Minimum Lot Size:
20,000 s.f. provided curb cuts on Hunter Road or Desert Road are at least 300 feet apart
on the relevant side of the road; otherwise the minimum lot size is 1 acre. The minimum
lot size of lots having frontage on roads other than Hunter Road or Desert Road is 20,000
s.f. provided that access to the lot is on a driveway serving 2 or more lots; otherwise the
minimum lot size is 1 acre.
2. Maximum Building Height: 35 feet
- 85 -
3. Minimum Road Frontage:
a. Minimum Road Frontage for Lots that have one or more access(es) that is not shared
with other lots: 100 feet
b. No Minimum Road Frontage for lots that share an access with one or more other lots.
4. Maximum Impervious Surface to Lot Area Ratio: 70%
5. Minimum Setback:
front: 25 feet
side: 25 feet
rear: 25 feet
6. Maximum Height - Wireless Telecommunication Facility (single user): 75 feet
Wireless Telecommunication Facility, Co-located: 125 feet
D. Space and Bulk Standards for Lots in Open Space Commercial Subdivisions approved after
August 6, 2019
1. Net residential density per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family – 1 unit per
2,904 s.f. (15 units per acre) of net residential acreage
2. Maximum impervious surface to lot area excluding designated open space 90%
3. Allowable number of stories 3 stories
4. Setbacks for developments with property in common ownership front: 25 feet
rear: 50 feet
side: 25 feet
For developments that will be divided into individual lots:
4. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family - 4,000 s.f.
5. Minimum road frontage 30 ft.
6. Minimum setback for commercial open space subdivisions front: 10 feet
rear: 10 feet
side: 5 feet
E. Prohibited Uses:
1. Manufacture, fabrication, disposal or any use of asbestos products
2. Paper Manufacturing
3. Petroleum and petrochemical refining and reprocessing
4. Production of lubrication oils and grease
5. Manufacture of explosives including, but not limited to, ammunition and fireworks
6. Offal or dead animal disposal and reprocessing
7. Abattoirs and slaughterhouses
F. Other Standards:
1. For developments that require open space, the open space shall be delineated by
using the following priority system:
a. first priority – establish buffer of at least 50 feet where the Commercial District is
adjacent to the Rural Residential District.
b. second priority – open space includes primary conservation areas to the greatest
extent practical
- 86 -
c. third priority – at the discretion of the owner
2. If open space is not required, a 25 foot buffer shall be required where the adjacent
property within this District is presently used for residential purposes. A 100 foot buffer
strip shall be required where it abuts residential districts
3. Landscaping is required in the front setback as per Section 527.E.
4. The Performance Standards of Section 527 are applicable. {Amended, Effective 01/02/18}
Section 413. Village Commercial “VC-I”
A. Purpose:
It is the intent of this District to concentrate commercial activity within the Village Center:
B. Permitted Uses subject to site review regardless of size:
1. Retail Trade
2. Commercial Recreation, Indoor
3. Business and Professional Offices
4. Arts Center – Indoor and/or Outdoor with or without permanent structures
5. Municipal Facility
6. Private Assembly
7. Public Assembly - Indoor
8. Public Utilities
9. Public or Private School
10. Commercial School
11. Outdoor Recreation School
12. Religious Institution
13. Peddler on Private Property subject to the requirements of Section 526
14. One or two dwelling units on other than the first floor
15. Multiple Family Dwelling
16. Restaurant
17. Restaurant - Carry-Out
18. Visitors’ Center
19. Manufacturing accessory to or associated with a retail trade located in this District
20. Bed and Breakfast Inn
21. Day Care Center Facilities
22. Convenience Store
23. Parking lots to serve A & B buildings, as defined in the Freeport Design Review
Ordinance in the VC-II District, which meet the requirements of Section 413.D.2.
24. Personal Services
25. Parking Structure subject to the standards of Sec. 413.D.7 below
26. Inn – not over 25 rooms and shall be at least two stories high
27. Parking area for open space {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
28. Artisan Food and Beverage {Effective 12/17/14}
29. Community Centers and Services {Amended, Effective 12/18/18}
- 87 -
C. Space Standards:
1. Minimum lot size: 8,000 s.f.
2. Minimum road frontage: None
3. Maximum building height: 35 feet
4. Minimum setback/front:
a. Where a sidewalk exists:
i. New Structures
- 10 feet from the property line if roof pitches toward the sidewalk;
- 5 feet from the property line if roof pitches away from the sidewalk;
ii. Additions to existing structures: the distance between the closest point of the
existing building and the edge of the sidewalk closest to the building. In no
instance shall the addition encroach into the public right-of-way;
Example:
b. Where no sidewalk exists: 15 feet from property line;
c. Landscaping or other amenities such as planters, benches or expanded sidewalk shall
be required within the front setback.
5. Minimum setback side and rear: None if masonry construction is used and roof does not
pitch in that direction. Five (5) feet if masonry construction is used and roof pitches in
that direction. Fifteen (15) feet for non-masonry construction or walls with points of
ingress or egress in them.
6. Minimum land area per dwelling unit: 2,000 s.f.
7. Maximum impervious surface to lot area ratio 90%
D. Other Standards: {Amended, Effective 12/18/18}
1. Parking in the VC-I District is further subject to the provisions of Section 514 as
applicable of this Ordinance.
2. A Buffer Zone as required by Article V, Section 506 shall be at least 20 feet in depth, and
shall be required whenever new construction or renovation requiring a building permit is
applied for. Where existing structures are within the 20-foot area, no further
encroachment shall be permitted.
3. Peddler trucks are prohibited.
Existing Building
S i d e w a l k
Front Setback
- 88 -
4. Parking structures shall meet the following design standards:
a. Active uses such as retail, display windows, or other Permitted Uses shall be
incorporated into a parking structure. At least 50% of the total pedestrian-level
frontage facing streets or other pedestrian areas shall incorporate retail, display
windows, or other Permitted Uses. For the purposes of this section, pedestrian
areas shall mean existing or proposed sidewalks, walkways, or plazas. The required
frontage incorporating retail, display windows or other Permitted Uses may be
included in another structure that is physically separate from the parking structure
provided that such other structure is separated by no more than 10 feet from the
parking structure. If the space between such separate structures abuts a public
street, other pedestrian area or parking lot, such space shall be integrated into the
building design as a sidewalk or it shall be concealed from view from such street,
pedestrian area or parking lot in a manner consistent with this Ordinance. Neither
vehicular access to parking structures nor the parking portion of the structure shall
be permitted on the street level of Main and Bow Streets. Upper levels of parking
structures on these streets shall be designed to be compatible with the street level
structure.
b. The retail, display windows or other Permitted Uses meeting the 50% frontage
requirement described above may be allocated across different elevations of the
structure in any manner, provided that the result of such allocations in conjunction
with other adjacent uses is not to cause any street upon which the parking structure
has frontage to be significantly lacking in pedestrian destinations with the result that
the street is inconsistent with the character of the District.
c. The parking space dimension and aisle width of Section 514 of this Ordinance may
be reduced to maximize the efficiency of the parking structure provided the safety
of the structure is not reduced.
d. Parking structures may exceed the maximum impervious surface to lot area
requirement; provided the required pervious land area is met on another property in
the VC-1, VC-2, or VC-4 Districts provided a permanent agreement is documented
publicly in a format approved by the Town Attorney.
e. At least 75% of the street level of the parking structure that does not include retail,
display windows or other Permitted Uses shall be screened with landscaping, art
work, plants that grow on vines, or other material that softens the appearance of the
parking structure. The 75% does not include entrances and exits or commercial
uses. Street trees shall be provided at 1 tree for every 30’ feet of parking garage
clearly visible from a public street or a parking lot. If the Project Review Board
determines that street trees are not appropriate in the sidewalk along the parking
structure, the standard may be met at another location in the VC-1 District or at the
village gateways at exit 20 and/or 21 provided a permanent agreement is
documented publicly in a format approved by the Town Attorney.
f. The façade of the parking structure along the street or sides of the structure that are
clearly visible from a road, other pedestrian area or parking lot shall consist of
materials found on nearby buildings such as brick, stone, or wood-like material; or
shall have a functional use such as a climbing wall.
g. The façade of the structure along sides other than those described in paragraph f.
above shall be treated to soften the stark appearance of concrete, for example red
- 89 -
sand mixed with the concrete provides a brick-like color and texture to the
minimally visible walls.
h. On the side of the structure facing the street or sides of the structure that are clearly
visible from a road, other pedestrian area or parking lot, the façade shall have
vertical elements that cover support columns and shall be done in such a way to
mimic window openings similar to nearby buildings, while providing proper
ventilation, such as grill work, window boxes or other types of adornment that
soften the look of the structure. The sides of the structure along other buildings
shall maximize the openings between floors to improve ventilation.
i. Pedestrian access is required on all sides of a parking structure that run along a
public street, sidewalk, other pedestrian area or parking lot and shall be clearly
marked.
j. At no point shall a parking structure exceed 40 feet in height.
k. A plan for providing security to parking structures is required. This plan shall
include provisions for interior lighting and provisions for protecting the public such
as but not limited to: surveillance cameras, regular patrol, etc.
l. The Project Review Board may allow minor reductions to any of the standards
listed above if strict compliance with the standard would result in the need for a
mechanically ventilated parking structure. The Board may only allow a reduction
up to the point where the standards of an open parking structure are in accordance
with the current building code being enforced by the Town of Freeport. {Amended,
Effective 10/03/17}
Section 414. Village Commercial II “VC-II”
A. Purpose:
It is the intent of this District to begin the transition from the Village Commercial District to the
neighboring residential districts.
B. Permitted Uses:
1. Single Family Dwelling
2. Two-Family Dwelling
3. Peddler on Private Property subject to the requirements of Section 526
The following uses are subject to subdivision review
4. Subdivisions for one-family, two-family, or multiple family dwellings. Any such
subdivision must be designed as a Village Open Space Subdivision.
a. Buildings in existence prior to January 22, 2013 shall not be subject to the
provisions of Section 414.D.2, 4 and 6 below provided the provisions of
section 414.E.6 below are met {Amended, Effective 01/22/13}
The following uses are subject to site review regardless of size:
- 90 -
5. Religious Institution
6. Public or Private School
7. Commercial School
8. Outdoor Recreation School
9. Municipal Facility
10. Multiple Family Dwelling
a. Buildings in existence prior to January 22, 2013 shall not be subject to the
provisions of Section 414.C.5 below provided the provisions of section 414.E.6
below are met {Amended, Effective 01/22/13} {Amended, Effective 10/03/17}
11. Retail Trade
A minimum 20,000 sq. ft. lot may contain one of the following:
(a) New Structure: Gross floor area of a new structure shall not exceed 5,000
s.f. No floor shall exceed a maximum of 2,500 s.f. A maximum of 5,000
s.f. of floor area may be used for retail trade; or
(b) Existing Structure: A maximum of 6,000 s.f. of gross floor area in an
existing building may be used for retail trade; or
(c) Combined New and Existing Structure: Total gross floor area shall not
exceed 5,000 sq. ft.
12. Public Utilities
13. Business and Professional Offices New, existing or combined new and existing
structures: total gross floor area shall not exceed 10,000 square feet. No floor shall
exceed a maximum of 5,000 square feet.
14. Public Assembly, Indoor
15. Bed & Breakfast Inn
16. Hotel or Motel - not over 10 units
17. Private Assembly
18. Restaurant
19. Restaurant - Carry-Out
20. Restaurant Drive-Up, provided there is no vehicle access to Main Street, provided that
the restaurant contains a minimum of 75 indoor seats, an outdoor intercom system shall
use the lowest volume level necessary to service the intended user but to not be audible at
the property line. Outdoor broadcast systems are prohibited. {Amended, Effective 12/07/10}
21. Arts Center – Indoor and/or Outdoor with or without permanent structures
22. Parking lots serving A & B buildings, as defined in the Freeport Design Review
Ordinance, located in the VC-II District, when such parking is provided pursuant to
Section 413.D.2.
23. Parking area for open space {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
24. Artisan Food and Beverage {Effective 12/17/14}
C. Space Standards for Lots Which Are Not Within Subdivisions as Listed in D Below:
1. Minimum lot size, except for lots that meet all of the standards in Sec. 414.E.6 below:
{Amended, Effective 01/22/13} 20,000 s.f.
2. Minimum road frontage: 100 feet
- 91 -
3. Maximum building height: 35 feet
4. Minimum Setback front: 25 feet,
except for the east side of Main Street and the north side of Davis Avenue where it shall
be 10 feet from the interior edge of any sidewalk or 15 feet from lot line if no sidewalk.
Side: 15 feet
Rear: 25 feet
5. Minimum land area per dwelling unit: 5,000 s.f.
6. Maximum impervious surface to lot area ratio 90%
D. Space Standards for Lots in Village Open Space Subdivisions approved after August 2, 2005
1. Net residential density; single family - 1 unit per 12,000 s.f. of net residential acreage
2. Net residential density per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family –
1 unit per 3,630 s.f. of net residential acreage
3. Average lot size for single family – not less than 6,000 s.f.
4. Average lot size area per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family –
not less than 1,800 s.f.
5. Minimum lot size; single family 3,000 s.f.
6. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family - 600 s.f.
7. Minimum road frontage 30 ft.
8. Maximum impervious surface to lot area ratio 80%
E. Other Standards:
1. Peddler trucks are prohibited.
2. The following conditions shall be met for all non-residential uses which are located on
parcels having access to Main Street or Mallett Drive as well as minor streets as defined
in the Street Acceptance and Standards Ordinance of the Town of Freeport:
a. Access to Map 12, Lots 7, 30A, 30D, 31A and 33A shall be from Mallet Drive
only. Lots on Davis Avenue shall not provide access directly to Main Street.
Wherever possible, common access ways shall be created for adjacent lots.
b. Parking areas shall not be located within the side and rear setback. Driveways
and drive-throughs shall not be located within the side and rear setback.
c. Buffering, consisting of natural features, plantings and/or fencing, shall be
required to provide an effective visual and physical screen between residential
and nonresidential uses at the lot boundaries and surrounding parking areas.
During site review, the Project Review Board shall review and approve the type,
size and quantity of materials which will provide the most harmonious transition
between uses.
3. If an existing building, which is classified A or B in the Freeport Design Review
Ordinance and is going to be converted to non-residential use, does not have sufficient
space on site or within 300’ to meet the existing parking requirements, and municipal
parking spaces are unavailable, the parking requirements may be satisfied by permitting
Please consult the Freeport Village Design Standards for
additional standards that may apply.
- 92 -
spaces to be owned and developed within the VC-I and/or VC-II Districts. The purpose
of this provision is to encourage the preservation of historically significant structures.
4. Any new construction, addition, or reconstruction in this District are also subject to
the Freeport Village Design Standards as indicated as being applicable in those
Standards.
5. Building height requirements and building setback requirements are included in the
Freeport Village Design Standards.
6. For Section 414.B.10.a, additions to the building are prohibited. Decks, open air
porches, garages used solely for storage and vehicles, and fire escapes necessary to
meet the Life Safety Code are not considered to be additions. The parking
requirements and maximum impervious surface to lot area ratio must be able to be
met on-site. No building may have more than 8 units unless the land area per
dwelling unit requirement can be met. All units must be connected to the public
water and sewer system. To encourage the development of affordable housing for
every three units that are created at least one of those units must be a one-bedroom
or efficiency unit that is no greater than 650 sf. {Amended, Effective 01/22/13} {Amended,
Effective 10/03/17}
7. To allow for a variety of housing types at a variety of prices, lots that are smaller
than the minimum lot size may be created and will be considered conforming lots
provided all of the following provisions are met:
a. The small lot is no less than 5,000 square feet.
b. The remaining lot is no less than 20,000 square feet.
c. Only one small lot may be created per lot of record as of January 22, 2013.
d. The gross floor area of the house and garage on a small lot can be no more
than 1,300 square feet. This does not include covered or uncovered open air
porches, decks, basements or outbuildings that are used solely for storage
such as sheds. This requirement shall be set forth in a deed covenant or other
legal instrument that binds the lot owner and that runs with the land so that
future lot owners are also bound to the same restriction.
e. The house shall meet the minimum front and rear setback requirements as
established in the Freeport Village Design Standards.
f. The side setback requirements shall be as set forth in this section, not the
Freeport Village Design Standards. The side setback requirement that is
adjacent to the lot from which the small lot was created shall have a
minimum setback requirement of 5’and a maximum of 10’. Side lot lines
adjacent to lots other than the one that the small lot was created from shall
have a minimum setback requirement of 15’.
g. The road frontage requirement shall be no less than 50’.
h. Small lots must be connected to the public water and sewer system.
i. The lot may be used for single family houses only.
{Amended, Effective 01/22/13}
- 93 -
Section 415. Village Commercial III “VC-III”
A. Purpose:
It is the intent of this District to begin the transition from the Village Commercial District to the
neighboring districts. This District, which is included in the Design Review District, contains a
mixture of residential and commercial uses which are located in structures maintaining a
residential design and scale. New construction and renovation shall be compatible with the
visual appearance and placement on the parcel of the existing buildings.
B. Permitted Uses:
1. One- Family Dwelling
2. Two-Family Dwelling
3. Peddler on Private Property subject to the requirements of Section 526
The following uses are subject to subdivision review:
4. Subdivisions for one-family, two-family, or multiple family dwellings. Any such
subdivision must be designed as a Village Open Space Subdivision.
a. Buildings in existence prior to January 22, 2013 shall not be subject to the
provisions of Section 415.D.2, 4 and 6 below provided the provisions of section
415.F.5 below are met {Amended, Effective 01/22/13}
The following uses are subject to site review regardless of size:
5. Religious Institution
6. Public or Private School
7. Commercial School
8. Outdoor Recreation School
9. Municipal Facility
10. Multiple Family Dwelling
a. Buildings in existence prior to January 22, 2013 shall not be subject to the
provisions of Section 415.C.5 below provided the provisions of section 415.F.5
below are met {Amended, Effective 01/22/13} {Amended, Effective 10/03/17}
11. Retail Trade
A minimum of 20,000 sq. ft. lot may contain the following:
Gross floor area shall not exceed 6,000 s.f., No floor shall exceed a maximum
of 3,500 s.f.
12. Public Utilities
13. Business and Professional Offices:
Gross floor area shall not exceed 6,000 s.f. No floor shall exceed a maximum of
3,500 s.f.
14. Public Assembly, Indoor
15. Bed & Breakfast Inn
16. Hotel or Motel not over 20 units
- 94 -
17. Private Assembly
18. Restaurant
19. Manufacturing and Processing which does not involve the basic refinement of bulk raw
materials.
20. Parking area for open space {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
21. Artisan Food and Beverage {Effective 12/17/14}
C. Space Standards for Lots Which Are Not Within Subdivisions as Listed in D Below:
1. Minimum lot size: 20,000 s.f.
2. Minimum road frontage: 100 feet
3. Maximum building height: 35 feet
4. Minimum Setback front: 25 feet
side: 15 feet
rear: 25 feet
5. Minimum land area per dwelling unit: 5,000 s.f.
D. Space Standards for Lots in Village Open Space Subdivisions approved after August 2, 2005
1. Net residential density; one family - 1 unit per 12,000 s.f. of net residential acreage
2. Net residential density per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family –
1 unit per 3,630 s.f. of net residential acreage
3. Average lot size for one family – not less than 6,000 s.f.
4. Average lot size area per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family –
not less than 1,800 s.f.
5. Minimum lot size; one family 3,000 s.f.
6. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family - 600 s.f.
7. Minimum road frontage 30 ft.
8. Maximum impervious surface to lot area ratio 80%
E. Prohibited Uses:
Specifically include but not limited to:
1. Manufacturing, fabrication, disposal, or any use of asbestos products.
2. Paper manufacturing
3. Petroleum and petrochemical refining and reprocessing
4. Production of lubrication oils and grease
5. Manufacture of explosives including, but not limited to, ammunition and fireworks
6. Offal or dead animal disposal and reprocessing
7. Abattoirs and slaughterhouses
8. Drive-up/Drive-through
Please consult the Freeport Village Design Standards for
additional standards that may apply.
- 95 -
F. Other Standards:
1. Peddler trucks are prohibited.
2. The following conditions shall be made for all non-residential uses which are located on
parcels having access to Main Street and/ or minor streets as defined in the Street
Acceptance and Standards Ordinance of the Town of Freeport
a. Parking areas shall not be located within the side and front setbacks. Driveways
shall not be located within the side and rear setback.
b. Buffering, consisting of natural features, plantings and/or fencing, shall be
required to provide an effective visual and physical screen between residential
and nonresidential uses at the lot boundaries and surrounding parking areas.
During site review, the Project Review Board shall review and approve the type,
size and quantity of materials which will provide the most harmonious transition
between uses.
3. Any new construction, addition, or reconstruction in this District are also subject to
the Freeport Village Design Standards as indicated as being applicable in those
Standards.
4. Building height requirements and building setback requirements are included in the
Freeport Village Design Standards.
5. For Section 415.B.4.a, additions to the building are prohibited. Decks, open air
porches, garages used solely for storage and vehicles, and fire escapes necessary to
meet the Life Safety Code are not considered to be additions. The parking
requirements and maximum impervious surface to lot area ratio must be able to be
met on-site. No building may have more than 8 units unless the land area per
dwelling unit requirement can be met. All units must be connected to the public
water and sewer system. To encourage the development of affordable housing for
every three units that are created at least one of those units must be a one-bedroom or
efficiency unit that is no greater than 650 sf. {Amended, Effective 01/22/13} {Amended,
Effective 10/03/17}
6. To allow for a variety of housing types at a variety of prices, lots that are smaller than
the minimum lot size may be created and will be considered conforming lots
provided all of the following provisions are met:
a. The small lot is no less than 5,000 square feet.
b. The remaining lot is no less than 20,000 square feet.
c. Only one small lot may be created per lot of record as of January 22, 2013.
d. The gross floor area of the house and garage on a small lot can be no more than
1,300 square feet. This does not include covered or uncovered open air porches,
decks, basements or outbuildings that are used solely for storage such as sheds.
This applies to the lifetime of the structure. This requirement shall be set forth in
a deed covenant or other legal instrument that binds the lot owner and that runs
with the land so that future lot owners are also bound to the same restriction.
e. The house shall meet the minimum front and rear setback requirements as
established in the Freeport Village Design Standards.
f. The side setback requirements shall be as set forth in this section, not the
Freeport Village Design Standards. The side setback requirement that is adjacent
to the lot from which the small lot was created shall have a minimum setback
- 96 -
requirement of 5’and a maximum of 10’. Side lot lines adjacent to lots other
than the one that the small lot was created from shall have a minimum setback
requirement of 15’.
g. The road frontage requirement shall be no less than 50’.
h. Small lots must be connected to the public water and sewer system.
i. The lot may be used for single family houses only.
{Amended, Effective 01/22/13}
Section 416. Village Commercial IV “VC-IV”
A. Purpose:
It is the intent of this District to mix commercial and residential activity within the Village
Center, and by offering flexibility of use, encourage the preservation of existing buildings, in
particular, the old Town Hall.
B. Permitted Uses:
1. One Family Dwelling
2. Two Family Dwelling
The following uses are subject to subdivision review:
3. Subdivisions for one-family, two-family, or multiple-family dwellings. Any such
subdivision must be designed as a Village Open Space Subdivision.
The following uses are subject to site review regardless of size:
4. Business and Professional Offices
5. Municipal Facility
6. Public Assembly - Indoor
7. Public Utilities
8. Multiple Family Dwelling
9. Hotel/Motel
a. New structures shall not exceed 65,000 sq.ft., measured from the exterior face
of exterior walls, grade level and above.
10. Religious Institution
11. Public or Private School
12. Commercial School
13. Outdoor Recreation School
14. Private Assembly
15. Bed and Breakfast Inn
16. Day Care Center Facility
17. Nursing homes
18. Buildings in existence prior to (date of acceptance) within the VC-IV District
may contain one or more of the following uses;
- 97 -
(a) restaurant
(b) restaurant carry-out
(c) personal service store such as but not limited to beauty and barber shops,
Laundromats, cleaners, photography studios, shoe, jewelry and household
appliance repair services, and alteration services
(d) meeting space accessory to a hotel
19. Local convenience goods stores accommodating local needs, such as but not limited
to, retail bakeries, delicatessens, fish stores, meat markets, farmers’ markets,
grocery and food stores, florist shops and combinations thereof.
20. Parking area for open space {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
21. Artisan Food and Beverage {Effective 12/17/14}
C. Space Standards for Lots Which Are Not Within Subdivisions as Listed in D Below:
1. Minimum lot size: 10,000 ft.
2. Minimum road frontage: 50 feet
3. Maximum building height: 35 feet
4. Minimum setback/front: 10 feet, except (see additions to or enlargement of existing
structures below)
Additions to or enlargement of existing structures - the interior edge of sidewalk
or the existing building line, whichever produces the greater setback (“building
line” means a line parallel to the property line or edge of sidewalk from which
the setback is being measured and which touches the existing building at the
point nearest to that property line or edge of sidewalk);
Landscaping or other amenities such as planters, benches or expanded sidewalk
shall be required within the front setback.
5. Minimum setback side and rear: 25 feet, and the minimum rear setback adjacent to a
railroad right-of-way shall be 5 feet.
6. Minimum land area per dwelling unit: 5,000 square feet.
7. Maximum impervious surface to lot area ratio: 80%
8. Maximum gross floor area per lot: 30,000 s.ft., except where otherwise noted
9. Buildings greater than 20,000 s.ft. gross floor area shall not be located east of Park
Street.
D. Space Standards for Lots in Village Open Space Subdivisions approved after August 2, 2005
1. Net residential density; one family - 1 unit per 10,000 s.f. of net residential acreage
2. Net residential density per dwelling unit; two family and multiple-family –
1 unit per 5,000 s.f. of net residential acreage
Please consult the Freeport Village Design Standards for
additional standards that may apply.
- 98 -
3. Average lot size for one family – not less than 5,000 s.f.
4. Average lot size area per dwelling unit; two-family and multiple-family –
not less than 5,000 s.f.
5. Minimum lot size; one family 3,000 s.f.
6. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family - 2,000 s.f.
7. Minimum road frontage 30 ft.
8. Maximum impervious surface to lot area ratio 80%
E. Other Standards:
1. A buffer zone shall be at least 10 feet in depth when a commercial property abuts the
V-I District, and 5 feet in depth when a commercial use abuts a property within the
VC-IV District that is currently used for residential purposes. The buffer zone shall
maintain the natural features of the land when possible, or, if necessary, fencing or
screening may be used and shall be located and constructed in such a manner that it
can be maintained from the developer’s property except that where a commercial
property abuts a residential use, the screening shall be vegetated in nature.
2. Overnight parking is allowed in VC-IV.
3. Peddler trucks and/or peddler carts are prohibited.
4. Offsite parking is allowed provided the parking area is within the VC-IV District.
5. Any new construction, addition, or reconstruction in this District are also subject to
the Freeport Village Design Standards as indicated as being applicable in those
Standards.
6. Building height requirements and building setback requirements are included in the
Freeport Village Design Standards.
Section 417. Village Mixed Use District 1 –VMU-1
A. Purpose:
It is the intent of the Village Mixed Use District I District to recapture some of the character
of a local town center allowing commercial uses and all residential housing types at a scale
that is compatible with the surrounding area. The commercial uses in this District would be
limited to those providing goods and services to local residents on a regular basis.
Development in this district needs to be pedestrian friendly with both on-road and off-road
facilities, as can be accommodated, and a variety of open spaces. Roads in the district
should minimize the amount of pavement required while balancing the need for adequate
and safe traffic flow, pedestrians, and bicyclists. There should be measures to calm traffic
in non-structural ways and to provide adequate space for pedestrian amenities, walkers at
different speeds, handicapped accessible, and safe for travel by bicyclists.
It is essential that the neighborhoods in the Village Mixed Use District I maintain the
historical and/or architectural significance of existing residential and commercial buildings.
The protections built into the ordinance will ensure that development on historic properties
will be reviewed with the intent of protecting Freeport’s historic resources.
- 99 -
B. Permitted uses:
1. Single Family Dwelling
2. Two-Family Dwelling
The following uses are subject to subdivision review:
3. Subdivisions for one-family, two-family, or multiple family dwellings. Any such
subdivision may include other uses in either attached or detached structures and must
be designed as a Village Open Space Subdivision.
a. Buildings in existence prior to January 22, 2013 shall not be subject to the
provisions of Section 417.D.2, 4 and 6 below provided the provisions of section
417.E.10 below are met {Amended, Effective 01/22/13}
The following uses are subject to site review and the Freeport Village Design Standards
regardless of size:
4. Multi-family Dwelling
a. Buildings in existence prior to January 22, 2013 shall not be subject to the
provisions of Section 417.C.5 below provided the provisions of section 417.E.10
below are met. {Amended, Effective 01/22/13}
5. Religious Institution
6. Public or Private School
7. Commercial School
8. Outdoor Recreation School
9. Municipal Facility
10. Local Retail Trade
11. Mixed Use Development; mixed use development with local convenience goods
stores may have a building footprint up to 15,000 square feet. as allowed in Sec.
E.6 below
12. Business and Professional Offices
13. Art Gallery/Museum
14. Public Utilities
15. Public Areas
16. Private Assembly
17. Public Assembly – Indoor
18. Village Cafe – up to 40 seats
19. Bed and Breakfast Inn
20. Day Care Center Facility
22. Parking area for open space {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
C. Space Standards for Lots Which Are Not Within Subdivisions as Listed in D Below:
1. Minimum lot size – residential 8,000 s.f.
2. Minimum lot size – commercial or mixed use development none
3. Minimum road frontage –
- 100 -
a. single and two-family 50 feet
b. commercial, mixed use, or multi-family developments that have one or
more accesses that are not shared 50 feet
c. commercial, mixed use, or multi-family developments that have one access
that is shared none
4. Maximum building height 35 feet
5. Minimum land area per dwelling unit 2,500 s.f.
6. Maximum impervious surface to lot area 80%
(for the purposes of this section, sidewalks and public areas required to meet the
build-to requirements of the Village design Standards are not considered an
impervious surface)
7. Setback requirements - see Freeport Village Design Standards
D. Space Standards for Lots in Village Open Space Subdivisions approved after April 3, 2007
1. Net residential density; single family -
1 unit per 8,000 s.f. of net residential acreage
2. Net residential density per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family –
1 unit per 2,500 s.f. of net residential acreage
3. Average lot size for single family – not less than 5,000 s.f.
4. Average land area per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family –
not less than 1,800 s.f.
5. Minimum lot size; single family 3,000 s.f.
6. Minimum land area per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family - 600 s.f.
7. Minimum road frontage per lot created after (date of adoption) 30 ft.,
a. for Lots that have one or more access(es) that is not shared with other lots:
30 feet
b. for Lots that have one access that is shared with other lots: none
8. Maximum impervious surface to lot area ratio 80%
(for the purposes of this section, sidewalks and public areas required to meet the
build-to requirements of the Village design Standards are not considered an
impervious surface)
9. Maximum building height 35 feet
E. Other standards:
1. The installation of sidewalks in or adjacent to the public right-of-way, at least 5 feet
wide, or a fee in lieu of installing sidewalks is mandatory for all development within
this zone. For the purposes of this section, development shall mean new
construction requiring site plan review, new construction of single family or duplex
residential development, residential or commercial additions that are heated greater
than 1,000 s.f., or changes of use from residential to commercial regardless of any
building expansions. The Project Review Board shall decide whether a sidewalk
should be constructed or whether a fee in lieu of a sidewalk is appropriate. In
making that decision, the Board shall consider the proximity to the nearest sidewalk,
long and short term plans to build sidewalks in the area, and/or other pertinent
information. The fee shall be based on the current cost of constructing 5 feet wide
- 101 -
sidewalks including curbing if determined to be necessary by the Public Works
Director.
If sidewalks at least 5’ wide exist adjacent to a proposed development, a fee shall be
paid to cover the cost of periodic repair and reconstruction. That fee shall be based
on the current cost of sidewalk reconstruction.
Fees shall be established by order of the Town Council and may be amended from
time to time. The fees shall be uniform throughout this District. Fees shall be
deposited into an account dedicated to constructing sidewalks, or repair and
reconstruction of sidewalks as appropriate. The fees shall be used at the discretion
of the Town Council for constructing, repairing or reconstructing sidewalks in this
District. The fees may also be used to reimburse the Town for sidewalk
construction, repair, or reconstruction that was completed up to ten years before the
fee was paid.
2. The Project Review Board may require the construction of a public road or a service
alley to connect rear parking lots if the road or service alley would improve traffic
circulation and/or would connect two public roads or provide a link that could
connect two public roads over time. The Project Review Board shall have the
authority to waive the road standards of the Freeport Village Design Overlay District
for these types of roads and alleys if strict compliance with standards would result in
excessive pavement, if significant open spaces can be protected, if pedestrian and/or
bicycle connections can be constructed or enhanced, and/or public utilities are not
needed.
3. Any new construction, addition, or reconstruction in this District is also subject to
the Freeport Village Design Standards as indicated as being applicable in those
Standards. The Project Review Board may vary the standards of Section 4.2 of the
Village design Standards (setbacks and build-to requirements) when a project is a
common lot development.
4. Building setback requirements and minimum building height requirements are
included in the Freeport Village Design Standards.
5. No structure shall exceed a building footprint of 4,000 s.f. unless specifically stated
in Sec. 417.B above.
6. Local convenience goods stores may be up to 15,000 square feet provided the first
floor elevation is at least 10 feet lower than the average grade of Bow Street that is
adjacent to the building. The footprint of commercial buildings above such a
convenience store at the level of Bow Street and above shall not exceed 4,000 square
feet, residential buildings above such a grocery store at the level of Bow Street and
above shall not exceed 2,500 square feet, the combined footprints of buildings at the
level of Bow Street and above shall not be greater than 80% of the footprint of the
convenience store.
- 102 -
7. Buildings existing as of (insert date of adoption) that are greater than 4,000 square
feet shall be allowed a 25% expansion of the footprint of the building provided the
expansions on either the front or the sides of the building shall not be any closer to
the property line than that of the existing building. For example, if the existing
building is 10 feet from the front and side property line at the closest point, the
expansion of the building may not be greater than 10 feet from those property lines.
8. At least 50% of the required parking shall be met on-site or within 150’ of the
property. The balance of the required parking shall be provided within 500’ of the
parcel and may be leased using the Leased Parking Standards of Article V of this
Ordinance. The Project Review Board may allow less than 50% of the required
parking to be provided on the site if the location of the required parking is in a
location that appears to be part of the development although it may not be on the
same lot.
9. Local retail trade uses and village cafes shall not be open for business between 10
PM and 6 AM.
10. For Section 417.B.4.a, additions to the building are prohibited. Decks, open air
porches, garages used solely for storage and vehicles, and fire escapes necessary to
meet the Life Safety Code are not considered to be additions. The parking
requirements and maximum impervious surface to lot area ratio must be able to be
met on-site. No building may have more than 8 units unless the land area per
dwelling unit requirement can be met. All units must be connected to the public
water and sewer system. To encourage the development of affordable housing for
every three units that are created at least one of those units must be a one-bedroom
or efficiency unit that is no greater than 650 sf. {Amended, Effective 01/22/13} {Amended,
Effective 10/03/17}
Section 418. Village Mixed Use District 2 –VMU-2
A. Purpose:
It is the intent of this District is similar to the Village Mixed Use District I except at a smaller
scale.
B. Permitted uses:
1. Single Family Dwelling
2. Two-Family Dwelling
The following uses are subject to subdivision review:
- 103 -
3. Subdivisions for one-family, two-family, or multiple family dwellings. Any such
subdivision may include other uses in either attached or detached structures and
must be designed as a Village Open Space Subdivision.
a. Buildings in existence prior to January 22, 2013 shall not be subject to the
provisions of Section 418.D.2, 4 and 6 below provided the provisions of
section 418.E.8 below are met {Amended, Effective 01/22/13}
The following uses are subject to site review regardless of size:
4. Multi-family Dwelling
a. Buildings in existence prior to January 22, 2013 shall not be subject to the
provisions of Section 418.C.5 below provided the provisions of section 418.E.8
below are met {Amended, Effective 01/22/13}
5. Religious Institution
6. Public or Private School
7. Commercial School
8. Municipal Facility
9. Construction Services up to 3,000 s.f building footprint, provided the use:
(a) engages in no outdoor storage or outdoor parking of commercial vehicles
except for vehicles with a load capacity of one ton or less except for loading
and unloading, and
(b) produces no noise, smoke, dust, odors, or glare detectable beyond the
boundaries of the lot.
10. Local Retail Trade
11. Mixed Use Development
12. Business and Professional Offices
13. Art Gallery/Museum
14. Public Utilities
15. Public Areas
16. Private Assembly
17. Public Assembly – Indoor
18. Bed and Breakfast Inn
19. Day Care Center Facility
20. Village Cafe – up to 20 seats
21. Parking area for open space {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
C. Space Standards for Lots Which Are Not Within Subdivisions as Listed in D Below:
1. Minimum lot size – residential 8,000 s.f.
2. Minimum lot size – commercial or mixed use development none
3. Minimum road frontage
single and two-family 50 feet
commercial, mixed use, or multi-family developments that have one or more
accesses that are not shared 50 feet
commercial, mixed use, or multi-family developments that has one accesses
that is shared none
4. Maximum building height 35 feet
- 104 -
5. Minimum land area per dwelling unit 2,500 s.f.
6. Maximum impervious surface to lot area 80%
(for the purposes of this section, sidewalks and public areas required to meet the
build-to requirements of the Village design Standards are not considered an
impervious surface)
7. Setback requirements - see Freeport Village Design Standards
D. Space Standards for Lots in Village Open Space Subdivisions approved after April 3, 2007
1. Net residential density; single family -
1 unit per 8,000 s.f. of net residential acreage
2. Net residential density per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family –
1 unit per 2,500 s.f. of net residential acreage
3. Average lot size for single family – not less than 5,000 s.f.
4. Average land area per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family –
not less than 1,800 s.f.
5. Minimum lot size; single family 3,000 s.f.
6. Minimum land area per dwelling unit; two family and multiple family - 600 s.f.
7. Minimum road frontage per lot created after (date of adoption)
a. Minimum Road Frontage for Lots that have one or more access(es) that is not shared
with other lots: 30 feet
b. No Minimum Road Frontage for lots that share an access with one or more other lots.
8. Maximum impervious surface to lot area ratio 80%
(for the purposes of this section, sidewalks and public areas required to meet the
build-to requirements of the Village design Standards are not considered an
impervious surface)
9. Maximum building height 35 feet
E. Other standards:
1. The installation of sidewalks in or adjacent to the public right-of-way, at least 5 feet
wide, or a fee in lieu of installing sidewalks is mandatory for all development within
this zone. For the purposes of this section, development shall mean new
construction requiring site plan review, new construction of single family or duplex
residential development, residential or commercial additions that are heated greater
than 1,000 s.f., or changes of use from residential to commercial regardless of any
building expansions. The Project Review Board shall decide whether a sidewalk
should be constructed or whether a fee in lieu of a sidewalk is appropriate. In
making that decision, the Board shall consider the proximity to the nearest sidewalk,
long and short term plans to build sidewalks in the area, and/or other pertinent
information. The fee shall be based on the current cost of constructing 5 feet wide
sidewalks including curbing if determined to be necessary by the Public Works
Director.
- 105 -
If sidewalks at least 5’ wide exist adjacent to a proposed development, a fee shall be
paid to cover the cost of periodic repair and reconstruction. That fee shall be based
on the current cost of sidewalk reconstruction.
Fees shall be established by order of the Town Council and may be amended from
time to time. The fees shall be uniform throughout this District. Fees shall be
deposited into an account dedicated to constructing sidewalks, or repair and
reconstruction of sidewalks as appropriate. The fees shall be used at the discretion
of the Town Council for constructing, repairing or reconstructing sidewalks in this
District. The fees may also be used to reimburse the Town for sidewalk
construction, repair, or reconstruction that was completed up to ten years before the
fee was paid.
2. The Project Review Board may require the construction of a public road or a service
alley to connect rear parking lots if the road or service alley would improve traffic
circulation and/or would connect two public roads or provide a link that could
connect two public roads over time. The Project Review Board shall have the
authority to waive the road standards of the Freeport Village Design Overlay District
for these types of roads and alleys if strict compliance with standards would result in
excessive pavement, if significant open spaces can be protected, and/or public
utilities are not needed.
3. Any new construction, addition, or reconstruction in this District is also subject to
the Freeport Village Design Standards as indicated as being applicable in those
Standards. The Project Review Board may vary the standards of Section 4.2 of the
Village design Standards (setbacks and build-to requirements) when a project is a
common lot development.
4. Building setback requirements and minimum building height requirements are
included in the Freeport Village Design Standards.
5. No structure shall exceed a building footprint of 2,500 s.f. unless specifically stated
in Sec. 418.B above
6. At least 50% of the required parking shall be met on-site or within 150’ of the
property. The balance of the required parking shall be provided within 500’ of the
parcel and may be leased using the Leased Parking Standards of Article V of this
Ordinance. The Project Review Board may allow less than 50% of the required
parking to be provided on the site if the location of the required parking is in a
location that appears to be part of the development although it may not be on the
same lot.
7. Local retail trade and village cafes uses shall not be open for business between the
hours of 10PM and 6AM.
- 106 -
8. For Section 418.B.4.a, additions to the building are prohibited. Decks, open air
porches, garages used solely for storage and vehicles, and fire escapes necessary to
meet the Life Safety Code are not considered to be additions. The parking
requirements and maximum impervious surface to lot area ratio must be able to be
met on-site. No building may have more than 8 units unless the land area per
dwelling unit requirement can be met. All units must be connected to the public
water and sewer system. To encourage the development of affordable housing for
every three units that are created at least one of those units must be a one-bedroom or
efficiency unit that is no greater than 650 sf. {Amended, Effective 01/22/13} {Amended,
Effective 10/03/17}
Section 419. Village Mixed Use District 3 –VMU-3 {deleted 01/26/10}
Section 420. Local Business District “LB”
A. Purpose:
This District is intended to provide an opportunity for retail, service and municipal facilities that
primarily serve local residents. Service of any extended area or regional market is ancillary to
the local market.
B. Permitted Uses:
The specific permitted uses which are listed below are intended to provide examples of a
type of permitted use. Uses similar to those examples which are specifically listed are
permitted if their primary purpose is to serve local needs. All uses are subject to site
review.
1. Peddler on Private Property subject to the requirements of Section 526.
2. Local convenience goods stores accommodating local needs such as but not limited to
retail bakeries, delicatessens, candy, nut and fish stores, fruit and vegetable stores,
grocery and food stores, 5 & 10 stores, hardware stores, auto parts supply, book stores,
branch banks, dry goods stores, apparel stores and florist shops. All types of restaurants,
as defined in this Ordinance, are not included in this definition and, therefore, are
prohibited.
3. Personal service stores such as but not limited to beauty and barber shops, laundromats,
cleaners, photography studios, shoe, jewelry and household appliance repair services, and
alterations services.
4. Shopping Center including a supermarket, department store, local convenience goods and
personal service stores.
5. Business and Professional Offices
6. Commercial Recreation - Indoor
7. Municipal Facility
8. Public or Private School
- 107 -
9. Commercial School
10. Outdoor Recreation School
11. Timber framing millwork and cabinetry
12. Warehouse and Storage Facility
13. Parking area for open space {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
14. Artisan Food and Beverage {Effective 12/17/14}
a. food truck(s) as an accessory use is allowed subject to the provisions
of Sec. 526A – Food Trucks
C. Space Standards:
1. Minimum lot size: 1 acre
2. Minimum road frontage: 150 feet
3. Maximum building height: 35 feet
4. Minimum setback front: 50 feet
side: 35 feet
rear: 35 feet
shore: 75 feet
5. Minimum shore frontage: See Section 507
6. Maximum Impervious Surface to Lot Area: 70%
8. Maximum gross floor area per local
convenience goods & personal service store: 12,000 s.f.
Supermarkets will be excluded from this space standard.
D. Other Standards
1. Buffer strips separating the LB District from the boundaries of districts which permit
residential uses shall be at least 50' and shall consist of natural growth, landscaping or
fencing to effectively screen business uses from residential areas. Buffer strip
requirements shall not apply where the district boundary is a road as defined in this
Ordinance.
2. Outdoor storage shall be fenced. No outdoor storage is permitted in the front setback.
No temporary or permanent outdoor storage areas shall be permitted unless they are
approved by the Project Review Board under site review.
3. Landscaping is required in the front setback.
4. Parking standards: Shopping centers larger than 25,000 s.f. of gross floor area - 4.0
spaces per 1,000 s.f. of gross floor area. All other uses must conform to the parking and
loading requirements of this Ordinance.
5. Access to streets or sections of streets from a business use on land, under one ownership,
aggregating more than 300 feet of continuous frontage shall be from service roads. The
number of service roads, grade, provision of curbs, sidewalks and esplanade reservation
shall be subject to site review.
6. Parcels within the Shoreland Zone shall meet the requirements of Section 507
- 108 -
Section 421. Industrial District I “I-I”
A. Purpose:
It is the intent of this District to provide for suitable locations, near major transportation routes,
for industrial, office, business, and warehouse uses, including industrial parks, which will be
environmentally sound and physically attractive assets to the Town. Off-site utilities are
presently or potentially available. In order to assure that developments shall be compatible with
adjacent residential districts, all uses are subject to site review and shall conform to the
appropriate performance standards of Article V. Specific uses which have been determined to be
incompatible with residential uses are prohibited.
B. Permitted Uses:
1. Timber Harvesting
2. Agriculture {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
3. Agritourism Activity {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
4. Peddler on Private Property subject to the requirements of Section 526
The following uses are subject to site plan review regardless of size:
5. Public or Private School
6. Commercial School
7. Outdoor Recreation School
8. Manufacturing and Processing which does not involve the basic refinement of bulk raw
material
9. Business and Professional Offices
10. Warehouse and Storage Facilities
11. Commercial Sales and Service
12. Public Utilities
13. Commercial Recreation - Outdoor
14. Truck Facility
15. Parking area for open space {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
16. Artisan Food and Beverage {Effective 12/17/14}
a. food truck(s) as an accessory use is allowed subject to the provisions
of Sec. 526A – Food Trucks
C. Space Standards:
1. Minimum lot size: 3 acres
2. Maximum building height: 35 feet
Building height may be increased one (1) foot for every five (5) feet that all set-backs are
increased to a maximum of 45 feet
3. Minimum road frontage: 500 feet
4. Maximum impervious surface to lot area: 70%
- 109 -
5. Minimum setback - front: 100 feet
side: 15 feet
rear: 15 feet
6. Minimum setback from lot line of a parcel containing a residential use: 100 feet
D. Prohibited Uses:
1. Manufacturing, fabrication, disposal, or any use of asbestos products.
2. Paper manufacturing
3. Petroleum and petrochemical refining and reprocessing
4. Production of lubrication oils and grease
5. Manufacture of explosives including, but not limited to, ammunition & fireworks
6. Offal or dead animal disposal & reprocessing
7. Abattoirs and slaughterhouses
E. Other Standards:
1. A buffer strip of at least one hundred (100) feet in depth shall be created around the
perimeter of the District. It shall meet the requirements of Section 506, B-D. No use
other than access roads shall be allowed in the buffer strip. Access roads shall be
perpendicular to the road or buffer strip unless specifically waived by the Project Review
Board.
2. Landscaping is required in the front setback.
3. Parking and outdoor storage are prohibited in buffer strip.
Section 422. Industrial District II “I-II”
A. Purpose:
It is the intent of this District to provide for suitable locations, near major transportation routes,
for industrial, office, business and warehouse uses, including industrial parks, which will be
environmentally sound and physically attractive assets to the Town. Off-street utilities are
presently or potentially available. In order to assure that development shall be compatible with
adjacent residential districts, all uses are subject to site review and shall conform to the
appropriate performance standards of Article V. Specific uses which have been determined to be
incompatible with residential uses are prohibited.
B. Permitted Uses:
1. Timber Harvesting
2. Agriculture {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
3. Agritourism Activity {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
- 110 -
The following uses are subject to site review regardless of size:
4. Manufacturing and Processing which does not involve the basic refinement of bulk raw
material
5. Business and Professional Offices
6. Warehouse and Storage Facilities
7. Commercial Sales and Service
8. Public Utilities
9. Public of Private School
10. Commercial School
11. Outdoor Recreation School
12. Commercial Recreation - Outdoor
13. Truck Facility
14. Wireless Telecommunication Facility (See Sec 528)
15. Parking area for open space {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
16. Artisan Food and Beverage {Effective 12/17/14}
a. food truck(s) as an accessory use is allowed subject to the provisions
of Sec. 526A – Food Trucks
C. Space Standards:
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet
Building height may be increased one (1) foot for every five (5) feet that all setbacks
are increased to a total of 45 feet.
2. Maximum impervious surface to lot area: 70%
3. Maximum Height:
Wireless Telecommunication Facility (singer user): 75 feet
Wireless Telecommunication Facility, Co-located: 125 feet.
4. Minimum setback - front 100 feet
side 15 feet
rear 15 feet
D. Prohibited Uses:
l. Manufacture, fabrication, disposal or any use of asbestos products
2. Paper manufacturing
3. Petroleum and petrochemical refining and re-processing
4. Production of lubrication oils and grease
5. Manufacture of explosives including, but not limited to, ammunition and fireworks
6. Offal or dead animal disposal & reprocessing
7. Abattoirs and slaughterhouses
- 111 -
E. Other Standards:
1. A buffer strip of at least one hundred (100) feet in depth shall be created around the
perimeter of the District. It shall meet the requirements of Section 506, B-D. No use
other than access roads shall be allowed in the buffer strip. Access roads shall be
perpendicular to the road or buffer strip unless specifically waved by the Project Review
Board.
2. Parking and outdoor storage are prohibited in the buffer strip.
Section 423. Marine Waterfront District “MW” (Section removed and replaced with
Section 507.E.4 and Table 1)
{Amended, Effective 07/01/09}
Section 424. Resource Protection District I “RP-I” (Section removed and replaced with
Section 507.E.1 and Table 1)
{Amended, Effective 07/01/09}
Section 425. Resource Protection II “RP-II”
A. Purpose:
It is the intent of this District to protect the quality and quantity of the groundwater resources of
Freeport.
This zone applies to all lands identified as aquifer recharge protection zones on the Town of
Freeport, Maine Zoning Map. Recharge areas are defined by the extent of sand and gravel
deposits associated with aquifers and wetlands within them that drain into the aquifer, together
with:
1. an appropriate protective strip so drawn that its bounds can be definitely established upon
the site;
2. the shorelands around any stream, including an appropriate protective strip, that flows
into the recharge area.
Where bounds as delineated are in doubt or in dispute, the burden of proof shall be upon the
Town.
B. The following are permitted Uses:
1. Single Family Dwelling
2. Two-Family Dwelling
3. Mobile Home
4. Timber Harvesting
5. Agriculture {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
- 112 -
6. Agritourism Activity {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
The following uses are subject to subdivision review
7. Open Space Subdivisions for single family and two family dwellings;
8. Large Lot Subdivisions for single family and two family dwellings;
The following uses are subject to site review regardless of size:
9. Outdoor Recreation School up to 5,000 square feet of gross floor area or up
to 5,000 square feet total gross square footage of all buildings on any parcel. The lot
size must be at least five acres.
11. Municipal Facilities
12. Parking area for open space {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
C. Space Standards for Lots Which Are Not Within Subdivisions as Listed in D Below:
1. Minimum lot size: 2 ½ acres
2. Minimum road frontage: 200 feet
3. Maximum building height: 35 feet
4. Minimum setback- front: 50 feet
side: 50 feet
rear: 75 feet
shore: 100 feet
5. Minimum land area per dwelling unit: 2 ½ acres
6 Minimum shore frontage: See Section 507
7. Maximum lot coverage with impervious surfaces: 10%
8. Minimum lot width: 150 feet
D. Space Standards for Lot in Subdivisions approved after April 9, 2002
1. Open Space Subdivisions requirements
A. Net residential density, single family and per dwelling unit, two-family
1 unit per 2.5 acres of net residential acreage
B. Minimum lot size, single family and per dwelling unit, two-family 1 acre
2. Large Lot Subdivisions requirements
A. Net residential density, single family and per dwelling unit, two-family:
1 unit per 5 acres of net residential acreage
B. Large lot subdivision minimum lot size, single family and per dwelling unit, twofamily:
5 acres
- 113 -
E. Bulk Standards for Lot in Subdivisions approved after April 9, 2002
1. Minimum road frontage and lot width, Open Space Subdivisions 100 feet
2. Minimum road frontage large lot subdivisions 200 feet
3. Minimum lot width large lot subdivisions: 150 feet
4. Minimum setback for open space subdivisions
front: 25 feet
rear: 40 feet
side: 10 feet
combined side : 40 feet
5. Minimum setback for large lot subdivisions
front: 50 feet
rear: 75 feet
side: 50 feet
6. Maximum building height: 35 feet
7. Minimum shore frontage: See Section 507
F. Prohibited Activities: (not to imply that such activities are permitted elsewhere) {Amended,
Effective 06/18/13}
1. Disposal of solid waste (except brush and stumps), leachable wastes (except subsurface
disposal of domestic sewage) and sludge;
2. Storage of petroleum or gasoline;
3. Storage of leachable wastes or solid wastes;
4. Mining or excavation in excess of 10 cubic yards other than excavation for permitted uses
or approved uses and within public rights-of-way and as otherwise permitted in Section
509;
5. Application of de-icing chemicals except sand with a salt content of no more than 10%
can be used on public rights of way. Herbicides, pesticides and fertilizers shall be
applied in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications and direction; No more than
3,000 sq. ft. of lawn area cultivated by means of fertilization shall be permitted per acre
of residential use;
6. Use and storage of hazardous materials as defined in Chapter 14 of Title 38 of the Maine
Revised Statutes and hazardous wastes as defined in Chapter 13 of Title 38 of the Maine
Revised Statutes;
7. Stormwater detention and retention ponds from parking lots for municipal facilities;
8. Overnight storage and maintenance of vehicles in municipal facilities.
G. Other Standards:
1. Parcels within the Shoreland Zone shall meet the requirements of Section 507.
2. Roof drainage from municipal facilities shall be designed to maximize recharge to
the District.
3. For the purposes of this section, a shed is defined as a structure that is no greater than 200
square feet with a building height of no more than 12 feet and that is used soley for the
- 114 -
storage of property, not shelter for animals, people, or passenger vehicles. Sheds as
defined in this section have a minimum side and rear setback requirement of 25 feet.
{Amended, Effective 08/04/15}
Section 426. Island District “ID”
A. Purpose: {Amended, 03/19/19}
Freeport’s Islands are acknowledged to be among the Town’s most treasured natural resources,
and their attractiveness contributes to the well-being of the Town.
It is the intent of the Island District to protect these unique natural areas and especially their
shorelines and surrounding waters by discouraging inappropriate uses, prohibiting development
on certain islands, and restricting development on the others as to not materially disturb wildlife
habitat, contribute to water pollution, or alter the natural and scenic appearance of the landscape
when viewed from offshore. This zone applies to the following islands: Bartol, Bowman, Crab,
French, French’s Ledge, Googins, Indian, Little Bustins, Little Flying Point, Little French,
Pettengill, Pound of Tea, Pumpkin Knob, Sister, Sister’s Ledge, Sow and Pigs, and Williams.
Bustin’s Island is not included.
B. Permitted Uses: {Amended, Effective 06/18/13, 03/19/19}
All uses are subject to site plan review regardless of size:
1. Non-Residential Facilities associated with outdoor recreation and/or outdoor recreation
school
2. Piers, Docks and Wharves (subject to the requirements of Art. XIII of the Coastal Waters
Commission Ordinance, and Sec. 507 G of this Ordinance).
3. Single Family Dwelling
4. Fishing, excluding fish processing
5. Clearing and removal of vegetation subject to Sec. 426.D.4
C. Space Standards: {Amended, 03/19/19}
1. Maximum structure height: 20 feet
2. Minimum setbacks:
a. On the following Islands; Bowman, Crab, French, French’s Ledge, Googins, Indian,
Little Bustins, Little French, Pettengill, Pound of Tea, Pumpkin Knob, Sister, Sister’s
Ledge, Sow and Pigs, and Williams -
shore: 125 feet
side: 50 feet
b. On Islands connected to the mainland by a causeway; Bartol and Little Flying Point
Islands –
shore: 75 feet
side: 50 feet
- 115 -
3. Maximum lot coverage with non-vegetated surfaces: 20%
D. Restrictions: {Amended, 03/19/19 & 09/17/19}
1. On the following Islands; French, Pettengill, Sister, Crab and Williams only one dwelling
unit may be maintained on each Island or lot of record existing as of January 1, 1979. Only
one accessory structure and one pier, dock or wharf may be maintained on each Island or lot
of record existing as of January 1, 1979.
2. No dwellings or other structures may be erected on the following Islands, which are deemed
unsuitable for such use because of their small size, exposure to the elements, critical wildlife
habitat, thin and unstable soils, and/or scenic importance: Bowman, Googins, Indian, Little
Bustins, Little French, French’s Ledge, Pound of Tea, Pumpkin Knob, Sister’s Ledge, and
Sow and Pigs. Once destroyed or removed, any structures currently existing on one of these
Islands may not be reconstructed or replaced unless accomplished within two (2) years. The
location of a replaced structure may differ from the location of the original structure.
3. On Islands connected to the mainland by a causeway including Bartol Island and Little
Flying Point Island, only one dwelling unit may be maintained on each Island or lot of record
existing as of January 1, 1979. Only one pier, dock or wharf may be maintained on each
Island or lot of record existing as of January 1, 1979.
3. The clearing and removal of vegetation are subject to the following:
a. The right to cut and restore trees and shrubs that are disturbed by the forces of nature;
b. The right to gather, use, or remove dead wood, provided that no tree supporting an
osprey nest may be cut;
c. The right to cut timber standing where a permitted structure is to be erected;
d. The right to cut trees and shrubs only if the purpose is to maintain and encourage a
healthy forest environment and a well distributed stand of trees is retained. The plan
must be approved by a Licensed Forester.
4. Any modification, alteration, construction or reconstruction of any subsurface waste water
disposal system shall be done in a manner that will prevent the direct or indirect discharge
of any waste, treated or otherwise, into the salt water.
5. Inter-island bridges or causeways, and bridges or causeways from any island to the
mainland, are specifically prohibited, except that the bridges or causeways from the
mainland to Bartol's Island and Little Flying Point may be maintained and reconstructed, as
necessary, provided that once removed or destroyed, the same may not be reconstructed or
replaced unless accomplished within a period of three (3) years thereafter.
E. Other Standards:
1. Parcels within the Shoreland Zone shall meet the requirements of Section 507.
- 116 -
Section 427 - Mining and Extraction Overlay District - “MEOD”
A. Purpose and Applicability:
It is the intent of this District to provide for the excavation, processing, and storage of mineral
deposits in locations which will be compatible with surrounding land uses and the general
character of the area; to ensure the orderly development of mineral resources in a manner
compatible with the overall development of the Town of Freeport; to assure the best management
practices for maximum control of potential adverse environmental impacts; to provide for future
reuse of mined land and to provide for the public health, safety and welfare.
The creation by the Town Council of a Mining and Extraction Overlay District shall not change
the existing zoning district classification of any property. The regulations of the Mining and
Extraction Overlay District shall be in addition to and shall apply concurrently with the
regulations of the underlying zoning district. Where a conflict exists between the requirements
of the Mining and Extraction Overlay District and the requirements of the underlying zoning
district, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.
B. Permitted Uses:
The following uses are subject to the review requirements of Section 509 of this Ordinance:
1. Excavation;
2. A residence for the caretaker, operator or owner of the property where the excavation is
occurring. No more than one residence shall be permitted;
3. Equipment and/or structures which are necessary and accessory to the operation of the
extraction, e.g., garage, storage shed, fuel tanks, but excluding residences not otherwise
permitted by subparagraph 2 of this Section 423(B);
4. Uses accessory to excavation, limited to the following activities:
a. Washing, cleaning and sifting of raw mined material (ore) into salable condition;
b. Sedimentation ponds when used in conjunction with washing and cleaning of raw
ore;
c. Stockpiling of raw ore;
d. Sale of stockpiled and excavated ore, including a sales office where business
operations exclusively for this use are conducted;
e. Parking areas for employee vehicles, trucks and equipment used in the mining
operation;
f. Waiting and loading area for trucks moving the ore;
g. Facilities for the storage, maintenance and repair of equipment used on the site.
5. Processing Uses: Processing of earth materials into a stone or concrete product,
including crushing mined rock, sawing, grinding and polishing quarry stone and mixing
sand and gravel with cement to form concrete or asphalt, provided that on an annual
basis, no more than thirty-three percent (33%) of all aggregate processed on the site may
be brought in from a location outside the site;
6. Public or private parks and recreation areas which are created as a result of the
reclamation of the site;
- 117 -
7. Public Utilities;
8. Municipal Facility.
C. Space Standards
1. Minimum lot area:
The minimum lot area shall be determined by the sum of the maximum area of extraction
plus the area required to meet the setback requirements and performance standards of
Section 509. However, the minimum lot area shall be no less than 5 acres;
2. Maximum building height: 35 feet
3. Minimum Setbacks: 150 feet, front, side, rear and shore.
D. Other Standards
1. A minimum of 50’ of frontage on a public road is required for access to the operation.
2. The requirements of Section 509 shall be met
3. One parking space shall be provided for each employee based on the expected average
employee occupancy. In addition, sufficient parking and/or waiting space shall be
provided for each truck and each piece of mobile equipment used in the extraction
operation and any accessory uses.
- 118 -
ARTICLE V
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Section 501. Temporary Activity {Amended, effective 01/06/15} {Amended, Effective 10/03/17}
A. An activity that is of a decidedly temporary nature and which can meet the minimum
requirements of the performance standards below Sec. 501.A.2-4, may be allowed under the
provisions of a Temporary Activity Permit issued by the municipal Codes Enforcement Officer.
The conditions of issuance or of renewal for any such permit are:
1. The proposed activity or use will not continue beyond a maximum time period of one (1)
week for no more than three times per year per property except as allowed in 501.C and
501.D below or as allowed in this section. If additional time beyond one week is
requested by the applicant, the Codes Enforcement Officer must obtain the concurrence
of the municipal Project Review Board before such an extension is granted. Upon
expiration of the Special Permit, the activity must be immediately discontinued or
brought into conformance with the minimum standards of performance or be in violation
of this Ordinance.
2. The proposed activity will not create, cause or increase any health, safety or public
nuisance problems.
3. The proposed activity will not cause immediate or future damage to adjacent properties.
4. Reasonable provision is made to prevent or minimize harmful environmental impacts of
the proposed activity.
B. This section is not intended to permit uses which do not conform to the use requirements of the
District in which the temporary activity is planned.
C. Temporary Activity Permits issued annually for outdoor retail sales, including but not limited to,
rack and container sales in the Village Commercial 1-4 and Commercial 1-4 Districts issued by
the CEO, shall be unlimited provided all of the sales are conducted outside of the public right-ofway
and do not displace parking spaces and on the same property that the business requesting a
temporary activity permit is located.
D. Peddler activities and food trucks during special events such as concerts, festivals, and holiday
festivities on private property but not including privately owned parking lots in the VC-1-4
Districts are considered a temporary activity subject to the requirements of Subsections A.2-4
and Section 526 or Section 526A. .
E. In the VC-I and VC-II Districts, no Temporary Activity Permits shall be issued between the week
before Memorial Day and the week after Labor Day if required parking is displaced by the
activity.
F. All temporary activities require a Temporary Activity Permit from the Codes Enforcement
Officer. Fees for Temporary Activity permits are established by order of the Town Council.
- 119 -
Section 502. Temporary Structures
A. Temporary structures used in conjunction with construction work shall be permitted only during
the period that the construction work is in continuous progress. Permits for temporary structures
shall be issued for a six (6) month period and may be renewed by the Codes Enforcement Officer
for additional six (6) month periods.
B. Residing in basement of foundation structures before the completion of the total structures shall
be permitted for a period of three (3) years from the date of issuance of a building permit subject
to issuance of a temporary Certificate of Occupancy. The municipal Codes Enforcement Officer
may issue a temporary Certificate of Occupancy for two additional one-year periods if, in his
judgment, reasonable progress is being made and if nuisance conditions do not exist.
Applications for permit extension shall be made before the permit expires. The Temporary
Certificate of Occupancy may require such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of
the occupants and the public. A valid plumbing permit shall be required.
C. Other temporary structures, except those specifically permitted by this Ordinance or other Town
Ordinances, are prohibited.
Section 503. Home Occupations
Home occupations shall be accessory to a residential use and clearly incidental and secondary to the
residential use of the dwelling unit. Home occupations shall conform with the following
requirements:
1. Exterior storage of materials, commercial vehicles used by the home occupation, or other
exterior indication of the home occupation shall be permitted, except in the setbacks,
provided that it is not incompatible with the residential character of surrounding
properties.
2. The performance standards of Article V, where applicable, shall be met. Objectionable
conditions such as but not limited to noise, smoke, dust, odors, or glare shall not be
generated.
3. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in substantially greater volumes
than would normally be expected in the neighborhood.
4. In addition to the off-street parking provided to meet the normal requirements of the
dwelling, adequate off-street parking shall be provided for the vehicles of each employee
and the vehicles of the maximum number of users the home occupation may attract
during peak operating hours.
5. Except for family and group day care homes and bed and breakfast inns of 3 guest rooms
or less, and uses approved under the terms of Subsection 503 (8) below, no home
occupation may utilize more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross floor area of the
- 120 -
dwelling (excluding basement floor areas) or more than 600 square feet of gross floor
area in an accessory structure.
6. Additional structures may be used in the case of the raising, breeding or keeping of
livestock or fowl.
7. The home occupation shall be carried on exclusively by a resident or resident members of
the dwelling unit. In addition to the residents of the dwelling unit, no more than two fulltime
employees or that number of part-time employees required to do the work of two
full-time employees may be employed in the home occupation on the site at any one time.
8. A home occupation may expand beyond the 600 square foot limitation in an accessory
structure only if the following conditions are met:
a. The home occupation is in existence as of July 6, l993;
b. The existing home occupation is located in an accessory structure in existence as
of July 6, l993;
c. The proposed expansion of the existing home occupation will be located within an
accessory structure in existence as of July 6, l993;
d. The maximum gross floor area of the existing accessory structure used for the
expanded home occupation shall be 3,000 square feet for all home occupations on
the site and a footprint no greater than 2,000 square feet or 0.56% of contiguous
land area owned by the applicant, whichever is smaller;
e. An existing accessory structure may be expanded by a maximum of 750 square
feet only if the total gross floor area of the accessory structure used for the home
occupation will not exceed the accessory structure size and land area limitations
of Section 503 8.d. above and the expansion is physically attached to the existing
accessory structure;
f. Only one principal use shall occur on land area required for an expanded
accessory structure;
g. No variance shall be granted on the relationship between the size of the accessory
structure and the area of the lot or on the permitted size of the accessory structure;
h. Site plan approval shall be required;
i. Site plan approval for such permitted expansion shall become void if the required
minimum land area is no longer owned by the applicant or subsequent assignees;
- 121 -
j. An existing home occupation may be replaced by a new home occupation under
this Section 503.8 only if the new home occupation is the same or similar in
character and impact, or will have less impact, than the existing home occupation.
k. If a proposed replacement home occupation will not be the same or similar or
have less impact than the existing home occupation which received site plan
approval under this Section 503.8, it shall not be permitted to expand beyond the
space limitations described in Section 503.5 above.
l. The expansion of the accessory structure shall be visually compatible with
existing buildings and landscape in its vicinity, as further described in Section
602.f.1.b.
m. Side and front setbacks of any newly constructed accessory area shall be
increased by one (1) foot per each fifty (50) square feet in excess of six hundred
(600) square feet;
n. Notice of decision of site plan approval shall be recorded in the Registry of Deeds
on a form provided by the Town
Section 504A. OPEN SPACE, EXPANDED OPEN SPACE, AND LARGE LOT
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS
504A.1 Purpose
The purpose of these provisions is to encourage flexibility in the design of residential development,
encourage creative development that preserves fields, forests, farmland, shoreland and related scenic
vistas and protects the most significant natural, historic and archaeological resources, to conserve
open land, to create good neighborhood development, to minimize the cost of constructing and
maintaining utilities and streets, and to protect and preserve sensitive wildlife habitats and other
natural areas.
504A.2 Applicability
1. This section 504A shall apply to:
a. all applications for approval of new subdivisions and
b. any application to amend a previously approved subdivision, except as provided
in subsection (2) below.
2. This section 504A shall not apply to an application to amend a subdivision approved prior
to April 9, 2002 if such amendment would not create two or more additional lots. Any
such amendment is subject to those space and bulk standards which the applicable zoning
district regulations require for lots within subdivisions approved prior to April 9,2002.
504A.3 Design and Construction Standards
The Project Review Board shall be authorized to approve Open Space Subdivisions, Expanded Open
Space Subdivisions, and Large Lot Subdivisions which conform to the requirements of this
- 122 -
Ordinance, the Subdivision Ordinance of the Town of Freeport, and all other applicable ordinances
of the Town of Freeport.
504A.4. Uses Permitted on Required Open Space Lands
1. Non-commercial recreation which does not require permanent structures
2. Up to 10% of the land may be used for non-commercial recreation which requires
permanent structures
3. Agriculture {Amended, Effective 06/18/13}
4. Neighborhood open spaces such as village greens, commons, picnic areas and other similar
passive recreation uses
5. Timber harvesting provided a forest management and harvest plan as defined by Title 36
M.R.S.A. § 573.3-A is submitted prior to the commencement of any timber harvesting.
This plan must be prepared by a licensed professional forester or a landowner and be
reviewed and certified by a licensed professional forester.
6. Access to sewer or water lines, or other public utility purposes, but excluding wireless
telecommunications facilities
7. Water supply and sewage disposal systems for subdivision lots provided the appropriate
easements are in place
8. Easements for drainage
9. Unpaved, unlighted parking for subdivision residents
504A.5. Ownership Options for Open Space
1. Some or all of the required open space may be dedicated to the Town of Freeport, subject
to acceptance by the Town Council. All open space lands shall be permanently protected
from development. Under no circumstances shall any development be permitted in the
open space at any time, except for those uses listed in Sec. 504A.4. Any such dedication
shall be accomplished by deeds or other appropriate legal instruments acceptable to the
town attorney.
2. Some or all of the required open space may be conveyed to a non-profit tax exempt land
trust or similar organization for conservation, passive recreation, or active recreational
purposes. All open space lands shall be permanently protected from development. Under
no circumstances shall any development be permitted in the open space at any time,
except for those uses listed in Sec. 504A.4. Any such conveyance shall be accomplished
by deeds or other appropriate legal instruments acceptable to the town attorney.
- 123 -
3. Some or all of the required open space may be held in common by the individual lot
owners of the proposed residential development. All open space lands shall be
permanently protected from development. Under no circumstances shall any
development be permitted in the open space at any time, except for those uses listed in
Sec. 504A.4. The developer shall be required to establish a homeowner's association
consisting of individual lot owners which shall include the following:
a. Covenants shall be included in each deed from the developer to an individual lot
owner which shall require mandatory membership in the association and shall set
forth the owner's rights, interests, privileges, and obligations in the association
and in the common open space including the association's responsibility and
obligation to maintain the common open space and any recreational facilities
located therein
b. The association shall develop a system to levy and collect annual charges against
any and all lot owners to defray expenses connected with the maintenance of
common open space and recreational facilities located therein and this system
shall be set forth in the deed covenants or other legal instrument binding upon the
lot owner and running with the land.
c. The developer shall be responsible for its maintenance until at least 75% of the
lots have been sold to individual lot owners after which time the association shall
be responsible for such maintenance and this requirement shall be set forth in the
deed covenants or other legal instrument binding upon the lot owner and running
with the land.
d. All proposed deed covenants and legal documents relating to such common open
space shall be reviewed by the town attorney and the Project Review Board and,
if approved, shall be recorded in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds and
included or referred to in the deed of each lot.
4. Some or all of the required open space may be held in “non-common private ownership”
provided the land is permanently restricted from future development through a
conservation easement or other mechanism acceptable to the Project Review Board,
except for those uses listed in Section 504A.4 above. The Town of Freeport has the
ability to enforce the restrictions of land in “non-common private ownership”. This
requirement shall be set forth in deed covenants or other legal instrument binding upon
the lot owner and running with the land. All open space held in “non-common private
ownership” shall be held in the same ownership. When the non-common open land is
attached to a homestead on the property being developed, the required open space land
shall be in addition to the minimum permitted lot size.
- 124 -
Section 504B. VILLAGE OPEN SPACE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS
504B.1 Purpose
The purpose of these provisions is to encourage flexibility in the design of village residential
development, encourage creative development that preserves the gullies and streams, an
undisturbed buffer along Interstate 295, and existing trails and provides links for a better
connected trail system. Trails should serve a recreational use or to connect key locations and
can provide an alternative form of transportation that will help mitigate the traffic congestion
created by increased housing densities and tourist traffic, improve the safety of pedestrians and
bicyclists, create opportunities for residents to increase physical activity and improve health,
promote economic vitality, and to build a stronger sense of community by allowing people of all
ages to walk and bike on common rights of way. These provisions are intended further to
create good neighborhood development and to minimize the cost of constructing and
maintaining utilities and streets
All residential subdivisions in the village area are required to provide open space. Secondary
conservation areas are shown on the Village Open Space Map dated 08/03/05 included as
Addendum 2 to this Ordinance. However, in some cases, the open space would be too small or
in a location that is not considered to be secondary conservation area. In those cases, the Project
Review Board may require that a fee in lieu of open space land be paid. For developments that
have secondary conservation area, but not enough to meet the village open space requirement,
the project Review Board may require that a combination of dedicated open space and a fee in
lieu of open space.
504B.2 Applicability
1. This section 504B shall apply to:
a. all applications for approval of subdivisions within the Freeport Village Overlay
District submitted after June 22, 2005, whether or not any such application would be
deemed a “pending proceeding” under 1 M.R.S.A. §302, and
b. any application to amend a subdivision within the Freeport Village Overlay District
approved before June 22, 2005, that creates two or more lots or units.,
504B.3 Design and Construction Standards
The Project Review Board shall be authorized to approve Village Open Space Subdivisions,
which conform to the requirements of this Ordinance, the Subdivision Ordinance of the Town of
Freeport, and all other applicable ordinances of the Town of Freeport. The Project Review
Board shall be further authorized to require public access on some or all of the required open
space.
504B.4 Open Space Requirements
1. Meeting the Requirement
The open space requirement in village open space subdivisions shall be met with land only if
the parcel has secondary conservation areas as shown on the Village Open Space Map 1
- 125 -
dated August 2, 2005, or would provide a connection or link for a trail to or between a
destination shown on Open Space Map 2 dated August 2, 2005 . The Project Review Board
may require public access in the open space where such access would further the purposes
described in Section 504B.1 above and where, because of the location of the required open
space, prohibiting public access would frustrate the purposes described in Section 504B.1.
2. Fee in lieu of land
a. If the parcel does not include any secondary conservation area, the applicant will pay a
fee in lieu of open space. The fee shall be established by order of the Town Council and
may be amended from time to time by order of the Town Council. The fee shall be
uniform throughout the Freeport Village Overlay District and shall be based on fair
market value of back land or conservation land in Freeport. The fee shall be established
on a square foot basis. For example, if an acre of non-developable land is valued at
$30,000, then the open space fee would be calculated as follows: $30,000 acre/ 43,560
sf/acre = .70 per square foot of open space.
b. The Project Review Board may approve a combination of open space land and a fee in
lieu of open space when a parcel has significant open space, but not enough to meet the
required open space area. For example, if a subdivision is required to provide 15,000
s.f. of open space and the Board decides that the parcel has 5,000 s.f. of secondary
conservation area, the 10,000 s.f. of remaining required open space may be paid as a fee
in lieu of open space. If the fee per square foot is .70, the fee shall be .70 x 10,000, or
$7,000 in addition to the open space land.
c. The fees shall be deposited in the land bank fund as described in Chapter 35-7 of the
Municipal Code.
d. The fees shall be used at the discretion of the Town Council to purchase open space or to
provide village open space amenities such as trail construction, parks, landscaping,
benches, and stream crossings in the Freeport Village Overlay District.
504B.5. Uses Permitted on Required Open Space Lands
1. Non-commercial recreation which does not require permanent structures
2. Up to 40% of the land may be used for non-commercial recreation which requires
permanent structures
3. Trails for pedestrians and bicyclists
4. Neighborhood open spaces such as village greens, commons, picnic areas and other
similar passive recreation uses
5. Access to sewer or water lines, or other public utility purposes, but excluding wireless
telecommunications facilities
- 126 -
6. Water supply and sewage disposal systems for subdivision lots provided the appropriate
easements are in place
7. Easements for drainage
504B.6. Ownership Options for Open Space
Open space shall meet the ownership options outlined in Section 504A.5
Section 504 C. RURAL FLEXIBLE LOT DEVELOPMENT {Amended, Effective 12/15/15}
a. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to provide landowners in Rural Districts an alternative
approach to lot development. This section allows for the same lot density as traditional lot
development while providing for the creation of open space and the protection of
environmentally sensitive areas such as wetlands, vernal pools and steep slopes. It allows
flexibility in the size and shape of lot development. This section applies only where the
development of the lots does not constitute a subdivision as defined in 30-A M.R.S.A.
section 4401.
b. Applicability
Rural Flexible Lot Developments may be created in the Rural Residential 1, 1A, and 2
Districts and the Resource Protection 2 District on a parcel that is greater than 7.5 acres. A
“Flexible Lot” shall mean a new designated piece of land created under the space standards
of Sec. 504C.c. The “Open Space Lot” shall mean the remaining land of the “Lot of Record
at the time of the survey submission that has at least 2.5 acres with 200 feet of road frontage
plus the required open space and any remaining land of the Lot of Record. Flexible Lots in a
Rural Flexible Lot Development are limited to the permitted use of a single family dwelling.
c. Flexible Lot Space Standards
Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet
Maximum lot size: 1 acre
Minimum road frontage requirement: 100 feet
Maximum building height: 35 feet
Minimum setback: front 50 feet
Side 25 feet
Rear 50 feet
Minimum setback from the perimeter
of the Lot of Record 50 feet
Minimum shore frontage 150 feet
Minimum lot width 100 feet
d. Flexible lot limitation and Calculating density
Regardless of the size of a parcel, no Rural Flexible Lot Development shall have more than
4 Flexible Lots as defined by Sec. 504C.b above. To calculate the number of Flexible Lots,
- 127 -
divide the total acreage by 2.5 acres for any lot that would have 200’ of road frontage
available. For Lots that wouldn’t have 200’ of road frontage available on an existing public
or private road, divide the acreage by 2.75 acres. Land area used for a right-of-way that is
created to meet road frontage requirement for the Flexible Lot may not be included in the
land area of the Flexible Lot. Any houses that exist on the property must use one of the
allowable lots.
Example: A 10 acre lot with 400’ of road frontage would yield 3 lots; two Flexible Lots and
one Open Space Lot. Two of the lots have 200 feet of road frontage and would have a
minimum lot size of 2.5 acres or a total of 5 acres. Because there isn’t 200’ of road
frontage for the third lot, the remaining 5 acres uses a minimum lot size of 2.75 acres;
therefore only one more Flexible Lot is allowed.
e. Calculating open space and lot size
The required open space is the difference between the minimum lot size of 2.5 acres and the
size of the Flexible Lot created, regardless of the minimum lot size used for calculating the
density. The Open Space Lot is the sum of all of the required open space areas plus the
required rural lot size of 2.5 acres with at least 200 feet of road frontage plus any remaining
land of the Lot of Record, except as allowed below in Sec. 504.C.f.. Environmentally
sensitive areas such as wetlands, vernal pools and steep slopes should not be included in a
Flexible Lot to the extent possible. The Open Space Lot must include a deed restriction
explaining the land area of the required open space and that it may not be further subdivided
or developed in perpetuity.
For example: Using the same example as above; the 2 Flexible Lots are 20,000, and 30,000
square feet each (2.5 acres = 108,900 square feet).
Flexible Lot 1 – (20,000 sf) open space = 108,900sf – 20,000sf = 88,900sf
Flexible Lot 2 – (30,000 s.f)open space = 108,900sf – 30,000sf = 78,900sf
OPEN SPACE requirement = 167,800 sf (3.9 acres)
Open Space Lot = 2.5 acres minimum lot size + 2.5 acres remaining land of Lot of Record
+ 3.9 acres required open space = 8.9 acres
f. Use of Open Space Lot
The Open Space Lot may have one single family dwelling with any of the following
accessory uses: agriculture, agritourism activity and timber harvesting and forest
management, non-commercial recreation that doesn’t require permanent structures, water
and sewage disposal systems for the open space lot and flexible lots in the development
provided the appropriate easements are provided, utility and/or drainage easements.
The area of the open space may be transferred to a government entity or a non-profit
organization that has a mission of holding land for conservation purposes. If the open space
is transferred, it must have a deed restriction that protects the land from future development
in perpetuity. The remaining land must have at least 2.5 acres and 200 feet of road frontage.
- 128 -
g. Application Submission Requirements
All Rural Flexible Lot Developments require the review and approval of the Town Planner
and the Codes Enforcement Officer. An application for review and approval must include
the following information:
1. Two plot plans based on the deed for the property prepared by a licensed surveyor,
including:
a. The approximate location of all of the proposed lots including dimensions
and lot sizes.
b. The approximate location of any easements on the property.
c. A calculation that shows how the density was calculated, and a list of each
Flexible Lot with their size and the required open space.
d. The calculation and the size of the Open Space Lot and a list of the deed
restrictions that will be placed on that lot.
e. A signature line for the Codes Enforcement Officer.
f. A section of conditions of approval which shall include at least the following:
i. The lot that will receive the open space and will be subject to a deed
restriction that protects the land from future development in perpetuity.
This deed restriction must be created before the first Flexible Lot is
offered for sale.
ii. The shape and location of the lot may change; however the size of the lot
being created must be as shown on this plan.
iii. This approval runs with the land and does not expire unless the owner of
the land submits documentation to the town that the approval has been
invalidated as allowed by Sec. 504C.i.b below.
iv. The lots shown on this plan are illustrative of the number, size and
overall density of lots that may be developed under Section 504.C of this
Ordinance, “Rural Flexible Lot Development.” This plan does not
constitute approval of a subdivision under 30-A M.R.S.A. section 4403.
Lots may be conveyed only in a manner which does not create a
subdivision as defined in 30-A M.R.S.A. section 4401.
h. Approval Criteria
The Codes Enforcement Officer r shall approve the plan provided all of the standards of this
section have been met. By signing the Plan, the Codes Enforcement Officer, or their
equivalent at the time, shall be considered an approval. No Flexible Lots may be sold until
the approved plot plan is recorded in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds. The
approved Plan must be recorded in the Registry of Deeds within 90 days of the signature of
the plan. The Plan Book and Page number of the recorded Plan shall be added to the
second plot plan that shall be kept in a file in the Town Office. A note shall be added to the
Tax Assessing data to acknowledge that the lot is being developed as a Rural Flexible Lot
Development.
If the Codes Enforcement Officer determines that a Plan is not complete or that a standard is
not met, the applicant shall be notified in writing the exact nature of the omission or how the
Plan doesn’t comply with the standards of this section.
- 129 -
i. Conveyance of Lots
Lots that have been approved as part of a Rural Flexible lot Development may only be sold
in a manner that do not create a subdivision as defined by 30-A M.R.S.A. §4401.
j. Plan Amendments or Invalidation
a. Amendments – a landowner may amend the plan if the lot sizes are going to change or if a
Zoning Ordinance amendment is adopted that the landowner has decided would be
beneficial to the development. To amend a Flexible Lot Development Plan, the landowner
shall submit a revised plan to the Town
Planner and Codes Enforcement Officer. A note shall be included on the Plan stating
what revisions have been made to the Plan. The Town Planner and Codes Enforcement
Officer shall sign the Plan if all of the standards of this section have been met.
b. Invalidation - -A landowner may decide at any point that the flexible lot development
scheme that was proposed and approved is no longer a good option. To invalidate a
Flexible Lot Development Plan, the landowner shall submit a revised plan to the Town
Planner and Codes Enforcement Officer. A note shall be included on the Plan stating
what revisions have been made to the Plan along with the new lot calculation and open
space requirement calculations. The Town Planner and Codes Enforcement Officer shall
sign the Plan if all of the standards of this section have been met. The signed Plan must be
recorded in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds within 90 days of the signing of the
Plan.
Section 504D. COMMERCIAL OPEN SPACE SUBDIVISIONS
{Amended, Effective 08/06/19}
504D.1 Purpose
The purpose of these provisions is to encourage flexibility in the design of subdivisions in
commercial districts, to preserve a buffer where commercial districts are adjacent to residential
districts and to protect environmentally sensitive areas.
504D.2 Applicability
1. This Section - 504D shall apply to:
a. all applications for approval of subdivisions within the Commercial Districts where
allowed submitted after 06/06/19 whether or not any such application would be deemed a
“pending proceeding” under 1 M.R.S.A §302.
504D.3 Design and Construction Standards
The Project Review Board shall be authorized to approve Commercial Open Space
Subdivisions, which conform to the requirements of this Ordinance, the Subdivision Ordinance
of the Town of Freeport, and all other applicable ordinances of the Town of Freeport.
504D.4 Uses Permitted on required Open Space Land
- 130 -
1. Trails for non-motorized uses such as but not limited to pedestrians, bicyclists, skiing, and
snowshoeing
2. Controls that are part of the stormwater management system
3. Easements for drainage and or utilities
504D.5 Ownership Options for Open Space
Open space shall meet the ownership options outlined in Section 504A.5
Section 505. Campgrounds
Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under State licensing procedures
and the following:
A. Recreational Vehicle and Tenting Areas shall meet the following criteria:
1. Each recreational vehicle, tent, or shelter site shall contain a minimum of 5,000
square feet, not including roads and driveways, wetlands and land below the
normal high water line of a water body;
2. A minimum of 200 square feet of off-street parking plus maneuvering space shall
be provided for each recreational vehicle, tent, or shelter site.
B. The area intended for placement of the recreational vehicle, tent or shelter and utility and
service buildings shall meet the required setbacks for the District in which the
campground is located.
C. Screening shall be required when necessary to shield the ground from non-compatible
abutting areas.
D. Water supply and electrical utilities shall be installed underground.
Section 506. Buffer Zones
No building or structure shall be erected or any use permitted in the following districts (RR-IA, C-I,
C-III, C-IV, MD, LB, VC-I, VC-II, VC-III, I-I, I-II, MW) which abut the following districts (RR-I,
RR-II, RP-I, RP-II, MDR-I, MDR-II, V-I, and V-II) unless the following requirements are satisfied.
A. The side and rear yards abutting residential districts shall maintain the district boundary
in its natural state to provide a buffer of at least the setback distance. Where larger
buffers are required by specific District provisions, the larger size shall prevail.
- 131 -
B. When natural features such as slope, gullies, stands of trees, shrubbery or rock outcrops
do not exist or are insufficient to provide a buffer, the developer shall landscape, or
where not feasible, provide fencing or screening.
C. Natural features, landscaping, or, if necessary, fencing or screening, should not be
expected to hide the proposed development from abutting properties, but only to soften
the impact so that it is no more adverse than the Permitted Uses, as stipulated in the (B)
subsections of Article IV in the Residential Districts.
D. Fencing and screening, when necessary, shall be properly maintained and located or
constructed in such a manner that it can be maintained from the developer’s property.
E. The buffer zone shall be located in the non-residential district.
F. Notwithstanding subsections (A) and (E) above, when a lot is transected by a zoning
district boundary, the buffer required by this Section may be maintained from the lot line
rather than from the district boundary line.
Section 507. Shoreland Zone Regulations {Amended, Effective 07/01/09 & 09/17/19}
A. Purposes:
It is the intent of this Section to provide for the regulation of activities and uses in the Shoreland
Zones in order to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; to prevent and control
water pollution; to protect fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird and other wildlife habitat; to
protect buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion; to protect archaeological and
historic resources; to protect freshwater and coastal wetlands; to control building sites and
placement of structures; to conserve shore cover and visual as well as actual points of access to
inland and coastal waters; to conserve natural beauty and open space; and to anticipate and
respond to the impacts of development in shoreland areas.
B. Authority:
This Section has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 38 Sections 438-A(1)
of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated (M.R.S.A.).
C. Applicability:
The regulations of this Section 507 shall be in addition to and shall apply concurrently with the
zoning district in which the parcel is located. Where a conflict exists, the more restrictive
requirements shall apply. The Shoreland Zones include Resource Protection 1, Shoreland Area,
Stream Protection, and Marine Waterfront as defined in Section 507.F below.
D. Effective date
The effective date of these ordinance amendments shall be on the date approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection herineafter “the Commissioner”,
or if the Commissioner fails to act on the Ordinance amendments within 45 days of his/her
receipt of the Ordinance amendments, it shall be automatically approved.
- 132 -
An application for a permit submitted to the municipality within the forty-five day period shall
be governed by the terms of this Ordinance amendment if the Ordinance amendment is approved
by the Commissioner.
E. Districts and Zoning Map. The areas to which this Ordinance is applicable are hereby divided
into the following districts as shown on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map which is part of this
Ordinance
1. Resource Protection 1
2. Shoreland Area
3. Maritime Waterfront
4. Stream Protection
F. Establishment of Districts
1. Resource Protection – The Resource Protection District includes areas in which
development would adversely affect water quality, productive habitat, or biological
ecosystems. The space and bulk standards of the adjacent district apply in this District.
This district includes the following areas:
a. Areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance of the upland edge of salt water marshes
and salt meadows which are rated “high” or “moderate” value waterfowl and
wading bird habitat, including nesting and feeding areas, by the Maine Department
of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as of January 1, 1973, and areas within 250 feet,
horizontal distance, of the upland edge of freshwater wetlands which are rated
“moderate” or “high” value waterfowl and wading bird habitat, including nesting
and feeding areas, by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife
(MDIF&W) that are depicted on a Geographic Information System (GIS) data layer
maintained by either MDIF&W or the Department of Environmental Protection as
of May 1, 2006
b. Floodplains as defined as 100-year floodplain as designated on the Federal
Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps adjacent
to tidal waters.
c. Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slop of 20% or greater.
d. Areas of two (2) or more contiguous acres supporting wetland vegetation and
hydric soils, which are not part of a freshwater or coastal wetland as defined, and
which is not surficially connected to a water body during the period of normal high
water.
2. Shoreland Area – The Shoreland Area is an overlay district and is an area that is suitable
for the uses permitted in the underlying district. It includes areas within 250’ of the high
water line of a tidal area other than those in Resource Protection 1 or Stream Protection.
Any uses allowed in the underlying district are allowed in the shoreland area provided all
of the standards of Section 507 are met. Space and bulk standards in this area are the
same as the underlying District.
3. Stream Protection – The Stream Protection District includes all land areas within seventyfive
(75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water line of a stream as defined in
this Ordinance, exclusive of those areas within two hundred and fifty (250) feet,
- 133 -
horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a freshwater or coastal wetland. Where a
stream and another shoreland zone intersect, that land area shall be regulated under the
terms of the other shoreland zone.
4. Marine Waterfront – The Marine Waterfront District includes areas where the existing
predominant pattern of development is functionally water dependent uses. The intent of
this district is to recognize and preserve the marine heritage of Freeport and to permit
services essential to fishing and boating. There is no minimum lot size, lot frontage, or
shore setback requirements in this area, the setback requirements from the front, side, and
rear property lines shall be fifteen (15) feet.
G. Permitted Uses:
TABLE 1. LAND USES IN THE SHORELAND ZONE
LAND USES DISTRICT
SP RP MW
1. Non-intensive recreational uses not requiring structures
such as hunting, fishing and hiking
yes
CEO
yes
2. Forest management activities and timber harvesting yes CEO yes
3. Clearing or removal of vegetation for activities other than
timber harvesting
CEO CEO yes
4. Fire prevention activities yes yes yes
5. Wildlife management practices yes yes yes
6. Soil and water conservation practices yes yes yes
7. Emergency operations yes yes yes
8. Agriculture CEO CEO yes
9. Aquaculture CWC CWC CWC
10. One and two family and multi-family residential,
including driveways
no no no
11. Conversions of seasonal residences to year-round
residences
no no no
12. Home occupations yes yes yes
13. Essential services CEO CEO CEO
14. Public and private recreational areas involving minimal
structural development
CEO CEO PRB
15. Individual, private campsites CEO CEO CEO
16. Campgrounds no no no
17. Parking facilities associated with permitted uses no no PRB
18. Marina, boat yard, ship chandlery, commercial fishery,
municipal wharf
no no PRB
19. Excavation, filling and earth moving of <15 cubic yards no yes yes
20. Filling and earth moving of >15 cubic yards no CEO CEO
- 134 -
PRB – Project Review Board SP – Stream Protection
CEO – Codes Enforcement Officer RP – Resource Protection 1
CWC – Coastal waters Commission MW – Marine Waterfront
LPI – Local Plumbing Inspector
H. Principal and Accessory Structures
1. All new principal and accessory structures shall be setback at least seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a waterbody, tributary stream or the
upland edge of a wetland. In the Resource Protection District, the setback requirement shall
be 250 feet, horizontal distance, except for structures, roads, parking spaces or other
regulated objects specifically allowed in that district in which case the setback requirements
specified above shall apply.. This setback does not apply to piers, docks, and retaining walls
necessary for the control of shoreline erosion, nor to other functionally dependent uses.
2. For areas identified as a “coastal bluff area” (designated with a red line) on the Official
Zoning map, all new principal and accessory structures shall be setback at least 75’ from the
top of the bank. The top of the bank shall be determined by the Codes Enforcement Officer.
3. The total footprint area of all structures, parking lots and other non-vegetated surfaces, within
the shoreland zones shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot or a portion thereof,
located within the shoreland zones, including land previously developed, except in the
Marine Waterfront District where the lot coverage shall not exceed seventy (70) percent.
4. Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing structures which are permitted in
the Resource Protection 1, Stream Protection, and Shoreland Area, shall not exceed thirtyfive
(35) feet in height. This provision shall not apply to structures such as transmission
lines, windmills, antennas, and similar structures having no floor area.
5. Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or similar structures may be
allowed with a permit from the Codes Enforcement Officer, to provide shoreline access in
areas of steep slopes or unstable soils provided: that the structure is limited to a maximum of
four (4) feet in width; that the structure does not extend below or over the high water line of a
water body or the upland edge of a wetland, , (unless permitted by the Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A.,
section 480-C); and the applicant demonstrates that no other reasonable access alternative
exists on the property.
6. The setback requirements from all other property lines are as outlined in Sec. 507.F above.
I. Space Standards:
1. Minimum Shore Frontage, and lot sizes:
a. Residential per dwelling unit; Minimum Minimum
shore frontage lot area
(1) Adjacent to tidal areas - 150 feet 30,000 s.f.
- 135 -
(2) Adjacent to non-tidal areas - 200 feet 40,000 s.f.
b. All non-residential uses subject to review by the Project Review Board or the Codes
Enforcement Officer;
(1) Adjacent to tidal areas - 200 feet 40,000 s.f.
(2) Adjacent to non-tidal areas - 300 feet 60,000 s.f.
c. Land below the normal high water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland
and land beneath roads serving two (2) lots shall not be included toward calculating
minimum lot area.
d. Lots located on opposite sides of a public road shall be considered each a separate
tract or parcel of land unless such road was established by the owner of land on both
sides thereof after September 22, 1971.
e. The minimum width of any portion of any lot within one hundred (100) feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a
wetland shall be equal to or greater than the shore frontage requirement for a lot with
the proposed use.
f. Setback requirements from property lines other than from the resource being
protected shall be those required in the underlying district unless otherwise listed in
Section 507.F. above.
g. If more than one residential dwelling unit, principal governmental, institutional,
commercial or industrial structure or use, or combination thereof, is constructed or
established on a single parcel, all dimensional requirements shall be met for each
additional dwelling unit, principal structure, or use.
J. Parking Areas:
1. Parking areas shall meet the shoreline and tributary stream setback requirements for
structures for the district in which such areas are located, except that in the MW District,
parking areas shall be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet horizontal distance from the
shoreline or tributary stream. The setback requirement for parking areas serving public
boat launching facilities in other Districts may be reduced to no less than fifty (50) feet
from the normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland if the Codes Enforcement
Officer finds that no other reasonable alternative exists.
2. Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed use and shall be designed to
prevent stormwater runoff from flowing directly into a water body, tributary stream or
wetland and where feasible, to retain all runoff on-site.
3. In determining the appropriate size of proposed parking facilities, the following shall
apply:
a. Typical parking space: 9 feet wide by 18 ½ feet long, for boat trailers add an
additional 20 feet.
b. Internal travel aisles: 20 feet
K. Roads and driveways
New public roads shall meet the requirements of the “Street Acceptance and Standards
Ordinance of the Town of Freeport, Maine.” Where the standards described below are more
- 136 -
stringent, they shall be required. The following standards shall apply to the construction of roads
and drainage systems, culverts and other related features.
1. Roads shall be set back at least seventy-five (75) feet horizontal distance from the normal
high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland
unless no reasonable alternative exists, as determined by the Codes Enforcement Officer,
or the Project Review Board if a road or driveway is also subject to Subdivision and/or
Zoning Ordinance review. If no reasonable alternative exists, the road and/or driveway
setback requirement shall be no less than fifty (50) feet horizontal distance upon clear
showing by the applicant that appropriate techniques will be used to prevent
sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such techniques may
include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling basins, and/or the effective use
of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the
water body, tributary stream or wetland.
On slopes greater than 20 percent the road and/or driveway shall be increased by ten (10)
feet, horizontal distance, for each five (5) percent increase in slope above twenty (20)
percent.
This section does not apply to approaches to water crossings or to roads or driveways that
provide access to permitted structures and facilities located nearer to the shoreline or
tributary stream due to operational necessity, excluding temporary docks for recreational
uses. Roads and driveways providing access to permitted structures within the setback
area shall comply fully with the requirements of this Section except for that portion of the
road or driveway necessary for direct access to the structure.
2. Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right-of-way regardless of
their setback from a water body, tributary stream or wetland.
3. New roads and driveways are prohibited in the Resource Protection I District except that
the Codes Enforcement Officer may grant a permit to construct a road or driveway to
provide access to a permitted use in the district upon a finding that no reasonable
alternative route or location is available outside the district. When a road or driveway is
permitted in the Resource Protection 1 District 1 the road shall be set back as far as
practicable from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland
edge of a wetland.
4. Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two (2) horizontal to one (1)
vertical and shall be graded and stabilized in accordance with the provisions for erosion
and sedimentation control contained in subsection Q below.
5. Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than ten (10) percent except for segments
of less than two hundred (200) feet.
6. In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from directly entering water
bodies, tributary streams or wetlands, roads and driveways shall be designed,
- 137 -
constructed, and maintained to empty onto a vegetated buffer strip at least (50) feet, plus
two times a number equal to the percentage of the average slope, in width between the
outflow point of the ditch or culvert and the normal high-water line of a water body,
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland. Surface drainage shall be diffused or
spread out to promote infiltration of the runoff and to minimize channelized flow of the
drainage through the buffer strip.
7 Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnouts shall be installed
in a manner effective in directing drainage onto a vegetated buffer strip before the flow
gains sufficient volume or head to erode the road, driveway, or ditch. To accomplish
this, the following shall apply:
a. Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water turnouts shall be spaced
along the road, or driveway at intervals no greater than indicated in the following
table:
Grade Spacing
(Percent) (Feet)
0-2 250
3-5 200-135
6-10 100- 80
11-15 80-60
16-20 60-45
21+ 40
b. Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only where the grade is
ten (10) percent or less.
c. Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly installed in order to
allow for effective functioning, and their inlet and outlet ends shall be stabilized
with appropriate materials.
d. On sections having slopes greater than ten (10) percent, ditch relief culverts shall
be placed at approximately a thirty (30) degree angle downslope from a line
perpendicular to the centerline of the road or driveway.
8. Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips water turnouts and other storm water runoff control
installations associated with roads and driveways shall be maintained on a regular basis to
assure effective functioning.
L. Storm Water Runoff
1. All new construction and development shall be designed to minimize storm water runoff
from the site in excess of the natural predevelopment conditions. Where possible,
- 138 -
existing natural runoff control features, such as berms, swales, terraces and wooded areas
shall be retained in order to reduce runoff and encourage infiltration of storm waters.
2. Storm water runoff control systems shall be maintained as necessary to ensure proper
functioning.
M. Septic Waste Disposal
1. All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in conformance with the State
of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, and the following: a) clearing or
removal of woody vegetation necessary to site a new system and any associated fill
extensions, shall not extend closer than seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from
the normal high-water line of a water body or the upland edge of a wetland and b) a
holding tank is not allowed for a first-time residential use in the shoreland zone.
N. Public Utilities
1. Where feasible, the installation of public utility service shall be limited to existing public
and private ways and existing service corridors.
2. Where allowed , such structures shall be located so as to minimize any adverse impacts
on surrounding uses and resources, including visual impacts as determined by the Codes
Enforcement Officer.
3. Damaged or destroyed public utility transmission and distribution lines, towers and
related equipment may be replaced or reconstructed without a permit.
O. Agriculture
1. All spreading of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with the Manure
Utilization Guidelines published by the Maine Department of Agriculture on November
1, 2001, and the Nutrient Management Law (7 M.R.S.A. sections 4201-4209)..
2. Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal
distance, of a great pond classified seventy-five (75) feet horizontal distance, of water
bodies, tributary streams, or wetlands within the Shoreland Zone. All manure storage
areas within the Shoreland Zone must be constructed or modified such that the facility
produces no discharge of effluent or contaminated storm water. .
3. Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than forty thousand (40,000) square
feet in surface area, within the Shoreland Zone shall require a Conservation Plan to be
filed with the Codes Enforcement Officer and approved by the Town Engineer using the
Department of Environmental Protection’s Best Management Practices, except that
manure may be spread on any home garden less than 10,000 square feet outside of the 75
foot shore setback area. Non-conformance with the provisions of said plan shall be
considered to be a violation of this Ordinance.
- 139 -
4. There shall be no new tilling of soil within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance of
water bodies, and coastal wetlands nor within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance,
of tributary streams and freshwater wetlands within the Shoreland Zone. Operations in
existence on July 2, l992, and not in conformance with this provision may be maintained.
5. After July 2, l992, newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted within
seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance of all water bodies, nor within twenty-five (25)
feet, horizontal distance, of tributary streams and wetlands within the Shoreland Zone.
Livestock grazing associated with presently existing farm activities, and which are not in
conformance with the above setback provisions may continue, provided that such grazing
is conducted in accordance with a Conservation Plan.
P. Individual Private Campsites. Individual private campsites not associated with
campgrounds, outdoor recreation and/or outdoor recreation school, are allowed provided the
following conditions are met:
(1) One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, or thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet of lot area within the shoreland zone, whichever is less, may be
permitted.
(2) When an individual private campsite is proposed on a lot that contains another principal
use and/or structure, the lot must contain the minimum lot dimensional requirements for
the principal structure and/or use, and the individual private campsite separately.
(3) Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a recreational vehicle or
tent platform, shall be set back one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, from the
normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or river flowing to a great pond
classified GPA, and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal highwater
line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.
(4) Only one recreational vehicle shall be allowed on a campsite. The recreational vehicle
shall not be located on any type of permanent foundation except for a gravel pad, and no
structure except a canopy shall be attached to the recreational vehicle.
(5) The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter
in a Resource Protection District shall be limited to one thousand (1000) square feet.
(6) A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and location of sewage
disposal shall be required for each campsite and shall be approved by the Local
Plumbing Inspector. Where disposal is off-site, written authorization from the receiving
facility or land owner is required.
(7) When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed on-site for more than one
hundred and twenty (120) days per year, all requirements for residential structures shall be
met, including the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system in compliance with
- 140 -
the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules unless served by public sewage
facilities.
Q. Timber Harvesting
The Freeport regulation of timber harvesting is repealed on the statutory date established
under 38 M.R.S.A. section 438-B(5), at which time the State of Maine Department of
Conservation’s Bureau of Forestry shall administer timber harvesting standards in the
shoreland zone. On the date established under 38 M.R.S.A. section 438-B(5) the following
provisions of this Ordinance are repealed:
a. Table 1 – Land Uses in the Shoreland Zone – references to forest management
and timber harvesting
b Section P in its entirety, except that the following shall remain “Where permitted
in the underlying zoning district, timber harvesting in a Shoreland Zone shall be
administered and enforced by the Director of the Bureau of Forestry in
accordance with Chapter 21 of the Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting
and Related Activities in Shoreland Areas, dated June 15, 2005, established by the
Maine Forest Service.”
c. Section 101 – Definitions, the definition of ‘Forest management activities.”
1. Timber Harvesting shall conform with the following provisions:
a. Selective cutting of no more than forty (40) percent of the total volume of trees
four (4) inches or more in diameter measured at 4 ½ feet above ground level on
any lot in any ten (10) year period is permitted. The Codes Enforcement Officer
may permit timber harvesting in excess of the 40 percent limitation if a forest
management plan, signed by a Maine licensed professional forester, concludes
that such exemption is necessary for good forest management and is carried out in
accordance with the purposes of this Shoreland Zone.
In addition:
(1) Within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance of the normal highwater
line of all water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a
wetland there shall be no clear cut openings and a well-distributed stand of
trees and other vegetation, as defined in Section N.1.b.2., including
existing ground cover, shall be maintained.
(2) At distances greater than seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance of the
normal high-water line of all water bodies, tributary streams or the upland
edge of a wetland, harvesting operations shall not create single clear cut
openings greater than ten-thousand (10,000) square feet in the forest
canopy.
- 141 -
Where such openings exceed five-thousand (5000) square feet they shall
be at least one hundred (100) feet apart. Such clear cut openings shall be
included in the calculation of total volume removal.
For the purpose of these standards, volume may be considered to be
equivalent to basal area.
b. No accumulation of slash shall be left within fifty (50) feet of the normal highwater
line of a water body. In all other areas, slash shall either be removed or
disposed of in such a manner that it lies on the ground and no part thereof extends
more than four (4) feet above the ground. Any debris that falls below the normal
high-water line of a water body shall be removed.
c. Timber harvesting equipment shall not use stream channels as travel routes except
when:
(1) Surface waters are frozen; and
(2) The activity will not result in any ground disturbance.
d. All crossings of flowing water shall require a bridge or culvert, except in areas
with low banks and channel beds which are composed of gravel, rock or similar
hard surface which would not be eroded or otherwise damaged.
e. Skid trail approaches to water crossings shall be located and designed so as to
prevent water runoff from directly entering the water body or tributary stream.
Upon completion of timber harvesting, temporary bridges and culverts shall be
removed and areas of exposed soil revegetated.
f. Except for water crossings, skid trails and other sites where the operation of
machinery used in timber harvesting results in the exposure of mineral soil shall
be located such that a strip of vegetation of at least seventy-five (75) feet in width
for slopes up to ten (10) percent shall be retained between the exposed mineral
soil and the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland.
For each ten (10) percent increase in slope, the vegetated strip shall be increased
by twenty (20) feet. The provisions of this paragraph apply only to a face sloping
toward the water body or wetland, provided, however, that no portion of such
exposed mineral soil on a back face shall be closer than twenty-five (25) feet from
the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland.
R. Clearing of Vegetation for Development
1. In a Resource Protection 1 District the cutting or removal of vegetation shall be limited to
that which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that district.
2. Within the strip of land extending 75’, horizontal distance, inland from the normal high
water line,
- 142 -
b. In all other Districts, a buffer strip of vegetation shall be preserved. All vegetation
removal shall be subject to the following provisions:
(1) There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet in the forest
canopy (or other existing woody vegetation if a forested canopy is not
present) as measured from the outer limits of the tree or shrub crown;
however, a footpath or other recreational trail not to exceed six (6) feet in
width as measured between tree trunks and/or shrub stems is allowed
provided that a cleared line of sight to the water through the buffer strip is
not created.
(2) Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is allowed provided that a
well distributed stand of trees and other natural vegetation is maintained.
For the purposes of this section a “well-distributed stand of trees” adjacent
to water bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands, is defined as maintaining
a minimum rating score of 8 points as hereinafter defined per 25-foot
square area. (625 sq. ft.) as determined on plans prepared by a licensed
forester.
Diameter of Tree at 4-1/2 feet
Above Ground Level (inches) Points
2 - 4 in. 1
>4 - 12 in. 2
>12 in. 4
For the purposes of this section, “other natural vegetation” is defined as
retaining existing vegetation under three (3) feet in height and other
ground cover and retaining at least three (3) saplings less than two (2)
inches in diameter at four and one-half (4 ½) feet above ground level for
each 25-foot square area. If three (3) saplings do not exist, no woody
stems less than two (2) inches in diameter can be removed until 3 saplings
have been recruited into the plot.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than 40% of the total
volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured at 4 ½ feet
above ground level may be removed in any ten (10) year period.
(3) Pruning of tree branches on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is permitted.
(4) In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing vegetation
under three (3) feet in height and other ground cover, including leaf litter
and the forest duff layer, shall not be cut covered, or removed, except to
provide for a footpath or other permitted use as described in Section N.1.b
above.
- 143 -
(5) When the removal of storm-damaged, diseased, unsafe, or dead trees
results in the creation of cleared openings, these openings shall be
replanted with native tree species unless existing new tree growth is
present.
Section N.1.b. above does not apply to those portions of public recreational
facilities adjacent to public swimming areas as long as cleared areas are
limited to the minimum area necessary.
3. Outside of the 75’ shore setback:
a. At distances greater than seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the
normal high-water line of all water bodies, tributary stream, or the upland edge of
a wetland, there shall be allowed on any lot, in any ten (10) year period, selective
cutting of not more than forty (40) percent of the volume of trees four (4) inches
or more in diameter, measured 4 ½ feet above ground level. Tree removal in
conjunction with the development of permitted uses shall be included in the forty
(40) percent calculation. For the purposes of these standards volume may be
considered to be equivalent to basal area.
In no event shall cleared openings for any purpose, including but not limited to,
principal and accessory structures, driveways, lawns and sewage disposal areas,
exceed in the aggregate, 25% of the lot area within the shoreland zone or ten
thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is greater, including land previously
cleared. This provision shall not apply to the Marine Waterfront District.
4. Legally existing nonconforming cleared openings may be maintained, but shall not be
enlarged, except as allowed by this Ordinance.
5. Fields and other cleared openings which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees, or other
woody vegetation shall be regulated under the provisions of this section.
S. Erosion and Sedimentation Control
1. Notification of the Codes Enforcement Officer shall be required for filling, earthmoving
and excavation activities described in Section 507.D.2. above. If the CEO determines
that unstable soil conditions may result from the activity, he/she shall require that erosion
and sedimentation control measures be instituted and shall include, where applicable, the
measures described below:
2. All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or other similar activities which
result in unstabilized soil conditions and which require a permit shall also require a
written soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. The plan shall be submitted to the
Codes Enforcement Officer for approval and shall include, where applicable, provisions
for:
a. Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
- 144 -
b. Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt fencing or diversion
ditches.
c. Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or riprap.
3. In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall be designed to fit with
the topography and soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts and fills may
be required shall be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours shall be followed as
closely as possible.
4. Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed
project involving land disturbance, and shall be in operation during all stages of the
activity. The amount of exposed soil at every phase of construction shall be minimized to
reduce the potential for erosion.
5. Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently stabilized within one (1)
week from the time it was last actively worked, by use of riprap, sod, seed, and mulch, or
other effective measures. In all cases, permanent stabilization shall occur within nine (9)
months of the initial date of exposure. In addition:
a. Where mulch is used, it shall be applied to a depth of six (6) inches and shall
be maintained until a catch of vegetation is established.
b. Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable method
may be required to maintain the mulch cover.
c. Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to avoid siltation
into the water. Such measures may include the use of staked hay bales and/or
silt fences.
6. Natural and man-made drainage ways and drainage outlets shall be protected from
erosion from water flowing through them. Drainage ways shall be designed and
constructed in order to carry water from a twenty-five (25) year storm or greater, and
shall be stabilized with vegetation or lined with rip-rap.
T. Soils
All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or structures can be
established or maintained without causing adverse environmental impacts, including severe
erosion, mass soil movement, improper drainage and water pollution, whether during or after
construction. Proposed uses requiring subsurface waste disposal, and commercial or industrial
development and other similar intensive land uses, shall require a soils report based on an on-site
investigation and be prepared by state-certified professionals. Certified persons may include
Maine Certified Soil Scientists, Maine Registered Professional Engineers, Maine State Certified
Geologists and other persons who have training and experience in the recognition and evaluation
of soil properties. In addition, if an on-site investigation for a septic system is needed, a Maine
Licensed Site Evaluator shall submit a required report. The report shall be based upon the
analysis of the characteristics of the soil and surrounding land and water areas, maximum ground
water elevation, presence of ledge, drainage conditions, and other pertinent data which the
- 145 -
evaluator deems appropriate. The soils report shall include recommendations for a proposed
design to counteract soil limitations where they exist.
U. Archaeological Sites
Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil disturbance on or
adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on, the National Register of Historic Places, as
determined by the Codes Enforcement Officer, during the required review process, shall be
submitted by the applicant to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review and
comment at least twenty (20) days prior to action being taken by the Codes Enforcement Officer
who shall consider comments received from the Commission prior to rendering a decision on the
application.
V. Administration
1. Permits Required
After July 2, l992, no person shall, without first obtaining a permit, engage in any
activity or use of land or structure requiring a permit in the Shoreland Zone in which such
activity or use would occur; or expand, change, or replace an existing use or structure; or
renew a discontinued nonconforming use. A person who is issued a permit pursuant to
this Ordinance shall have a copy of the permit on site while the work authorized by the
permit is performed.
A. A permit is not required for the replacement of an existing road culvert as long as:
a. Not more than 25% longer than the culvert being replaced; and
b. Not longer than 75 feet and
c. Provided that adequate erosion control measures are taken to prevent
sedimentation of the water, and that the crossing does not block fish
passage in the water course.
B. A permit is not required for an archaeological excavation as long as the
excavation is conducted by an archaeologist listed on the State Historic
Preservation Officer’s level 1 or level 2 approved list, and unreasonable erosion
and sedimentation is prevented by means of adequate and timely temporary and
permanent stabilization measures.
C. Any permit required by this Ordinance shall be in addition to any other permit
required by other law or ordinance.
2. Permit Application
a. Every applicant for a permit, approval or determination required by the provisions
of this Ordinance governing the Shoreland Zone shall submit a written
application, including a scaled site plan, on a form provided by the Town and any
reasonable and relevant information which shall enable the Coastal Waters
- 146 -
Commission or CEO to make the determinations required in Subsection 3 below.
Applications shall be submitted to the Codes Enforcement Officer. The Coastal
Waters Commission or the Codes Enforcement Officer shall process applications
for permits, approvals or determinations required by the provisions of this
Ordinance governing the Shoreland Zone according to the procedures described in
Section 602(c)(1) of this Ordinance, but may modify those procedures as it deems
appropriate to process the particular permit, approval or determination which is
sought. All applications shall be signed by an owner or individual who can show
evidence of right, title or interest in the property or by an agent, representative,
tenant, or contractor of the owner with authorization from the owner to apply for a
permit hereunder, certifying that the information in the application is complete
and correct.
3. The Project Review Board, the Coastal Waters Commission, the Board of Appeals or the
Codes Enforcement Officer shall approve an application for a permit, only upon finding
that the use, activity or structure complies with all requirements of this Ordinance and
that it meets the criteria listed in Section 602.F.1.L. (1) - (7) below.
No approval shall be granted if the use or structure will violate any other local Ordinance
or regulation or any State law which the municipality is responsible for enforcing.
4. Special Exceptions.
In addition to the criteria specified in Sec.602.F.1.L.(1) –(7) below, excepting structure
setback requirements, the Board of Appeals may approve a permit for a single family
residential structure in a Resource Protection District provided that the applicant
demonstrates that the following conditions are met:
a. There is no location on the property, other than a location within the Resource
Protection District, where the structure can be built.
b. The lot on which the structure is proposed is undeveloped and was established
and recorded in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds before the
adoption of the Resource Protection District.
c. All proposed buildings, sewage disposal systems and other improvements are:
i. located on natural ground slopes of less than 20%, and
ii. located outside the floodway of the 100 year floodplain based on the
elevation shown on the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s
(FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
iii. The total ground-floor area, including cantilevered or similar overhanging
extensions, of all principal and accessory structures is limited to a
maximum of 1,500 square feet. This limited shall not be altered by a
variance.
iv. All structures, except functionally water dependent structures, are setback
from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream or
upland edge of a wetland to the greatest practical extent, but not less than
75 feet, horizontal distance. In determining the greatest practical extent,
the Board of Appeals shall consider the depth of the lot, the slope of the
land, the potential for soil erosion, the type and amount of vegetation to be
- 147 -
removed, the proposed building site’s elevation in regard to the floodplain,
and its proximity to moderate-value and high-value wetlands.
5. Expiration of Permit.
Permits shall expire one year from the date of issuance if substantial start is not made in
construction or in the use of the property during that period. If substantial start is made
within one year of the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall have one additional year
to complete the project, at which time the permit shall expire.
6. Enforcement.
The Codes Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete record of all essential transactions
of the office, including applications submitted, permits granted or denied, variances
granted or denied, revocation actions, revocation of permits, appeals, court actions,
violations investigated, violations found, and fees collected. On a biennial basis, a
summary of this record must be submitted by March 1 to the Director of the Bureau of
Land Quality Control within the Department of Environmental Protection.
7. Installation of Public Utility Service.
No public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility company of any kind may
install services to any new structure located in the Shoreland Zone unless written
authorization attesting to the validity and currency of all local permits required under this
or any previous Ordinance, has been issued by the Codes Enforcement Officer.
Following installation of service, the company or district shall forward the written
authorization to the Codes Enforcement Officer, indicating that installation has been
completed.
8. Fines
Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner’s agent or a
contractor, who orders or conducts any activity in violation of this Ordinance shall be
penalized in accordance with Title 30-A, Maine Revised Statutes Annotated, Subsection
4452 as subsequently amended.
Section 508. Sanitary Standards
A. All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be located in areas of suitable soil and comply with
the minimum standards set forth in the State Plumbing Code.
B. No materials of any kind shall be permanently or temporarily placed or deposited directly into or
in the flood plains of any river or stream, lake, ponds or tidal waters or on the ice thereof where
such material may fall or otherwise find its way into said water courses or tidal waters, nor shall
such material be placed or deposited directly in pits, wells or on ground surface except in
conformity with municipally approved sites and procedures.
- 148 -
C. A marina shall provide, for use by its customers, shower and toilet facilities and shall also
provide an environmentally safe means of removing accumulated waste matter from boats which
have self-contained sanitary waste disposal units.
Section 509. Extraction
A. Purpose:
The purpose of this section is to regulate both new and existing excavations and their accessory
uses. Excavations are unique uses because they must be located where the desired natural
resources exist and because they generally must expand if the use is to continue. Existing and
proposed excavations, therefore, are and may be adjacent to or within residential districts and
may have adverse impacts on surrounding uses due to their potential for producing noise, dust,
vibration, traffic and groundwater contamination. These regulations are intended to protect the
quality and quantity of ground and surface waters, prevent erosion and sedimentation, provide
for the reclamation and rehabilitation of new and existing excavations, minimize any adverse
impact of such excavations on adjacent and nearby properties, and insure minimum standards of
safety during and after active operations.
It is the intent of this Section to permit existing excavations to continue to operate and to expand.
It is also the intent of this section to require rehabilitation of expanded and newly excavated
areas. Excavations existing as of January 16, 1990 may continue to exist and expand without
rezoning only if they meet the requirements of this Section. New excavations, except for Short
Term Excavations, require the creation by the Town Council of a Mining and Extraction Overlay
District before the use is permitted; new excavations are subject to the requirements of this
Section. Minor expansions, defined under “Existing Excavations”, require less extensive review
by the Project Review Board. Larger expansions of existing excavations, Short Term
Excavations and new excavations require more extensive review because of their potential for
creating a greater impact on surrounding properties and the environment and the review is
undertaken by the Project Review Board as an extension of the Site Plan Review process.
B. Definitions:
1. Abandoned Excavation: an excavation which does not qualify as an Existing Excavation.
In order to operate, it must meet the requirements for New Excavation.
2. Excavated area: any area of land on which excavation, as defined in Section 104 of this
Ordinance, is occurring or has occurred.
3. Existing Excavations: an operation where extraction in excess of two hundred (200) cubic
yards of earth materials or fifty (50) cubic yards of topsoil or loam has taken place
lawfully during each of at least three (3) of the previous five (5) calendar years preceding
January 16, 1990.
- 149 -
An existing excavation may expand and still retain its status as an existing excavation
provided that the following limits are not exceeded:
a. The annual rate of extraction shall not increase by more than (10%) of the average
rate per year of the highest three of the previous five (5) calendar years preceding
March 7, 1991.
b. Expansion of the excavated area is limited to a maximum of one acre or 50%
more than the size of the existing excavated area as measured around the edge of
the excavated area as of January 16, 1990, whichever is less, and any such
expansion must remain within the boundaries of the parcel on which the
excavation was occurring on March 7, 1991.
c. The number of processing operations shall not increase and there shall be no
change in processing activities unless the Codes Enforcement Officer determines
that the change will result in a reduced impact on the environment.
Any other increases or changes shall cause reclassification to “Expansion of Existing
Excavation,” as defined below.
Any excavation which has been determined by written decision of the Codes
Enforcement Officer issued prior to January 16, 1990 to have expanded, enlarged or
changed unlawfully may qualify for existing excavation status, but limited to the rate of
extraction, excavated area and number and types of processing operations, if any, which
the Codes Enforcement Officer has determined to be allowed as a lawful nonconforming
use, and cannot operate beyond such limitations unless reviewed and approved as an
“Expansion of Existing Excavation” under Section 509 (F).
4. Expansion of Existing Excavation: An expansion of the excavated area, annual rate of
extraction, or number or types of processing operations exceeding those permitted for
“Existing Excavations” as defined above.
5. New Excavation: An excavation which did not exist before January 16, 1990 or does not
qualify as an existing excavation. Creation of a Mining and Extraction Overlay District
is required for all new excavations except for ponds and Short Term Excavations.
6. Processing Operations: Operations which include, but are not limited to, washing,
cleaning, sifting, crushing, blasting, sawing, grinding and polishing of raw materials, and
the creation of products such as concrete and asphalt.
7. Short Term Excavation: A New Excavation which is permitted in all districts, is limited
to a total lifetime extraction limit of 20,000 cubic yards of earth material, and is limited to
a total, consecutive time of two (2) years from date of initial extraction to completion of
reclamation. a Short Term Excavation shall be subject to the same requirements as a
New Excavation, except that a Short Term Excavation does not require the creation of a
- 150 -
Mining and Extraction Overlay District by the Town Council. Processing shall not be
permitted.
C. Permit Required
There shall be no excavation not otherwise exempt under Subsection D below unless a permit
has been issued under this Section, except that Existing Excavations may continue to operate for
240 days after March 7, 1991 without a permit if a complete application has been filed within
180 days with the Project Review Board as required below. The Project Review Board may
grant a time extension of up to two months for each deadline if it determines that the extension is
needed to obtain relevant information or if Project Review Board schedules require a time
extension.
D. Exemptions: The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this section of the
Ordinance:
1. Excavation, the sole purpose of which is to determine the nature or extent of mineral
resources, which is accomplished by hand-sampling, text boring or other methods which
create minimal disturbance. Test holes shall be filled in immediately after use.
2. Excavation necessarily incidental to construction, alteration, or grading for which a
building permit or other construction permit has been issued by the Codes Enforcement
Officer, plantings which are accessory to permitted and existing uses, excavations and fill
incidental to construction, filling of the earth for gardens and landscaping associated with
permitted and existing uses, and normal excavation and fill whose sole purpose is routine
maintenance of existing facilities and grades.
3. The removal of less than two hundred (200) cubic yards of earth material and less than
fifty (50) cubic yards of topsoil or loam in any one (1) year from any single lot of land,
provided such removal does not disturb more than one (1) acre of land.
The removal of any amount of topsoil or loam from a site is an exempt activity if it is
undertaken as part of an approved construction project, is part of normal farm operations
or the topsoil or loam is being moved to a contiguous site having the same ownership. In
the case of multiple successive excavations on the same property, all such excavations
shall be deemed part of a single excavation for all purposes under this ordinance.
E. Existing Excavation Registration Regulations
Within two hundred forty (240) days of March 7, 1991 or a later date if the Planning Board
grants a time extension, no Existing Excavations shall continue to operate unless they have been
approved by the Planning Board.
If an excavation is not registered or fails to qualify under this Section, it shall be deemed an
abandoned excavation and may not resume operations except according to the requirements for
New Excavations.
- 151 -
1. Procedures:
The application shall be reviewed by the Project Review Board. If the application meets
the requirements of this Section, the Board shall issue a permit effective for three (3)
years. The Project Review Board may hold a public hearing if it deems it necessary to
elicit the required information. The Project Review Board may attach such condition(s)
as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with the purposes and requirements of this
Section.
2. Submission Requirements.
The following shall be submitted:
a. Fee.
b. Completed application form which shall include the following information:
(1) Name and address of owner and/or operator.
(2) Copy of deed of original parcel, map and lot number, lease, if applicable.
(3) Evidence that this is an existing excavation and that it will continue to
operate within the limits of Section 509(B)(3). Evidence of existing
excavation status may include receipts, affidavits, photographs or other
information.
(4) Drawing containing the following information: approximate size of parcel,
location of excavation, name of road frontage, location of access road,
location and size of buffer, existing slope of excavation.
(5) Information on depth to groundwater.
(6) Location of surface water, e.g., streams, ponds, brooks, etc.
(7) Description of reclamation plan for newly excavated areas.
(8) If the operation will include blasting, a blasting plan prepared by a
qualified professional which includes, but is not limited to, an assessment
of the potential impact on surrounding areas.
(9) Location of exposed groundwater.
(10)Location and description of all processing operations.
3. Additional Information. The Project Review Board may require other pertinent
information necessary to determine if the use meets the provisions of this Ordinance.
4. Waivers. The Project Review Board may grant waivers from the required submissions if
it determines that the information is not necessary to evaluate the extent of the impact on
surrounding properties and the environment.
5. Operating Requirements.
(a) No further excavation which would increase the amount of standing groundwater
shall occur and a plan shall be developed to protect existing exposed groundwater
from contamination.
- 152 -
(b) The excavation, including processing operations, shall meet the standards listed in
Subsection G below.
(c) Topsoil shall be stockpiled and used to revegetate newly exposed areas which
shall be reclaimed to a minimum 2:1 slope.
(d) The operation shall comply with all required State and Federal regulations.
6. Permit Renewal. The applicant shall apply for permit renewal before the expiration date
unless the excavation is no longer classified as an “Existing Excavation”. Renewals shall
be reviewed by the Staff Review Board according to the requirements of this Section
509.E. The purpose of the renewal shall be to determine compliance with the previously
granted permit, status of the reclamation plan and review of future plans.
F. Expansion of Existing Excavations and New Excavations. {Amended, Effective 10/03/17}
No expansion of an existing excavation or creation of a new excavation shall commence unless
the Project Review Board grants a permit under this Subsection. Review of a New Excavation
shall not commence until a Mining and Extraction Overlay District has been created by Town
Council action. The Project Review Board shall review applications according to the procedures
and requirements of Sec. 602 (Site Plan Review) of this Ordinance as well as the additional
requirements described below.
1. Submissions.
In addition to applicable Site Plan Review submissions, the following submissions shall
be made. The Project Review Board may waive any of these requirements if it
determines that the scale of the project is of such size as to make the information
unnecessary. The Project Review Board may require other pertinent information
necessary to determine if the planned use meets the provisions of this Ordinance.
(a) Fee,
(b) Names and addresses of current owner(s) of the property and the current operator;
a copy of the deed, and the lease agreement if the operator is not the owner; map
and lot number; zoning district; size of parcel,
(c) A site plan, drawn to a scale no smaller than one inch to one hundred feet,
showing the location and boundaries of the property; the boundaries of existing
and proposed excavation areas; a boundary survey for any existing and proposed
excavation in excess of five (5) acres; the present use of the entire property
including any existing excavated areas; present uses of adjacent property; the
location of all proposed access roads, parking areas and temporary and permanent
structures; the type and location of all existing surface and ground water,
including location of existing wells and streams, drainage ways, and depth to
groundwater at the site of the proposed excavation as determined by test borings
and/or other geotechnical or other methods if acceptable to the Board; location of
existing and proposed utility service; signs; lighting; the contours of the land
- 153 -
within and extending beyond the boundaries of the parcel for two hundred (200)
feet at five (5) foot contour intervals, or at intervals acceptable to the Board; the
location and design of all proposed hazardous material storage areas;
(d) A plan for controlling access to the site.
(e) An operations statement, which shall include the approximate date of
commencement and duration of excavation, proposed phasing of the operation,
proposed hours and days of operation, the estimated volume of the excavation, the
method(s) of extracting and processing, including the disposition of topsoil, loam,
brush and boulders, the equipment proposed to be used in the operations, and the
operating practices proposed to be used to prevent surface and groundwater
pollution and minimize noise, dust, air contamination and vibration;
(f) An erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared in accordance with the
Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Best Management Practices (BMPs)
Manual for Designers and Engineers published by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection, latest revision; Approval of the Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Plan by the Town Engineer or other authorized qualified
professional shall be required; {Amended, Effective 10/03/17}
(g) A final reclamation plan.
(h) A statement explaining specifically how the applicable performance standards
shall be met.
(i) A description of the proposed Performance Guarantee for the reclamation plan.
(j) A hydrogeological study which shows the depth of groundwater throughout the
site and establishes that the excavation will not cause any pollution to
groundwater and/or surface water.
(k) A traffic study which includes the anticipated maximum estimated volume of
traffic into and out of the excavation, the kinds of trucks and equipment which
will be going into and out of the excavation, any existing or potential traffic
hazards on roads servicing the site and applicant’s plans to address them, and the
ability of such roads physically to withstand the additional traffic generated by the
site. The study shall consider the actual, existing traffic conditions in the vicinity
of the excavation.
(l) Names and addresses of property owners within 500’ of the property.
(m) If the operation is to include blasting, a blasting plan, prepared by a qualified
professional, which includes, but is not limited to, an assessment of the potential
impact on surrounding areas.
- 154 -
G. Standards for Operation of Existing Excavations, Expansion of Existing Excavations and
New Excavations.
All excavations shall meet the following requirements:
1. A buffer strip of one hundred fifty (150) feet from all public rights-of-way and one
hundred fifty (150) feet from all other boundaries of the property is required. The buffer
strip is measured from the property boundary to the top edge of the excavation. No
excavation shall be permitted within the buffer strip and natural vegetation shall be
retained. Topsoil may be stockpiled in the buffer if it is stabilized to prevent erosion and
sedimentation. To the extent necessary to protect neighboring uses from dust, noise and
unsightly appearance, the Project Review Board may require the applicant to provide
additional screening where there is inadequate natural buffer. In those situations,
provisions shall be made to provide trees for a visual and acoustical buffer between the
project and adjacent properties and along the road frontage. The number, location, size
and type of the trees shall be approved by the board. Alternative plans, such as vegetated
berms, may be approved by the Project Review Board if they will provide the required
buffer.
No use, other than the access road where it intersects with the entrance to the parcel, shall
be permitted within the buffer. No excavation or use shall occur in these buffer strips and
no existing excavation or use lawfully located within such buffer areas shall be permitted
to expand horizontally within these buffer strips; however, vertical excavation within this
already excavated area in the buffer may continue. An applicant may, as part of the
application, apply for a waiver of the 150 foot buffer strip in the three instances described
below, and the Board shall grant such waiver in the case of (1) two abutting, working
excavations, and (2) where the excavation abuts unbuildable land of a public utility
provided the excavation remains at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from the public
utility’s property line furthest from the excavation measured perpendicular to that
property line and (3) where any abutting property owner agrees in writing recorded in the
Cumberland County Registry of Deeds to reduce or eliminate the buffer strip where the
excavation adjoins that abutter’s property.
No processing operations shall be located within 300’ of a dwelling other than a
residence permitted on the same lot under Section 424(B)(2). Existing processing
operations located within 300 feet of a dwelling shall be permitted to continue but may
not expand in the direction of a dwelling, unless such dwelling is a residence permitted
on the same lot under Section 424(B)(2).
2. Excavation shall not extend below an elevation of five (5) feet above the seasonal high
ground water table as established by competent, technical data. If the applicant proposes
less than a 5 foot separation, all information required by DEP, under its Site Location
Authority, 38 MRSA Section 481-490, to review groundwater quality and quantity shall
be submitted. If standing water exists in an existing excavated area, no further
excavation which could increase the amount of standing water shall occur. The Project
- 155 -
Review Board may grant a waiver if it determines that the proposal will not impact
groundwater quality and quantity.
3. For existing excavations, the average slope of any cut bank measured from the top of the
slope to the toe of the slope shall not be steeper than a horizontal to vertical ratio of 2:1.
Any excavation in lawful operation at the effective date of this ordinance whose slopes
are steeper than this requirement may maintain, but not increase, such non-conforming
slopes. In an expanded or new excavation, the slope for such areas shall not be steeper
than 3:1. Quarrying operations may be granted waivers from these requirements if the
proposed slopes are stabilized and compatible with the approved reclamation plan.
4. Excavation shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 8:00
a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Saturday. The Project Review Board may approve extended hours of
operation if it determines that such extended hours will not unreasonably interfere with
neighboring residential uses existing at the time of the request.
In the case of emergency need for excavated material, the hours of extraction may exceed
those approved by the Project Review Board on no more than two days in any calendar
year. Any excavation operations to exceed the approved hours for more than two days
require a Temporary Activity Permit pursuant to Section 501 of this Ordinance.
5. Access to the site shall be approved by the Project Review Board and may be limited
according to the particular circumstances of the proposed operation; at a minimum, a gate
with a lock shall be located at each entrance.
All access roads which are outside the excavation and within the buffer area, and which
connect to public roads or adjoining property, shall be paved and/or otherwise regularly
treated with water or calcium chloride spray to minimize dust conditions, as determined
by the Project Review Board.
6. Rock and stone crushing, or other processing activities, which may be permitted by the
Project Review Board as an accessory use to excavation operations, shall be limited to
the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and may be prohibited or
further restricted by the Project Review Board if it will unreasonably interfere with
existing and/or future residential uses. On an annual basis, no more than thirty-three
percent (33%) of all aggregate crushed or otherwise processed on the property of such
excavation operation may be brought in from a location outside the property.
7. Erosion and sedimentation on site shall be adequately controlled, in accordance with the
Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Best Management Practices (BMPs) Manual for
Designers and Engineers published by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection, latest revision; Approval of an Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan by the
Town Engineer or other authorized qualified professional shall be required; {Amended,
Effective 10/03/17}
8. Sufficient topsoil shall be retained and stockpiled on the site to comply with the approved
reclamation plan. Topsoil shall not be removed from the site unless it is not needed after
- 156 -
the site has been completely reclaimed or if the Project Review Board determines that an
alternative reclamation plan is acceptable.
9. Signs and lighting shall be designed and located to prevent public nuisance conditions or
undesirable excess lighting of the neighborhood and the sky. One sign of a maximum
size of 24 square feet shall be permitted at the entrance access road. If the excavation is
in a residential district, the maximum size of the sign face shall be 12 square feet. The
sign shall be wood with minimal down-lighting or no lighting.
10. All potentially hazardous materials (petroleum products, salt, rubbish, etc.) shall be
stored on impervious surfaces in watertight containers.
11. Noise. No operation shall exceed the noise levels required by Sec. 515.
12. Odorous and Toxic Matter. The requirements of Sec. 516 shall be met.
13. Electromagnetic Interference. The requirements of Sec. 517 shall be met.
14. Smoke and Particulate Matter. The requirements of Sec. 518 shall be met. In addition,
all potential sources of fugitive particulate emissions shall be controlled with
water or calcium chloride or other acceptable means so that visible emissions at the
source do not exceed 5% capacity. Potential sources include: all unpaved roads and
parking areas, all uncovered trucks, all sand and aggregate stockpiles and all crushers and
associated equipment. Dust shall not be permitted to drift offsite if it creates a nuisance
condition.
15. Vibrations. The requirements of Sec. 519 shall be met. Any blasting shall require
Project Review Board review under Sec. 509.F. A plan shall be submitted showing
locations and a monitoring plan. Certificates of liability insurance covering the blasting
activity in an amount approved by the Town Manager as sufficient to cover any damage
reasonably likely to occur shall be submitted.
16. Fire and Explosive Hazards. The requirements of Sec. 520 shall be met.
17. Lighting. The requirements of Sec. 521 shall be met.
18. Water Quality Protection. The requirements of Sec. 522 shall be met.
19. Groundwater. The requirements of Sec. 523 shall be met. In addition, no ditches,
trenches, pumping or other methods shall be used to lower the water table to permit
more extraction than could occur under natural conditions unless the applicant can prove
that there will be no harmful impact on groundwater supplies.
If excavation has occurred in the groundwater, a plan shall be developed to remedy the
situation and the Project Review Board shall review and approve a final plan. If such
excavation has occurred in the RP-II District, the property owner shall employ a Certified
- 157 -
Maine Geologist who specializes in Hydrogeology to develop a plan to remedy the
situation and the Project Review Board shall review and approve a final plan.
A fine of $500 shall be levied for each day groundwater exposure occurs in new
excavations prior to being remedied.
20. Reclamation plans shall meet the requirements of Sec. 509.H. Unless authorized,
pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, Title 38, M.R.S.A., Section 480-C as
subsequently amended, no part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff
control features, shall be permitted within seventy-five (75) feet of the normal high-water
line of any water body, tributary stream or the upland edge of a wetland in the Shoreland
Zone.
H. Reclamation.
The following provisions shall apply to all existing excavations, expansions of existing
excavations, and new excavations. A reclamation plan shall be submitted to the Project Review
Board, and the site shall be reclaimed in accordance with the requirements of this Section. The
reclamation plan shall include a description of the proposed use of the site after reclamation and
the plan shall be designed to be suitable for that proposed use. Any project which will operate
for more than five years shall be designed to operate and be reclaimed in phases, if possible. The
reclamation work shall be completed within one year of the closing of a site (or a portion of a
site with regard to phased reclamation plans).
Reclamation of continuing operations shall be conducted in phases, if possible, so that there is
never open more area than is needed to efficiently operate the excavation. Any excavation which
is proposed to operate for a period of time in excess of five years shall be designed to be
reclaimed in phases. At the time of review, the Project Review Board shall determine the
maximum boundary line which may be exposed by excavation before reclamation is begun.
Failure to remove more than four hundred (400) cubic yards of material from an excavation
within any 24 month period shall trigger the obligation of the excavation operator to commence
reclamation. The following requirements shall be met unless the Project Review Board finds
that an alternative plan will achieve the soil stabilization, groundwater and surface water
protection, buffering and aesthetic effects intended by these regulations.
1. Where an embankment remains after the completion of operations, it shall be at a slope
no steeper than (2:1) 2 feet horizontal to one foot vertical for excavated area existing as
of March 7, l991 and 3:1 for expanded and new excavation. Quarrying operations may
be granted waivers from these requirements if the proposed slopes are stabilized.
2. Exposed slopes shall be stabilized so that no erosion will occur. Loaming, seeding and
planting, if required, shall be prepared in accordance with the Maine Erosion and
Sediment Control Best Management Practices (BMPs) Manual for Designers and
Engineers published by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, latest
revision; Sufficient topsoil shall be retained on site to complete the site reclamation.
{Amended, Effective 10/03/17}
- 158 -
3. Overburdened soil shall be redistributed over the excavation area, or removed from the
parcel if not needed for the reclamation plan. All stumps and grubbings shall be removed
from the site or disposed of legally. The areas of the excavation with solid or broken
ledge rock shall be trimmed of loose rock, and the bottom of the excavation graded to be
compatible with the surroundings.
4. Grading and restoration shall be completed in such a manner that it will avoid adverse
drainage impacts on adjacent parcels, prevent standing water unless a wetland is created,
minimize erosion and sedimentation on the parcel and adjacent parcels, and be
compatible with the planned final use of the reclaimed site. The excavation shall be
contoured so that sediment is not directed into streams or drainage ways.
5. A performance guarantee in the form of a bond, letter of credit, or other financial
instrument satisfactory to the Town Manager covering the cost of the reclamation plan
shall be delivered to the Town Manager at the time of Project Review Board approval of
the excavation. The amount of the performance guarantee shall be determined by the
Project Review Board according to the time schedule for the excavation and
rehabilitation, and shall include adjustments for reasonable inflation estimates; the
amount shall include a breakdown of costs of the various stages of reclamation. The
performance guarantee shall remain in force until the Codes Enforcement Officer
certifies that the site has been rehabilitated according to the approved rehabilitation plan.
Failure to complete the reclamation plan approved by the Project Review Board shall
constitute a violation of this Ordinance, subject to enforcement and legal action as
provided in Section 601. In addition, if there is a default of any obligation to reclaim an
excavation under this Section 509, the Town may call upon the performance guarantee
and cause the reclamation plan to be implemented pursuant to the terms of that guarantee.
6. Reclaimed areas shall be guaranteed for a period of eighteen (18) months following the
substantial completion of reclamation, during which time the performance guarantee shall
remain in full force and effect. A reclamation plan shall state specific time requirements
for commencement and substantial completion, and the times may be staggered for
phased extraction work.
I. Inspection.
It shall be a condition of any Project Review Board approval pursuant to this Section 509 that the
Codes Enforcement Officer and his/her agents and assistants may, at reasonable times and after
reasonable notice to the operator of the excavation, enter the property and inspect for compliance
with the requirements of this Section 509, with any conditions of approval and with the
reclamation plan.
- 159 -
Section 510. Design Review
Buildings and structures located in the Design Review District are subject to the regulations of the
Freeport Design Review Ordinance.
Section 511. Signs
All signs shall comply with the Sign Ordinance of the Town of Freeport.
Section 512. Access to Property
A. Each property shall be provided with vehicular access to the property by abutting public or
private ways. Private rights-of-ways shall be protected by permanent easements.
B. Where the proliferation of access points from subdivisions, commercial and industrial
developments to public ways tends to cause traffic hazards, congestion and other manifestations
of strip development, the Project Review Board may require that a developer dedicate a fifty (50)
foot strip adjacent to and running the length of the public way to the use of controlled public
access and landscaping. Such strip shall not be considered as part of the required setback. If
required, such an access roadway shall be constructed in accordance with minimum Town
standards and shall connect in a proper fashion with the roadways of adjoining development.
1. The developer shall file with the Town a performance guarantee in an amount sufficient
to defray the cost of improving the 50-foot strip for marginal landscaping or vehicle
access. The conditions and amount of such performance bond shall be determined by the
Town Manager with the advice of the various municipal departments and agencies
concerned.
2. The Town reserves the right to select areas within the 50-foot marginal access for the
grouping or placement of signs and traffic directions;
3. The Town reserves the right to designate all ingress and egress points to the public or
private way from the 50-foot marginal access as may be needed to meet current and
future traffic control needs.
C. Single and two-family dwellings:
Driveways, roads, rights-of-ways, or other means of access from single and two-family
dwellings to public or private ways shall not have an average slope in excess of eight percent
(8%) within fifty (50) feet of the point of intersection. The angle of intersection
between the access road and the way shall not be less than sixty degrees (60), nor to exceed one
hundred twenty degrees (120).
- 160 -
D. The following criteria shall be followed for driveways to any use other than single and two
family dwellings:
1. No access drive or driveway or other means of ingress and egress shall be located in any
residential zone to provide access to uses other than those permitted in such residential
zone;
2. All entrance and exit driveways shall be located and designed in profile and grading to
afford safety to traffic, provide for safe and convenient ingress and egress to and from the
site and to minimize conflict with the flow of traffic and shall not have an average slope
in excess of 8% within 50’ of the point of intersection.
3. The dimensions of driveways shall be designed to adequately accommodate the volume
and character of vehicles anticipated to be attracted daily onto the land development for
which a site plan is prepared.
4. Provision shall be made for convenient and safe emergency vehicle access to all
buildings and structures at all times.
5. Any exit driveway or driveway lane shall be so designed in profile and grading and so
located as to provide the following minimum sight distance measured in each direction.
The measurements shall be from the driver’s seat of a vehicle standing on that portion of
the exit driveway with the front of the vehicle a minimum of ten (10) feet behind the curb
line or edge of shoulder, with the height of the eye three and five one hundredths (3.5)
feet to the top of an object four and twenty-five hundredths (4.25) feet above the
pavement.
Allowable Speed Required Sight Distance
(Miles Per Hour) (Feet)
25 160
40 275
45 325
50 350
55 425
6. Where a site occupies a corner of two (2) intersecting roads, no driveway entrance or exit
shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the point of tangency of the existing or proposed
curb radius of that site.
7. No part of any driveway shall be located within a minimum of ten (10) feet of a side
property line. If there is an existing use or structure, the Project Review Board may
waive the 10 foot requirement provided the criteria and standards of Section 602, Site
Plan Review, are satisfied. However, the Project Review Board may permit a driveway
serving two (2) or more adjacent sites to be located on or within ten (10) feet of a side
property line between the adjacent sites.
- 161 -
8. Where two (2) or more two-way driveways connect a single site to any one (1) road, a
minimum clear distance of one hundred (100) feet measured along the right-of-way line
shall separate the closest edges of any two (2) such driveways. If one driveway is twoway
and one is a one-way driveway, the minimum distance shall be seventy-five (75)
feet.
9. Angles
(a) Two-way operation. Driveways used for two-way operation shall intersect the
road at an angle of as near ninety degrees (90) as site conditions will permit and in
no case less than sixty degrees (60) or more than 120 degrees
(b) One-way operation. Driveways used by vehicles in one (1) direction of travel
(right turn only) shall not form an angle smaller than forty-five degrees (45) with
a road.
10. Dimensions - The dimensions of driveways shall be designed to accommodate
adequately the volume and character of vehicle anticipated to be attracted daily onto
the land development for which a site plan is prepared. The required minimum
dimensions for driveways are indicated below. Driveways serving large vehicles or
large volumes of daily Traffic may be required to have wider driveways. {Amended,
Effective 10/03/17}
One-Way Operation Two-Way Operation
Driveways* Width Driveways* Width
(feet) (feet)
3 to 9 dwelling units 10 18
10 dwelling units or over 15 22
Non-residential uses 15 22
*The transition from the edge of the driveway pavement to the street pavement shall
be made with a radius of the appropriate dimension to accommodate the tracking of
entering or exiting vehicles without encroachment into opposing traffic lanes.
11. Grades - Driveways shall not have a grade in excess of fifteen percent (15%) over the
entire length. On arterials the grade shall not be more than five percent (5%) for the
first twenty-five (25) feet from the road unless otherwise approved by the Project Review
Board. Driveways shall not be located where visibility is limited because of curves or
topography.
12. Acceleration Lanes - Where a driveway serves right-turning traffic from a parking area
providing two hundred (200) or more parking spaces and the road has an A.D.T. volume
exceeding seven thousand five hundred (7,500) vehicles, an acceleration lane shall be
provided which is at least two hundred (200) feet long and at least ten (10) feet wide
measured from the road curb line. A minimum thirty-five foot curb return radius shall be
used from the driveway to the acceleration lane.
- 162 -
13. Deceleration Lanes - Where the same conditions exist as in previous paragraph and a
driveway serves as an entrance to a land development, a deceleration lane shall be
provided for traffic turning right into the driveway from the road. The deceleration lane
shall be at least two hundred (200) feet long and at least ten (10) feet wide measured from
the road curb line. A minimum thirty-five foot curb return radius shall be used from the
deceleration lane into the driveway.
14. Stacking or Queuing Space Standards for Drive-through Businesses:
Banks or other commercial uses: Minimum of eight spaces for the first drive-in window
and two spaces for each additional window.
Drive-up Restaurant: Eleven spaces for the drive-up window, with a minimum of five of
these spaces designated for the ordering station.
Stacking or queuing spaces shall be located on-site and shall not be located within the
required setbacks. Stacking or queuing spaces shall not interfere with the stall and
aisle space requirements as described in Section 514.
Section 513. Corner Clearances
For purposes of traffic safety in all districts, no building, structure or visual obstruction may be
erected and no vegetation may be maintained between three (3) to ten (10) feet above the plane
through the curb grades of intersecting streets within a triangle, two sides or which are the edges of
the public ways for twenty (20) feet measured from their point of intersection or in the case of
rounded street corners, the point of intersection of their tangents.
Section 514. Off-Street Parking and Loading
A. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to allow flexibility in addressing vehicle parking, present a
menu of strategies to solve parking issues, maintain and enhance a safe and efficient
transportation system that minimizes the amount of land converted to impervious surface for
parking purposes, and to ensure that off-street parking demands associated with new
development or re-development will be met without adversely affecting other nearby land
uses and surrounding neighborhoods.
B. Off-Street Parking
1. Accessory Use: Off-street parking shall be considered an accessory use when required
or provided to serve permitted uses located in any district. Off-street parking may be
provided in either a surface parking lot or a parking structure. For residential uses, a
garage space(s) is considered a parking space.
2. Multiple uses or spaces: Where more than one use occupies a single structure or lot or
where one structure has more than one leasable space the total required parking shall be
- 163 -
the sum of the requirements of the individual uses and/or spaces.
a. VMU 1 and VMU 2 - Notwithstanding Sec. 514.B.2 above in the Village Mixed
Use Districts (VMU-1 and VMU-2) Districts the requirement shall be ninety
percent (90%) of the sum of the requirements of the individual uses if the
parking is restricted, for shared parking the requirement shall be seventy-five
percent (75%) and may be reduced to 70% if parking lots on adjacent properties
are connected.
b. The Project Review Board may reduce the required parking if the applicant can
demonstrate that the variety of uses have different peak parking demands. This
section (514.B.2.b) does not apply to the Village Commercial 1 District.
3. When a parking requirement isn’t listed for a specific use: In the event a particular
building or use does not fit exactly into any of the categories listed in the Section, the
Codes Enforcement Officer shall apply the requirements of the category which he deems
to bemost closely analogous.
4. Use of parking spaces: Required parking spaces shall be available for the parking of
vehicles of residents, customers, patrons and employees only, and shall not be used for
storage of vehicles or materials (unless required in the provisions below), and shall not
be used for sale, repair or servicing of any vehicle(s).
5. Measuring the building area: In all Districts, to determine the building area (in square
feet) for meeting the parking requirement, all measurements are taken from the interior
walls of each floor of the building. The following spaces are not included in the area for
meeting the parking requirement;
• Stairways and hallways that are not used by customers,
• restrooms that are open to the public not just customers of the business and that
are clearly marked for public use,
• unused attic or basement space,
• areas with less than 6 feet of floor to ceiling height,
• elevators,
• rooms for HVAC equipment or other utility equipment, and
• loading docks.
6. Reductions allowed - In all Districts except the VC-I District, the Project Review Board
may allow a reduction up to fifty (50) percent in the number of spaces constructed
provided the required number of spaces can be constructed on the property while
meeting all other space and bulk requirements of that District. The applicant must
demonstrate that the additional spaces are not necessary, and the Project Review Board
shall attach a condition of approval stating that the town may require that the spaces be
constructed if additional parking is needed to correct a parking problem on the site. In
considering a reduction, the Board may consider the typical hours of operation of the
uses, seasonal fluctuations, the amount of parking needed for customers versus
employees, and so on.
7. On-site and off-site – Notwithstanding Section 514.B.8.b (Village Commercial 1)
below, the Project Review Board may approve off-site parking if the entrance to the off-
164 -
site parking is within 300 linear feet of the entrance to the on-site parking. The owner, as
defined by this Ordinance, of the off-site parking must be the same as the owner of the
on-site parking. Evidence of legal use of the off-site parking spaces for the duration of the use
must be submitted and that the use of the off-site parking spaces of the spaces will not create a
shortage of parking spaces for any uses on the property which the off-site parking spaces are
located.
8. District Parking requirements - Off-street parking in compliance with the following
minimum requirements shall be provided and maintained for all uses, new construction,
expansion of existing uses or structures, and changes of use in all districts.
a. Commercial Districts I, III, and IV (C-1, C-3, C-4)
Where construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings or a
change of use is proposed, the Project Review Board shall establish the parking
requirement for such structures or uses. The established parking requirement
shall be based upon a parking analysis submitted by the applicant. In making a
decision, the Project Review Board may require a peer review of the parking
analysis.
b. Village Commercial 1District (VC-1) – for shared parking
1. Off-street parking requirements for permitted uses in the VC-1 District
shall be located in the VC-1 District. Parking spaces may be provided on
the same parcel as the use they serve, and/or on another lot held under the
same ownership, and/or with a credit pursuant to Article 6 of the Traffic
and Parking Ordinance, and/or they may be leased from the municipality
or other entity as per the Freeport Traffic and Parking Ordinance, Chapter 48,
Article V Leased Parking Standards. All parking spaces shall be paved,
striped, plowed, lighted and maintained so that they are useable.
c. For shared parking - the following table shall be used to calculate the
number of required parking spaces. All parking requirements shall be
calculated to one decimal point.
Restaurant,
Retail
3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet of building
area using the standards of Sec. 514B.5 above
Outdoor seating - parking must be provided based on the
building area as defined in Sec. 514B.5 for outdoor seating
using the standard above for this category of use. If the
outdoors seating is seasonal, meaning that it is not enclosed
with walls and/or a roof of any material and/or no sources of
heat are provided the area of the outdoor seating is eligible
for a reduction of 65% of the parking requirement for that
seasonal use area.
Effective date: March 18, 2019
- 165 -
For all other uses permitted
in the VC-1 District, but not
specifically listed in this
section
2.5 parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet of building
area using the standards of Sec. 514B.5 above
Effective date: March 18, 2019
Notwithstanding the
standards of this section, any
use in a commercial space
that is on a floor other than
the ground floor and that is
not connected to the ground
level space
2 parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet of building
area using the standards of Sec. 514B.5 above
Effective date: March 18, 2019
Religious institutions,
visitors centers, outdoor arts
center with no permanent
structures and indoor and
outdoor arts center connected
to a parking structure
No parking requirement
Public utilities, Bed and
Breakfast Inns, Inn, Public
and Private Schools, Day
care Facilities, Commercial
Schools, Open Spaces
Use the parking requirements in Sec. 514.B.8.c below.
Peddler carts on private
property
Per Sec 526.D.3
Dwellings 1 bedroom unit – 1 parking space, 2 bedroom unit – 1.75
parking spaces, 3 bedroom unit – 2 spaces for the first three
bedroom and .5 spaces per bedroom beyond 3 bedrooms,
units restricted to senior housing – 1 space per unit.
Any buildings with more than 3 units shall also provide for
guest parking at a rate of 1 space per 5 units.
Every garage space counts as a parking space
d. For all other Districts and uses and buildings in the Village Commercial 1
District not using shared parking the following table shall be used to calculate
the number of required parking spaces using the standards of Sec. 514B.5 above.
- 166 -
Dwellings: In the V-1, VC-2, VC-3, VC-4, and MDR-2 Districts the
following shall apply: Single family – 2 spaces, two-family
and multi-family: 1 bedroom unit – 1.25 spaces per unit or
major fraction thereof, 2 bedroom unit -1.75 spaces per unit
or major fraction thereof, 3 bedroom unit- 2 spaces for the
first three bedrooms with .5 spaces per bedroom beyond 3
bedrooms; units restricted to senior housing – 1 space per
unit, multi-family units shall provide 1 space per 5 units for
guest parking.
All other districts: 2 parking spaces per dwelling unit.
In all cases, a garage may be counted as a parking space.
{Amended, Effective 09/17/13}
Motels, Tourist Homes,
Rooming Houses, Hotels, Bed
and Breakfast Inns, Inns:
1 parking space for each guest room; plus1 parking space for
each overnight employee based on the expected average
overnight employee occupancy and, in addition, adequate
parking based on the standards supplied in this section, shall
be provided for restaurant, meeting rooms, auditoriums and
other activities which are accessory to the principal use.
Schools:
Nursery School & Day
Care Home & Center:
1 parking space for each teacher & aide;
Elementary Schools: 1 parking space for each adult employee plus 10 parking
spaces;
Junior High Schools: 1 parking space for each adult employee plus 6 parking
spaces;
Senior High Schools: 1 parking space for each adult employee plus 25 parking
spaces for each 100 students or major fraction there of total
enrollment.
Commercial Schools: 1 parking space for each .75 students at maximum enrollment
plus one space for each instructor
Hospitals, Nursing Homes: 1 parking space per 3 beds and 1 for each employee based on
the expected average employee occupancy.
Public Assembly-Indoor, 1 parking space for each 3 seats or for each 100 square feet or
Private Assembly, Commercial major fraction thereof of assemblage space if no fixed seats;
Recreation-Indoor, Outdoor
Recreation School:
Marina Minimum of 30 parking spaces {Corrected, Dec 2008}
Community Centers and In designated growth areas, 1 parking space for each 235
Services square feet of building area as defined in Sec. 514B.5 above
and excluding area designated for storage when bicycle racks
are provided; on-street parking spaces created for this use
within 700’ of the parcel can be counted toward meeting this
standard, provided at least one third of the total required
parking spaces are provided on the site. Outside of
- 167 -
designated growth areas, 1 space per 300 square feet of
building
Retail Trade, Ship Chandlery, In the Village Commercial 1 District buildings not using
Commercial Sales and Service, shared parking, 1 parking space for each 150 square feet of
Commercial Fishery: building area as defined in Sec. 514B.5 above. In addition,
parking for employees shall be provided and shall be
calculated using the formula of minimum of one parking
space per 1,000 square feet or major fraction thereof of Sec.
514B.5 of building. For uses with less than 1,000 square feet
of Sec. 514B.5 of buildings, a minimum of one employee
parking space is required. {Amended, Effective 01/02/18}
Furniture/Large Appliance
Showroom, Art Galleries,
Museums: {Amended, Effective 01/02/18}
1 parking space for each 500 square feet or major fraction
thereof of building area as defined in Sec. 514B.5 above.
Bowling Alley: 4 parking spaces for each bowling lane.
Restaurants, Snack Bars,
Eating and Drinking
Establishments:
In the Village Commercial I District (VC-I) for buildings not
using shared parking, 1 customer parking space for each 150
square feet or major fraction thereof of building area as
defined in Sec. 514B.5 above plus the greater of 1 employee
parking space for each employee based on the highest
expected average employment or 1 employee parking space
for each 1,000 square feet or major fraction there of building
area as defined in Sec. 514B.5 above.
In all other zoning districts, 1 parking space for every 2 seats
or stools (indoor & outdoor), and 1 space for each 50 square
feet of dining or drinking area where there are no fixed seats
with a minimum of 10 spaces.
In any District, customer parking space for outdoor seating
must be provided based on the building area as defined in
Sec. 514B.5 above used for the seating using the same
standard for this use in the District in which it is located. If
the outdoors seating is seasonal, meaning that it is not
enclosed with walls and/or a roof of any material and/or no
sources of heat are provided the area of the outdoor seating is
eligible for a reduction of 65% of the parking requirement
for that seasonal use area. {Amended, Effective 01/02/18}
Offices, Professional & Public
Buildings, Banks:
1 parking space for each 300 square feet, or major fraction
hereof, of the building area as defined in Sec. 514B.5 above.
In no case shall there be less than 1 parking space for every 1
½ employees.
- 168 -
Public Utilities,
Manufacturing/Processing,
Boat Yard, Warehouse &
Storage Facilities, Construction
Services, Truck Facility:
1 parking space for each 1.2 employees based on the highest
expected average occupancy or 1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft.
of building area as defined in Sec. 514B.5 above, whichever
is greater, plus one space for each vehicle used in conduct of
the enterprise.
Commercial Recreation-
Outdoor:
Spaces equal in number to one-third of the maximum design
capacity in persons.
Golf Courses: 8 per hole and 1 for each 35 sq. ft. of building area as defined
in Sec. 514B.5 above in assembly buildings connected with
the course plus 1 for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area for
adjoining commercial uses.
Golf Driving Ranges: 1.5 parking spaces for each tee.
Outdoor Game & Athletic
Courts:
2 parking spaces for each court.
Miniature Golf Courses: 3 parking spaces per hole, or 2 for each hole plus the
requirements for all accessory uses, whichever is greater.
Religious Institutions: Spaces equal in number to one-third of the capacity in
persons of the main sanctuary or auditorium except in the
VC-I District there is no parking requirement.
Auto Service Station and Auto
Repair Service Garage:
2 parking spaces for each enclosed bay and 1 space for each
day shift employee.
Medical or Dental Clinic: 3 parking spaces per examination or treatment room.
Neighborhood Shopping
Center:
1 parking space for each 250 square feet of building area as
defined in Sec. 514B.5 above.
Convenience Store: 1 space per 200 sq. ft. of building area as defined in Sec.
514B.5 above for the first 1,000 sq. ft. and 3 spaces per each
additional 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
Handicapped-Accessible
Spaces:
Any establishment which caters to and/or offers its goods,
facilities or services to the general public shall maintain at
least one of its required parking spaces as an accessible space
for handicapped persons.
Open Space
{Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
The number of spaces for any open space shall be based on a
recommendation by the owner of the open space. The Project
Review Board may make a recommendation on the number of
spaces needed for a project under their review that includes
open space.
These parking spaces are subject to the dimensional standards
of Section 514.B.9.b of this Ordinance.
- 169 -
9. Parking Space Dimensions
Parking angle
In degrees
Stall width
Parallel to
Stall depth
Aisle to wall
Stall depth
Aisle to interlock
Aisle
width
one way
Aisle
width
two way
30 Degree
9’ Stall
18.0 17.0 13.2 12.0 N/A
45 Degree
9’ Stall
12.7 19.4 16.3 12.0 N/A
60 Degree
9’ Stall
10.4 20.5 18.3 16.0 N/A
90 Degree
9’ Stall
9.0 18.5 18.5 24.0 24.0
NOTE: d= Dimensions in feet Stall Dimensions Standard 9.0’x18.5’
Parallel stall Dimension Standard 9.0’ x 22’
a. Aisle and stall dimensions shall be measured as shown in 514.B.9; except that
the Project Review Board may approve an aisle width of 22’ for 90 degree
parking stalls in parking lots in the Village Mixed Use Districts 1, and 2.
Dimensions specified for one-way aisles apply only when diagonal parking is
provided from each side of the aisle and all such aisles are designated as “One
Way” with adequate signage and marking to direct the traffic movement.
b. Parking areas for open spaces are exempt from the parking space dimensional
standards of this section. Instead, the design of all parking areas must be
reviewed and approved by the Freeport Town Engineer. In the case of parking
areas that are owned by the Town of Freeport, the Town Engineer may also design
the parking area. In addition, if parking spaces are proposed in a public right-of-way, the
Freeport Traffic and Parking Committee must review and endorse the proposed parking
plan. {Amended, Effective 12/02/14}
c. Angle, interlock parking shall only be used when a sufficient physical barrier is
provided to prevent vehicular contact across the interlock.
10. Accessible parking spaces – Newly constructed or paved parking lots or existing
parking lots that are restriped, shall meet the following standards.
a. Accessible spaces shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel from
adjacent parking to an accessible building entrance. Curb ramps to the accessible
route shall be provided at the end of all access aisles. The maximum slope in all
directions is 1:48
b. Accessible spaces shall contain the minimum required dimensions of nine ( 9’)
feet by eighteen and a half (18.5’) feet plus a five (5) foot wide striped access
aisle. Two accessible spaces may share a common access aisle the full length of
the parking stall. A van-accessible space shall be a minimum of eleven (11) feet
wide with a minimum by eighteen and half (18.5’) feet long and an aisle width of
five (5’) feet and provide 98 inches of vertical clearance.
- 170 -
c. Each space shall be marked with the International or Universal Symbol of
Accessibility.
In addition, “Van-Accessible” signs shall be located at van spaces. All signs shall
be located a minimum of 60” above the ground surface measured to the bottom
of the sign. Parking lots providing four or fewer parking spaces are exempt from
providing a sign.
d. Parking credits for improving accessibility - To improve the accessibility of
parking lots, parking credits can be issued in accordance with Article VI of the
Traffic and Parking Ordinance (Chapter 48) if existing parking spaces are lost
due to restriping to add accessible space or van accessible space or aisle or for
some other reason that improves accessibility.
e. Minimum number of accessible parking spaces
Total number of
parking spaces
provided in a
parking facility
Minimum number of
accessible parking
spaces
(car and van)
Minimum number of van
accessible parking spaces
(1 for every 6 accessible spaces)
1 – 25 1 1
26 – 50 2 1
51 – 75 3 1
76 – 100 4 1
101 – 150 5 1
151 – 200 6 1
201 – 300 7 2
301 – 400 8 2
401 – 500 9 2
500 – 1,000 2% of total parking
provided in each lot or
structure
1/6 of the previous column
Source: 2010 ADA Compliance Brief –for more details, refer to this document
C. VC-1 Conformance
1. Expansion of a building that is not conforming with this Section 514 must provide
additional parking at the rate required by this Section 514 for the expanded portion of
the building. The parking required for the expansion must be in addition to any existing
parking spaces whichmust be retained.
2. Use ceases – Notwithstanding Section 202(B)(4), if a use ceases for more than a period
of 12 months, the use shall meet the current requirement of this Section 514. For
buildings that are divided into multiple commercial spaces, only the space(s) in which a
use ceases for more than twelve months shall meet the current requirement of this
Section 514. The parking required for the use must be in addition to any existing parking
spaces currently being provided which must be retained.
- 171 -
3. Demolished building - If a structure is demolished and a new structure with a different
use is constructed, the new use shall meet the current requirement of this Section 514.
The parking required for the new use must be in addition to any existing parking spaces
currently being provided which must be retained.
4. Change of use – If a use changes in a building that is not conforming with the above
parking requirements, the new use shall provide parking at the rate required by this
Section 514. For buildings that are divided into multiple commercial spaces, only the
space(s) in which a use changes shall meet the current requirement of this Section 514.
The parking required for the use must be in addition to any existing parking spaces
currently being provided which must be retained.
5. Uses Made Conforming. Any previously legally non-conforming buildings and uses as to
the parking requirements in this Section that become legally conforming as to the parking
space requirements either through amendment of this Ordinance or the provision of
additional parking spaces must meet the parking space requirements through the provisions
outlined in subsection B(8) of this Section.
D. Enforcement
1. Enforcement. If the parking requirements of this Section 514 are not met or if they lapse,
the Certificate of Occupancy shall be revoked and it shall be the responsibility of the
Codes Enforcement Officer to invoke the requirements of Section 601 of this Ordinance.
Section 515. Noise Regulation
A.Noise is required to be muffled so as not to be objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency or
shrillness. The average dba count resulting from any activity shall not exceed at any point on or
beyond the lot line the maximum levels as set forth in the following table:
District Average dba
(day-night)
1. Resource Protection I and II, Island, 55 - 45
Rural Residential I & II
2. Medium Density Residential I & II 60 - 50
3. Medium Density 65 - 55
4. Village I and Village II 70 - 55
5. Village Commercial I, II and III, 75 - 55
Commercial I, II and III, Marine
Waterfront and Local Business
6. Industrial I, II 85 - 60
- 172 -
The average dba count for any activity shall be computed based on samples taken during hours
of operation at intervals over a 24-hour period. Daytime hours extend from 6:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m.
B. During the peak activity of 60 minutes in a 24-hour period, a noise may not exceed these average
dba counts by more than 15 dba in any zone.
C. If a lot abuts a district requiring a lower noise level, the maximum permitted level for that lot
shall be reduced by 5 dba; however, the volume of sound shall not exceed 60 dba or whichever is
lower at lot boundaries adjacent to residential districts.
D. Athletic events in the Village 1 (V-1) District shall not use amplification for any reason after
10PM, except as allowed in Sec. 515. E below. {Adopted, Effective 06/06/17}
E. For activities of a temporary nature unable to meet these requirements, a special permit must be
obtained from the Codes Enforcement Officer. The noise standards shall not apply to the
temporary use of such machinery as chain saws, lawn mowers and snowmobiles.
Section 516. Odorous and Toxic Matter
The emission of odorous or toxic matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at any point
along lot lines so as to produce a public nuisance or hazard is prohibited. Such activities shall
comply with applicable minimum Federal, State and local requirements and detailed plans shall be
submitted to the Codes Enforcement Officer for approval before a permit is granted. Violations of
this standard shall be considered as public nuisances.
Section 517. Electromagnetic Interference
No use, activity, or process shall be conducted which produces electromagnetic interference in the
transmission or reception of electrical impulses beyond the lot lines, including radio and television.
In all cases Federal, State and local requirements shall be met. Violations of this standard shall be
considered as public nuisances.
Section 518. Smoke and Particulate Matter
In all cases, air pollution control and abatement shall comply with applicable minimum Federal,
State and local requirements, including receipt of all required permits, and detailed plans shall be
submitted to the Codes Enforcement Officer for approval before the permit is granted. The
maximum permitted density of smoke, dust and other particulate emissions during normal operations
of any activity shall not exceed the maximum allowable under the regulations of the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection. In case of doubt, the Codes Enforcement Officer may
employ such independent, recognized consultant necessary, at the expense of the applicant, to assure
- 173 -
compliance with performance standards and all other requirements of this Ordinance related to the
public health, safety and welfare and the abatement of nuisances. Violations of this standard shall be
considered as public nuisances.
Section 519. Vibrations
No activity shall, as a result of normal operations, cause or create a vibration on a lot line or a
boundary line which is in excess of that indicated in the table below:
Vibration Displacement (in.)
Frequency(cps.) Steady State Impact
Under 10 .0005 .0010
10 -19 .0004 .0008
20 -29 .0003 .0006
30 -39 .0002 .0004
40 and over .0001 .0002
Buildings shall not be subject to a velocity from blasting in excess of two inches per second at the
building. Violations of this standard shall be considered as public nuisances.
Section 520. Fire and Explosive Hazards {Amended, Effective 10/03/17}
A. The protection of building occupants in both new and existing structures shall be achieved
through the enforcement of the current building code and the National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) 101: Life Safety Code, as adopted by the Town Council, with exceptions
and interpretations as approved by the Maine State Fire Marshal. General fire safety and
prevention shall be achieved through the enforcement of NFPA 1: Fire Code as adopted by the
Town Council, with exceptions and interpretations as approved and utilized by the Maine State
Fire Marshal.
B. The storage, handling and use of flammable and combustible liquids shall be goverened by
NFPA 30: Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code and NFPA 30A: Code for Motor Fuel
Dispensing Facilities and Repair Garages, as adopted by the Town Council, with exceptions
and interpretations as approved and utilized by the Maine State Fire Marshal.
C. Minimum safety requirements for the design and installation of fuel gas piping systems in homes
and other buildings shall be governed by NFPA 54: National Fuel Gas Code, as adopted by the
Town Council, with exceptions and interpretations as approved and utilized by the Maine State
Fire Marshal.
D. All fire alarm systems within the Town of Freeport shall be in compliance with NFPA 72:
National Fire Alarm and Signaling Code, as adopted by the Town Council, with exceptions and
interpretations as approved and utilized by the Maine State Fire Marshal.
- 174 -
When access to or within a structure is unduly difficult because of secured openings or where
immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or firefighting purposes, a key box of the type
approved by the Fire Chief shall be installed in an accessible location approved by the Fire Chief
and shall contain all keys necessary to gain access to those portions of the building as determined
by the Fire Chief.
Section 521.A Exterior Lighting
A. No lights shall be placed in view of any public roadway or street so that its beams or rays are
directed at any portion of the roadway when the light is of such brilliance and so positioned as to
impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle upon said roadway.
B. No rotating or flashing lights or signals, except safety signaling devices as required by law, are
permitted.
C. Adequate buffers using either the natural landscape or artificial screening are required to prevent
unnecessary or undesirable light from being directed beyond lot lines onto adjacent properties.
D. When site plan review is required, the applicant shall submit plans for all proposed exterior
lighting, drawn at a scale of at least one inch equals twenty feet. These plans shall include the
location, type of lighting equipment, manufacturer’s specification sheets and point-by-point
calculated illuminance values noted on a ten (10) foot grid (maximum).
The following design standards shall be followed unless waived by the Project Review Board if
it finds that, due to special circumstances of a particular plan, they are not necessary to provide
for the public health, safety and general welfare.
1. The style of the light and light standard shall be consistent with the architectural style of
the principal building.
2. The maximum height of freestanding lights shall be the same as the principal building,
but shall not exceed twenty (20) feet.
3. All lights shall have shielding to provide a beam cut-off at no more than 75 degrees
above nadir.
4. Where lights along property lines will be visible to adjacent residences, the lights shall be
appropriately shielded.
5. Freestanding lights shall be so located and protected as to avoid being easily damaged by
vehicles.
6. Lighting shall be located along streets, parking areas, at intersections and crosswalks and
where various types of circulation systems merge, intersect or split. Lighting shall be
consistent with the guidelines and recommendations published by the Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America for the given area.
7. Pathways, sidewalks and trails shall be lighted with low or mushroom-type standards.
8. Stairways and sloping or rising paths, building entrances and exits require illumination.
9. Lighting shall be provided where buildings are set back or offset from the street.
10. The following lighting criteria shall not be exceeded
- 175 -
a. Parking Lots: an average of one and five-tenths (1.5) footcandles throughout, a
maximum of six (6) footcandles, and a maximum-to-minimum uniformity ratio of
twenty to one (20:1) footcandles.
b. Intersections: an average of three (3) footcandles, a maximum of six (6)
footcandles, and a maximum-to-minimum uniformity ratio of twenty to one (20:1)
footcandles.
c. Maximum at property lines: one-tenth (0.1) footcandle.
d. The maximum illuminance level at grade along the property line shall be 0.1
footcandles.
11. When the activity is not in use, lighting shall be turned down to security level or turned
off.
Section 521.B – Athletic Field Lighting in the Village 1 district {Amended, Effective 06/06/17}
A. No lights shall be placed in view of any public roadway or street so that its beams or rays are
directed at any portion of the roadway when the light is of such brilliance and so positioned as to
impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle upon said roadway.
B. No rotating or flashing lights or signals, except safety signaling devices as required by law, are
permitted.
C. Any lights that are directed upward are only allowed during regular season football games
including playoffs; not during other sports, practices of any sports, other events or before or
after games.
D. All athletic field lights shall be dimmed to the level of lighting allowed in Sec. 521.B.G.4.a of
this section before any events and regular season games including playoffs and as soon as the
game is over. Athletic field lighting shall be turned on no more than 30 minutes before a
regularly scheduled game or event and turned off no later than 30 minutes after a game or event
is over.
E. Any building, sidewalk, pathways or parking lot lighting that is illuminated solely for events at
an athletic field shall be turned on no more than one hour before a game or event begins and shut
off no more than one hour after a game or event is finished. Lighting on poles shall be no higher
than 15 feet and all lights shall be fully shielded.
F. When site plan review is required, the applicant shall submit plans for all proposed exterior
lighting, drawn at a scale of at least one inch equals eighty (80) feet. These plans shall include
the location, type of lighting equipment, manufacturer’s specification sheets and point-by-point
calculated illuminance values noted on a thirty (30) foot grid (maximum).
G. The following design standards shall be followed by the Project Review Board to provide for the
public health, safety and general welfare.
- 176 -
1. The height of freestanding lighting poles shall be the minimum height that allows for the
lighting standards of this Section 521 B to be met. In no case shall the height of
freestanding lighting poles exceed eighty (80) feet.
2. All lights shall be aimed, and shall have shielding as necessary, to provide a beam cut-off
such that the intensity of light emitted at any angle higher than 80 degrees above nadir
does not exceed 50% of the maximum candlepower emitted from the light.
3. Freestanding lights shall be so located and protected as to avoid being easily damaged by
vehicles.
4. Lighting fixtures shall be selected and installed to meet the standards of the Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America (IESNA). The following lighting criteria shall not
be exceeded:
a. Athletic fields shall be lighted not to exceed the following illuminance
performance standards:
Average footcandles
regular season
games including
playoffs
average footcandles
practice times, before
and after games,
events
Max-to-min
Uniformity
at 50 fc
Football 50 30 2.0 to 1
Lacrosse 50 30 2.0 to 1
Soccer 50 30 2.0 to 1
Field Hockey 50 30 2.0 to 1
b. The maximum luminance level at grade along the property line shall be no more
than 0.1 footcandles.
c. All lights shall be aimed, and shall have shielding as necessary, to prevent light of
any intensity of more than 12,000 candela from being aimed at or beyond
property lines.
d. If LED lights are used, the minimum allowable color shall be 75 CRI.
e. The light emitted higher than 90 degrees above nadir shall be limited to 10% of
the total light emitted.
5. Following the completion of the installation of any athletic field lighting and after 100
hours of usage thereafter, luminance measurements shall be recorded by the applicant to
demonstrate conformance with the lighting standards of this Section. Measurements shall
be taken at three (3) feet above grade to confirm that the criteria listed above has been
met. Where elements of non-conformance are found to exist, the applicant shall take all
necessary actions to correct the deficiencies at the applicant’s expense.
Section 522. Water Quality Protection
No activity shall locate, store, discharge, or permit the discharge of any treated, untreated, or
inadequately treated liquid, gaseous, or solid materials of such nature, quantity, obnoxiousness,
toxicity, or temperature that runoff, seep, percolate, or wash into surface or ground waters so as to
contaminate, pollute or harm such waters or cause nuisances, such as objectionable shore deposits,
floating or submerged debris, oil or scum, color, odor, taste, or unsightliness or be harmful to human,
animal, plant or aquatic life.
- 177 -
Section 523. Groundwater Protection
No development or use of land shall result in an unreasonable impact on ground water quality or
quantity.
A. Impact on ground water quality
No development or use of land shall result in the existing ground water quality becoming
inferior to the physical, biological, chemical, and/or radiological levels for raw and untreated
drinking water supply sources specified in the Maine State Drinking Water Regulations,
pursuant to 22 MRSA 601. If the existing ground water quality is inferior to the State Drinking
Water Regulations, the developer or land owner will not degrade the water quality any further.
B. Impact on ground water quantity
1. No development or use of land shall lower the groundwater table beyond the limits of the
proposed development more than 10 feet below the level in the undeveloped state, cause
salt water intrusion, cause undesirable change in ground water flow patterns, or cause
ground subsidence of more than 1 inch on any abutting property.
2. Measures to minimize loss of recharge and to enhance recharge shall be undertaken to the
extent possible. Developers of sites having over 10’ depth of sand and gravel shall be
required to explore ways of enhancing soil recharge as part of the development scheme.
C. The Project Review Board may waive the requirements of Section 523(B)(1) to allow the
development of a well or wells by a water utility, as defined in 35A M.R.S.A. ‘ 102(22),
provided that:
1. The utility demonstrates to the Project Review Board that in the event a water well,
existing at the time of the request for a waiver and located on any property not owned by
the utility, should become adversely affected by the utility’s well or wells, the utility will
provide service to the affected property owner and will install the service connection at
the utility’s expense or, alternatively, will develop an alternate supply of well water for
the affected property owner at the utility’s expense, and
2. As a condition of site plan approval, the utility conducts a survey of potentially affected
water wells and provides written assurances to the owners of such potentially affected
water wells that it will perform its obligations under subparagraph (1) above. The Project
Review Board may also require the utility to provide a financial guarantee in a form and
amount satisfactory to the Project Review Board to ensure performance of the utility’s
obligations under subparagraph (1) above, if the Project Review Board determines that
circumstances warrant a financial guarantee.
- 178 -
Section 524. Mobile Home Parks
A. Compliance with Laws and Ordinances
Except as otherwise provided in this section, new mobile home parks and expansions of existing
mobile home parks shall comply with all State laws and ordinances of the Town of Freeport.
B. Lot Size, Width, and Density
Mobile home park lots shall meet the following lot size, width, and density requirements:
1. Lots served by public sewer:
Minimum lot area - 6,500 sq. ft.
Minimum lot width - 55 ft.
2. Lots served by individual subsurface sewage disposal system:
Minimum lot area - 20,000 sq. ft.
Minimum lot width - 100 ft.
3. Lots served by a central subsurface wastewater disposal system:
Minimum lot area - 12,000 sq. ft.
Overall density of the park - No less than 20,000 sq. ft. per mobile home
Minimum lot width - 75 ft.
4. Where lots front on a curved right-of-way or are served by a driveway, the lot width shall
be measured in a straight line perpendicular to the front of the manufactured home.
5. Lots within a shoreland zoning district shall meet the lot area, lot width, setback, and
shore frontage requirements for that district.
6. The overall area of the mobile home park shall equal at least the sum of;
a. The combined area of all mobile home lots including the density requirements for
lots served by a central subsurface wastewater disposal system;
b. The area required for road rights-of-way;
c. The area required for buffer strips;
d. For parks served by public sewer, an open space area for storage and recreation
equal to 10% of the combined area of the individual lots, if required by the Project
Review Board as provided by Section 25-904.1. of the Freeport Subdivision
Ordinance; and
e. The area within the shoreland setback.
C. Lot Setbacks
1. The following lot setbacks shall apply to all manufactured homes and accessory
buildings:
- 179 -
Front setback: 20 feet
Side setback: 20 feet
Rear setback: 10 feet
If these requirements conflict with the requirements of the shoreland zone, the stricter
standards shall apply. If a lot is on a public road, the setback shall conform with the
residential setback requirements applicable to residential dwelling units in the district.
2. So as to avoid monotony and sameness, the Project Review Board may allow the front
setback on a private road within a mobile park to be varied provided that no home may be
closer than 10 feet from the right-of-way and the average distance is at least 20 ft. for all
units.
3. Carports of non-combustible materials are not subject to side setback requirements.
4. The Project Review Board may reduce lot side yard setbacks to 5 ft. (or less) provided a
distance of 25 ft. is maintained between units.
5. Distance between Homes
A minimum 20 foot separation shall be maintained between all manufactured homes in
all directions.
D. Mobile Home Park Lots; Ownership and Use
The mobile home park lots shall be shown on the site plan and the subdivision plan for the
mobile home park. All the land in the mobile home park shall be owned by the same person or
persons and the mobile home park lots may not be sold or leased individually, except as
approved by the Project Review Board pursuant to subsection (q) of this Section 524. No
individual interests in the mobile home park lots may be created or conveyed, except that
individual mobile home pads may be leased to the owners or occupants of the homes placed
thereon. Mobile home park lots are allowed only in mobile home parks approved by the Project
Review Board in compliance with this Section 524, and shall not be considered lots for any other
purpose under this Zoning Ordinance.
E. Road Standards
1. Roads within mobile home parks which are to be offered for acceptance to the
community shall meet the minimum road standards of the Street Acceptance and
Standards Ordinance of the Town of Freeport.
2. Privately owned roads within the mobile home park shall be designed by a Professional
Engineer, registered in the State of Maine, and shall be built according to the
requirements described below. Where the road standards duly promulgated by the State
Manufactured Housing Board conflict with the standards described below, the
Manufactured Housing Board’s standards shall apply.
- 180 -
3. The street system of a mobile home park shall intersect with a public street.
4. Mobile home park roads which intersect with a public street shall meet the intersection
requirements of the Freeport Zoning Ordinance and the Street Acceptance and Standards
Ordinance of the Town of Freeport.
5. Mobile home lots shall have vehicular access only to an interior road created for the
mobile home park.
6. Right-of-way and Pavement Width
a. Privately owned roads within the park shall have a minimum right-of-way of 23
feet and the Project Review Board may require a minimum paved surface of 20
feet. The minimum paved width of one-way road shall be 14 feet. On-street
parking shall be prohibited along 14-foot, one-way streets and 20-foot two-way
streets.
a. Parking lanes shall be a minimum of 8 feet in width, if provided.
c. Cul-de-sac turnarounds shall have a minimum radius of 50 feet at the outer edge
of the pavement, exclusive of any parking areas.
F. Open Space
1. For mobile home parks served by a public sewer, an area amounting to no more than 10%
of the total area devoted to individual lots shall be set aside for open space and/or
recreation, if required by the Project Review Board. Such space shall be accessible to
and useable by all residents of the park. Parking spaces, driveways and streets and buffer
areas are not considered useable open space, but community recreation buildings,
common storage facilities, pools and outdoor recreational facilities are considered as
open space.
2. To the maximum extent possible, undeveloped open space shall be left in its natural state.
Improvements to make trails for walking and jogging or to make picnic areas are
permitted.
3. The developer shall submit, as part of the application, a copy of that portion of the
proposed park rules and a plan which specify how the open space is to be used and
maintained and what conditions are to apply to its use. The plan shall specify the areas to
be dedicated to open space, recreation, and storage.
1. Open space shall be maintained and used for its stated purpose.
G. Buffer Strips
1. A 50 ft. wide buffer strip shall be provided along all property boundaries that:
- 181 -
a. Abut developed residential land which has a gross density (dwelling units per
acre) of less than half of that proposed in the park, or
b. Abut undeveloped residential land that is zoned at a net residential density of less
than half of that proposed in the park.
Further, no structures, streets or utilities shall be placed in the buffer strip except that
utilities may cross a buffer strip to provide services to the park.
2. With the first 25’ of the buffer, measured from the exterior boundary of the park, visual
screening and/or landscaping shall be provided according to the requirements of Sec. 506.
3. The setbacks of the individual mobile home park lots may be incorporated into the buffer
to achieve the required 50 feet.
H. Parking Requirements
For each mobile home lot there shall be provided and maintained at least 2 off-street parking
spaces. Each parking space shall contain minimum dimensions of 9 feet by 18 ½ feet.
In addition to occupant parking, off-street guest and service parking shall be provided within the
boundaries of the park at a ratio of 1 space for each 4 mobile home lots. Such parking
spaces shall be reserved for that sole use. This requirement may be waived by the Project
Review Board if a parking lane is provided and will accommodate all required spaces.
I.Utility Requirements
All mobile home parks shall provide permanent electrical, water and sewage disposal
connections to each mobile home in accordance with applicable state and local rules and
regulations.
Electrical utilities and telephone lines may be located above ground.
J. Sidewalks/Walkways
The mobile home park shall contain pedestrian walkways between all units and all service and
recreational facilities. Such walkways shall be adequately surfaced and lit. A portion of the road
surface may be reserved for walkways provided the roadway width is widened accordingly.
Walkways shall be a minimum width of 3 feet.
K. Lighting
Outdoor lighting shall be provided to adequately illuminate internal streets and pedestrian
walkways.
- 182 -
L. Signs
The following signs shall be permitted and shall meet all requirements of the Freeport Sign
Ordinance:
1. One 24 sq. ft. maximum identification sign at the entrance road;
2. Directional signs within the park;
3. Mobile/manufactured home “For Sale” signs, provided that such signs that face a public
road shall be no more than 10 square feet and shall be limited to two signs per mobile
home park
M. Storage
At least 300 cubic feet of enclosed tenant storage facilities shall be conveniently provided near or
on each mobile home lot for the storage of materials and equipment.
N. Groundwater
For mobile home parks not served by a public sewer, the application shall include an assessment
of the impacts of park development on groundwater quality. The person developing or
expanding a mobile home park has the burden of proving that the development will not pollute a
public water supply or aquifer. The assessment shall be prepared by a Certified Geologist or
Registered Professional Engineer, shall demonstrate that the proposed mobile home park shall
meet the standards of Sec. 523 and shall include the following:
1. A map showing the basic soil types;
2. The depth to the water table at representative points throughout the mobile home park;
3. Drainage conditions throughout the mobile home park;
4. Data on the existing groundwater quality, either from test wells in the mobile home park
or from existing wells on neighboring properties;
5. An analysis and evaluation of the effect of the mobile home park on groundwater
resources. The evaluation shall, at a minimum, include a projection of post development
nitrate-nitrogen concentrations at any wells within the mobile home park, at the mobile
home park boundaries and at a distance of 1,000 feet from potential contamination
sources, whichever is a shorter distance. For mobile home parks within the watershed of
a lake, projections of the development’s impact on groundwater phosphate concentrations
shall also be provided;
6. A map showing the location of any subsurface wastewater disposal systems and drinking
water wells within the mobile home park and within 200 feet of the mobile home park
boundaries.
O. Permitted Accessory Uses
When approved by the Project Review Board, the following uses are permitted as accessory
uses:
- 183 -
1. Park management office;
2. Community or recreation buildings or structures within the park provided for use by park
residents;
3. Laundry building provided for use by park residents only;
4. Service equipment building for storage of park maintenance equipment only;
5. Storage facilities for use by park residents only.
P. Park Administration
The owner and operator of a mobile home park shall be responsible for ensuring the maintenance
of all structures and their sites. Park management shall conform to state laws
Compliance with this ordinance shall not exempt the park owner, developer, or manager from
complying with other applicable local, state and federal codes and regulations.
Q. Conversion of Park
No mobile home park lot may be sold, leased or conveyed without the prior approval of the
Project Review Board. Any such lot sold, leased or conveyed shall meet all the space standards
of the district in which it is located at the time of the sale, lease or conveyance as stated in the
applicable Section C of Article IV of this Ordinance.
Section 525. Filling of Lands and Creation of Ponds.
No materials in excess of 200 cubic yards during a calendar year may be used for filling of lands and
no materials in excess of a total of 400 cubic yards over the project lifetime may be removed to
create a pond unless a special permit for such operation has been approved by the Staff Review
Board or the Project Review Board and subsequently issued by the Codes Enforcement Officer. The
Staff Review Board and the Project Review Board shall review applications according to the
procedures and requirements of Sec. 602 (Site Plan Review) as well as the additional requirements
described below.
A. Exemptions.
No permit under this Section 525 shall be required for:
1. The depositing or dumping of two hundred (200) cubic yards or less of material onto or
in the ground.
2. Filling necessarily incidental to construction, alteration or grading for which a building
permit or other construction permit has been issued by the Codes Enforcement Officer.
3. The removal of a total of four hundred (400) cubic yards over the project lifetime or less
of material over the project lifetime to create or enlarge a pond, except that ponds
requiring DEP approval are not exempt.
4. Excavation to maintain an existing pond at its originally created size.
5. Activities described in Section 509.D.2.
- 184 -
B. The following filling of lands or excavations require a Staff Review Permit
1. On parcels where the primary use is residential, the depositing or dumping of more than
200 cubic yards of material onto or in the ground over the project lifetime, or the removal
of more than 400 cubic yards over the project lifetime to create or enlarge a pond.
2. On parcels where the primary use is commercial, the depositing or dumping of more than
200 cubic yards or less than 600 cubic yards of material onto or in the ground over the
project lifetime, or the removal of a total of more than 400 cubic yards or less than 600
cubic yards over the lifetime of the project to create or enlarge a pond.
C. The following filling of lands or excavations require a Project Review permit
1. On parcels where the primary use is commercial, the depositing or dumping of more than
600 cubic yards of material onto or in the ground.
2. On a parcel where the primary use is commercial, the removal of a total of 600 cubic
yards or more over the lifetime of the project to create or enlarge a pond.
D. Submissions.
In addition to applicable Site Plan Review submissions, the following submissions shall be
made. The Staff Review Board or the Project Review Board may waive any of these
requirements if it determines that the scale of the project is of such size, as to make the
information unnecessary. The Staff Review Board or the Project Review Board may require
other pertinent information necessary to determine if the planned use meets the provisions of this
Ordinance.
1. Fee.
2. Name and address of owner and/or operator of property and operation, copy of deed, map
and lot number, zoning district, size of parcel and other information required on the
application.
3. A site plan drawn at a scale no smaller than one inch to one hundred feet for that portion
of the parcel proposed for the fill or pond activity. The plan shall show the entire parcel;
describe the type of fill or excavation for a pond and its proposed location; slope existing
and proposed; locate any water bodies and drainage ways; describe any dams proposed
for creation of a pond.
4. Plans and/or other written materials showing how the applicant will comply with the
standards of Subsection C below.
E. Standards for Filling of Lands and Creation of Ponds.
- 185 -
1. For fill operations, excessive slopes and standing water shall be avoided. Where an
embankment shall be left upon the completion of operations, it shall be at a slope not
steeper than three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical.
2. The plan shall not alter drainage ways unless adequate provisions are made so that
drainage flows off-site will not increase. If drainage patterns are altered, the Staff
Review Board or the Project Review Board shall require submission of a stormwater
study conducted by a Registered Professional Engineer. If a dam is proposed for creation
of a pond, stream flows shall not be significantly decreased and fishery assets shall not be
harmed.
3. Groundwater quality and quantity shall not be lowered.
4. Erosion and sedimentation shall be adequately controlled. The standards of the Maine
Erosion and Sediment Control Best Management Practices (BMPs) Manual for Designers
and Engineers published by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, latest
revision shall be met. Review and approval by of the Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Plan by the Town Engineer or other authorized qualified professional shall be required.
{Amended, Effective 10/03/17}
Erosion and sedimentation plans shall be based on the following principles, when
applicable:
(a) Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be conducted in
such a way as to minimize erosion;
(b) Development shall preserve salient natural features, keep cut-fill operations to a
minimum and ensure conformity with topography so as to create the least erosion
potential and adequately handle the volume and velocity of surface water runoff;
(c) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and
supplemented;
(d) The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a practical
minimum;
(e) Disturbed soils shall be stabilized, by appropriate means, as quickly as practical,
in any event, no later than 2 weeks after the soil has been disturbed.
(f) Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be used to protect exposed critical areas
during development;
(g) The permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control measures shall
be installed as soon as practical on the site. A time schedule shall be submitted.
Ground cover planting shall be used, if appropriate;
- 186 -
(h) Until the disturbed area is stabilized, sediment in the run-off water shall be
trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or other acceptable
methods;
(i) Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation, regrading or other
development, it shall be the responsibility, including financial responsibility, of
the developer causing such sedimentation to remove it from all adjoining surfaces,
drainage systems, and watercourses and to repair any damage as quickly as
possible.
5. No hazardous materials or materials which may contaminate the ground or surface water,
land or air, as determined by the Staff Review Board or Project Review Board, shall be
permitted to be used as fill.
6. Methods and time period of the activity including, but not limited to, weight and load
limits of trucks hauling fill or excavating materials, protection against spillage off-site
and potential damage to off-site roadways, shall be approved by the Staff Review Board
or the Project Review Board.
7. The Staff Review Board or the Project Review Board may impose limitations on the
amount, type and location of the filling operation or excavation for ponds because of
potential environmental degradation;
8. The Staff Review Board or the Project Review Board may require adequate buffering or
fencing for public health, safety and welfare considerations;
10. The Staff Review Board or the Project Review Board may require a surety bond, or
equivalent, made payable to the Town and issued by a commercial surety company
authorized to do business within the State of Maine, in an amount sufficient to guarantee
conformity with the provisions of this section, approved as to form and amount by the
Town Manager.
Section 526. Peddlers on Private Property
A. Findings and Purpose
It is found and declared that:
The current ordinances regulate peddlers on the public street and place under Chapter 43 of the
Town of Freeport Codified Ordinance, but peddlers on private property are not permitted uses;
The location of any peddler on private property who held a permit issued by the Codes Enforcement
Officer as of May 6, 1998 is grandfathered.
Reasonable regulation of peddlers on private property is necessary to protect the public health, safety
and welfare of citizens and visitors to the Town;
- 187 -
Peddlers operate mainly on a seasonal basis out of mobile temporary carts and their potential impact
is greatest during times of increased commercial activity;
Peddlers on private property, individually and cumulatively, have an impact similar to small,
permanent structures and other uses regulated by zoning and other ordinances and need to be
regulated to achieve conformity with the objectives and purposes of the Comprehensive Plan,
Zoning Ordinance and Design Review Ordinance;
In order to permit the Town to monitor peddler number, density, location, safety and general
conformity with overall Town planning goals and to enact future amendments as necessary, no
peddler granted a permit under this Section will acquire any future rights to a permit renewal beyond
the date of expiration of that permit.
B. Exemptions
The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this section of the Ordinance.
1. Peddlers regulated by Chapter 43 “Peddlers’ Ordinance” of the Town of Freeport Codes;
2. Peddler activities conducted by organizations sponsored by the 4th of July Committee or
its successor.
C. Administration
1. Permits Required
After May 6, l993, no peddler on private property shall engage in this activity without
first obtaining a permit from the Codes Enforcement Officer. If the peddler cart will be
located on a parcel containing a use subject to site plan review or on a parcel which has
an approved site plan, site plan approval from the Project Review Board shall be obtained
before application for a permit is made to the Codes Enforcement Officer. Peddler carts
in the Design Review District are exempt from review by the Project Review Board.
2. Permit Application
a. The applicant for CEO approval shall be the owner of the property on which the
peddler cart will be located;
b. Every applicant shall pay the fee set by the Town Council and submit to the CEO
a written application on a form provided by the Town substantiating that the
activity meets the requirements of this Section. The property owner and the
peddler shall sign the application.
3. The CEO shall approve the permit application if a determination is made that the activity
will be in conformance with the requirements of this Section.
- 188 -
4. Any change in the operation as approved by the CEO shall require re-approval by the
CEO and by the Freeport Project Review Board if the peddler operation requires site plan
approval under Section 526.C.1 above.
5. Application Information
a. Name, home and business address and telephone number of the property owner
(applicant) and name, home and business address and telephone number of the
peddler cart owner or cart operator, if different from the applicant;
b. A description of the types of food and/or beverages to be sold;
c. A sketch, drawn to scale, showing the proposed operations location and its
measurements, the location of the cart and all appurtenances, all off-cart
items, and the relationship of all of the above features to all site features of
the entire parcel including, but not limited to, sidewalks, driveways,
buildings, landscaping, paths, signs and utilities, to show compliance with the
performance standards of this Section;
d. Length of time, to maximum of one year, that the activity will take place;
e. A sketch, drawn to scale, and, if available, a photograph of the cart to be used
in the operation of the business, labeling all aspects including, but not limited
to, materials, measurements, appurtenances, signs, awnings, umbrellas, fuel,
refrigeration, off-cart items, water supply, colors, to indicate compliance with
the performance standards. Specific measurements, designs and locations of
all appurtenance, including all off-cart items, shall be submitted;
f. Identification of the zoning district and location of the buffer zone, if any, on
the property;
g. Fee as set by the Town Council.
D. Performance Standards
1. Sale of non-food items is prohibited. Sale of food items shall be primarily intended
to be consumed at the time of purchase. Any distribution of free product samples
shall be limited to samples of food for sale at that cart.
2. Location
a. A maximum operations area of one hundred twenty-eight (128) square feet
shall be assigned to the cart and its operation. This shall include the cart,
customer waiting area, trash receptacle locations, coolers and any other
related cart activities. The cart shall be located a minimum of 3' from all
outside edges of the operations area. In this clear area, only the area to the
- 189 -
rear and sides of the cart may be used for off-cart items. The front must be
vacant and used only as customer waiting area. Minor overhang of the hitch,
umbrella or awning into the clear area is permitted; {Amended, Effective 07/15/08}
b. The operations area shall not be located in a way that would restrict or
interfere with ingress to and egress from any building or use within the parcel
or on abutting parcels, or obstruct adequate access by fire, police or
sanitation vehicles or interfere with pedestrian flow on the public sidewalk.
c. The operations area shall not include the public way and shall not interfere
with pedestrian and vehicle flow on the parcel and pedestrian and vehicle
access to the parcel or adjoining parcels. The cart shall not obstruct corner
clearance as regulated in Section 513 above;
d. The operations area shall not be located in a parking space(s) unless a
substitute parking space(s) is provided and meets the parking requirements of
this Ordinance;
e. The front face of the cart shall be at least 3' back from any public sidewalk;
f. Peddler carts shall not be located in buffer zones as described in Section 506.
3. Parking
One additional parking space, as calculated according to the employee parking
requirement for Retail Trade in Sec 514.B.5, per cart shall be provided either on the
site or leased according to the requirements of this Ordinance. Each space shall be
provided for each month of operation.
4. All utility connections shall be secured and safe.
5. The operations area shall be kept clean and free of litter. At least one trash receptacle
shall be provided. Public trash receptacles on the street shall not be used by the
operation. All trash shall be disposed of in conformance with Town regulations.
6. Only one cart shall be located on a lot.
7. Cart design shall conform to the following requirements except that permitted nonconforming
carts existing before January 1, l993 shall be permitted to operate for a
period of three years from January 1, l993 to December 31, l995. After December
31, l995, all carts shall conform to these requirements.
a. Materials: Carts may be commercial construction or individually constructed.
All carts shall be made of solid, durable materials.
- 190 -
b. Color: Neon and fluorescent colors are prohibited. Permitted colors shall be
shades of the following: red, white, gray, black, yellow, maroon, green, blue,
brown, beige and stainless steel.
c. Shape: "Theme" carts, such as ones in the shape of hot dogs, are prohibited.
d. Size: Maximum dimensions of a peddler’s cart or unit shall be no greater
than 38 inches in width and 8 feet in length. Maximum height of the cart
shall be six (6) feet from the top of the cart body, excluding umbrella or
awning, to the bottom of the cart where it (or the wheels) touches the ground.
Maximum height from the bottom of the cart (or the wheels) to the
uppermost top of any umbrella or awning attached to the cart shall be eight
(8) feet. The bottom of the canopy of the umbrella or awning shall be at least
80" off the ground.
e. Awnings and umbrellas shall be constructed of a non-rigid fabric such as, but
not limited to, canvas, ripstop nylon or soft plastic.
f. The hitch shall be visually identified for safety purposes with a wrapper,
bicycle type flag or other similar unobtrusive identifying device which does
not obstruct the clear area and which meets the requirements of the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act.
g. Carts shall not be motorized.
8. In addition to signs allowed for the principal use of the property, peddler carts are
allowed the following signs subject to the following requirements:
a. No more than two (2) signs, excluding lettering on an umbrella or awning,
are permitted on each cart. Lettering on an umbrella or awning is permitted
in addition to the two signs. In addition, one menu board is permitted and
shall be no larger than six (6) square feet. A menu board is not considered a
sign.
b. Each sign shall be secured to the cart at a maximum height no higher than the
bottom edge of the umbrella or awning material.
c. The maximum size of each sign shall be four (4) square feet.
d. Each sign face shall be counted as one sign.
e. Free standing signs are prohibited.
f. Sign design shall meet the following requirements:
- 191 -
(1) One or both signs may be preprinted, movable letter signs or chalk
boards.
(2) Any other type of sign shall be included as part of the CEO approval
process.
9. Cart lighting shall conform to the following requirements:
a. Lighting shall not increase the light level at the perimeter of the operations
area by more than 5 foot candles above the ambient light level. However,
total maximum lighting at the perimeter of the operations area shall not
exceed fifteen (15) foot candles.
b. Light sources shall be aimed or shielded so that the light projects downward
and in no case shall the angle be less than 20 degrees below horizontal.
10. Generators are prohibited.
11. Cart operators shall dress in a neat and clean manner.
12. The cart operation or location shall not modify an approved site plan without Project
Review Board approval.
13. Off-cart items, except for ones located on or under the cart, are limited to the
following items: one trash receptacle, one recycling receptacle, two coolers, one
chair, and other equipment required to meet state and/or local health standards.
{Amended, Effective 07/15/08}
14. No animals shall be attached to the cart except for guide animals.
15. Amplified sound shall not exceed 75 decibels during the day and 55 decibels at
night.
16. All applicable local, state and federal requirements shall be met.
17. A flame resistive shield surrounding the cooking elements shall be installed to
protect the customer from open flame and hot surfaces. The cooking elements shall
be approved/listed (i.e., U.L., Factory Mutual, etc.), permanently attached to the cart
and not in or on separate facilities. An ABC extinguisher shall be mounted to the
cart. The peddler cart shall meet all local, state and national fire codes. Before a
permit is issued, the peddler cart containing cooking elements shall be inspected by
the Fire Department. An inspection fee in the amount set by the Town Council shall
be paid to the Fire Department by the owner of the cart prior to its use.
18. A permit shall be issued by the CEO before a victualers license is obtained from the
Town of Freeport. The peddler cart may operate only while such license is in effect.
- 192 -
19. A license issued by the State of Maine Department of Human Services for food
service shall be obtained before a permit is issued by the Codes Enforcement
Officer. The peddler cart may operate only while such license is in effect.
E. Permit Duration
The permit issued by the CEO under this Section 526.C.1 shall be issued for a specific time
period up to a maximum of one year and shall expire at the end of that time period.
F. Display of Permit
Each cart shall display the valid permits in a visible location.
G. Transfer of Permits
No permit issued under this Section shall be used at any time by any person other than the
peddler for whom it was issued on the property for which it was issued.
H. Enforcement
Because of the transient nature of peddler activity, the Town may, in addition to pursuing
any other remedies available under this Ordinance or pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A., Sec. 4452,
enforce the provisions of this Section 526 as follows:
1. When as a result of a complaint or his own investigation the CEO determines that a
peddler on private property is in violation of the Rules or Standards of this Section,
he shall provide written notice of the violation to the permit holder and the private
property owner.
2. The notice shall contain the following information:
a. the specific facts or conditions which constitute the violation;
b. an order to correct the violation by taking specified actions;
c. the amount of the penalty to the permit holder and landowner if the violation
continues;
d. a warning that a failure to correct the violation will result in a suspension of
the permit and fines for the property owner and permit holder;
e. a statement that the permit holder and the property owner have the right to
appeal the notice pursuant to Section601(G)(4)(a) of this Ordinance and that
failure to appeal could preclude the permit holder and property owner
challenging the Codes Enforcement Officer's determination in subsequent
proceedings, but that filing an appeal does not stop the accrual of penalties.
3. Penalties - when a violation is not corrected within five (5) business days after the
date of notice of violation, both the peddler and the private property owner shall be
subject to the following penalties:
- 193 -
a. Suspension of permit and of the ability to apply for a new permit, for up to two
(2) years;
b. Fifty dollars ($50.00) for each day of violation after the date of notice;
c. One hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day of operation while under
suspension.
4. Appeal - any peddler or property owner adversely affected by decision of the CEO
may appeal in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 526.A Food Trucks {Effective 12/17/14}
Food trucks individually and cumulatively have an impact similar to small structures and to other
businesses. The Town acknowledges that food trucks can be desirable in limited circumstances
provided certain standards can be met. For businesses and zoning districts that specifically allow food
trucks and for special events that will use food trucks as a temporary activity, the following standards
shall be met:
A. For permitted uses that allow the use of a food truck as an accessory use:
1. the food truck must be located on the same property as the permitted use or on an
adjacent property if the owner of the land on which the permitted use is located has a
legal agreement with the property owner and
2. customers of the food truck must have access to restrooms on the same property that are
connected to the public sewer system or a sub-surface wastewater disposal system. An
agreement with the host permitted use to use the restrooms on the site must be
submitted.
3. One food truck is allowed at any given time, except that the host permitted use may have
up to three trucks, for no more than three days, no more than three times in any calendar
year.
4. Site plan review is not required for the use of a food truck as an accessory use on a
property that has already received site plan review.
5. Food trucks may be open for business during the host businesses hours of operation;
however, the hours of operation cannot be earlier or later than those included in Sec.
526A.B.12 below.
B. All food trucks must:
1. be registered by the Maine Department of Motor Vehicles and licensed by the Maine
Department of Health and Human Services.
2. be located on private property; except that the Project Review Board may approve food
trucks in the public right-of-way if they are associated with a special event that has been
approved by the Project Review Board and/or the Town Council (as an example 4
th
of
July festivities)
3. have a valid Food Truck license issued by the Codes Enforcement Officer of the Town
of Freeport.
4. have a valid Victualer’s License from the Town of Freeport if they will be selling at
more than 9 events and/or days in Freeport, this does not include food trucks for private
catering events when the food truck is parked entirely on private property and serves the
- 194 -
private guests of the host and all payments are made by the host, not the guests.
5. not verbally solicit business from pedestrians or persons in vehicles and no sales to
persons in vehicles,
6. not have lighting except localized lighting that is used on or in the food truck for the
purpose of food preparation and menu illumination,
7. not have signs except those identifying the name of the truck, this does not include
menus,
8. provide at least one trash receptacle and one recycling receptacle for use by patrons and
in a convenient location that does not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic,
9. collect and dispose of all litter or debris within a 25-foot radius of the food truck,
10. contain all equipment needed for the preparation of food within the food truck, except
for trash and recycling receptacles,
11. not have any furniture, umbrellas, generators, or other objects or structures outside of the
food truck,
12. limit operation between 8am and 10pm Sunday through Thursday and 8am and 11pm
Friday and Saturday,
13. not use any amplified customer notification system or amplified music.
14. food trucks must meet the setback requirements of the district in which they are located
if an adjacent property’s use is primarily residential.
Section 527. Performance Standards for Commercial Districts
(C-I, C-III, C-IV)
The purpose of this section is to encourage a pattern of development along major roadways
which minimizes the appearance of strip development and supports the following goals:
Create harmonious and attractive signage;
Encourage the development of architecturally well designed buildings;
Provide for a safe flow of vehicular traffic;
Encourage connectors between parcels for vehicles and pedestrians;
Encourage pedestrian activity along the corridor;
Minimize sky glow from lighting; and
Create attractive settings for developments through the use of extensive plantings in the
setbacks.
The following performance standards are for the Project Review Board to use to evaluate the
specific plans for a site. The standards are mainly general in nature to encourage creative
solutions related to the unique characteristics of individual sites. Detailed advisory guidance
on suggested methods to meet the following standards is available in the Route One South
Design Guidelines. These referenced Guidelines are provided as a supplement to this
Ordinance, but do not take precedence over and are not requirements of this Ordinance.
{Amended, Effective 01/02/18}
A. Signage
- 195 -
1. Placement, materials, shape, size, colors and style of the sign(s) should complement
the building and nearby properties.
2. The amount and size of the information on the sign should be consistent with the
ability of the viewer to comprehend it.
3. Framing/supports should be in proportion to, and compatible with, the size of the
sign and the size of the building.
4. One free standing sign per building is preferred
5. Lighting of interior illuminated signs should not create sky glow.
6. Dark background colors and light letter colors are preferred for interior illuminated
signs.
7. Free standing signs should not be located in the side setback of lots.
8. One building sign per building side is preferred.
9. For multi-tenant signage, the review process may be streamlined if, at the original
time of approval, minimum and maximum sign size and placement and a design plan
are established. Subsequently, each tenant may choose the lettering. When tenants
change, administrative approval can be obtained unless the sign changes are more
significant than the name change.
10. The establishment of integrated sign systems for multi-tenant developments is
encouraged.
11. Gooseneck lights on signs are preferable to ground lights. Ground lights are
discouraged. If ground lights are used they shall have year-round screening with
landscaping or some other method.
B. Building Design {Amended, Effective 01/02/18}
In addition to the criteria and standards included in Section 602.F.1.b. of the Freeport
Zoning Ordinance regarding the relation of proposed buildings to the environment, the
following standards apply.
1. For proposed building facades that face or are visible from any public road including
but not limited to US Route One and Interstate 295, residential neighborhoods, or
buildings on abutting properties, the following standards apply:
a. To prevent long, visually monotonous buildings facades, design features shall be
added to the building such as but not limited to, wall plane projections, recesses,
windows, roof elevation variations, variations in siding materials and
orientations, moldings and trim are design features that must be incorporated into
a building. In no case shall there be an uninterrupted span of wall for more than
50 feet. In addition, commercial buildings with wall heights greater than 20’
shall be treated as a 2-story building in terms of window and trim treatment
regardless of the number of floors on the inside of the building.
b. To encourage high quality buildings, architectural details on the front and side
edges of pitched and flat roofs are required.
c. To create consistent building styles, all sides of the building should match or
complement the style of the building that has the greatest visibility from a public
street.
- 196 -
d. In addition to the standards of this section, to blend metal sided buildings in with
other stick built buildings along a corridor, metal siding installed in a single
direction is not permitted on a façade more than 12 feet tall or more than 50 feet
long.
e. All façade elements shall be coordinated with the landscape plan.
f. For buildings with overhead doors, the overhead doors should be designed to not
unreasonably standout; this may be accomplished through the use of color, material
and/or form. Except if the overhead door is a prominent feature of the building, in
which case the design must include architectural features such as trim or type of
glass. {Amended 06/18/19}
2. Blank or unadorned walls are allowed if the walls are NOT directly visible from any
public road including but not limited to US Route One and Interstate 295, residential
neighborhoods, or buildings on abutting properties.
C. Vehicular Access.
1. New access points on Route One shall not be closer than 300 feet to an existing
access point to the greatest extent possible.
2. Sharing of common driveways is encouraged, especially for access to abutting lots which
are nonconforming in area and/or frontage.
3. Where possible, access from a side street or driveway is preferable to access from Route
One.
4. A minimum of the first 50 feet of any driveway off Route One shall be paved.
5. Driveways between parcels to connect adjacent parking lots are required where they are
practical to improve vehicular travel without using U.S. Route One and where
environmentally feasible.
D. Pedestrian Access
1. A pedestrian access at least 5 feet wide connecting abutting parcels shall be constructed
on each parcel where development is proposed. If the adjoining parcel is developed, the
access should be designed to relate to existing facilities on the abutting lot. Materials
might be asphalt, stone dust or wood, as examples. If the abutting lot is not developed,
the plan shall contain a statement that says that continuous and consistent access will be
created when the abutting lot is developed. The Project Review Board may waive this
requirement if no reasonable access is available due to, for example the presence of
wetlands, and/or steep slopes.
E. Front landscaped setback
The purpose of the landscaped setback is to soften the appearance of structures and parking lots
from the road and to screen vehicular headlight glare on and off site.
1. If drainage basins and swales are located in the setback, they should be landscaped with
trees or shrubs and the edge of the basin should be graded, if possible, to create height
variations (a berm effect). If landscaping and berming will eliminate the
retention/detention function of the basin, the basin should be relocated outside of the
- 197 -
setback or the size of the setback should be increased to accommodate the basin and the
landscaped strip.
2. Preservation of existing mature trees and planting or preservation of masses of shrubs in
the setback is encouraged.
3. Landscaping should include planting of new trees and shrubs if none presently exist.
4. Loaming and seeding may be a part of the landscaping plan but should not be the only
element of the plan.
5. Fencing may be incorporated into the landscaping plan, at the interior edge of the front
landscaped setback, especially to screen vehicular lights from the roadway.
G. Site Features
1. In general, no more than three flagpoles should be located on a parcel.
2. The height of the flagpole shall be in proportion to the height of the building. The
dimensions of the flag shall be in proportion to the dimensions of the flagpole.
Section 528 Regulation of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
A. Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of performance
standards and requirements to be used by the Project Review Board or Staff Review Board
during the site plan review process when it reviews an application for the placement and
construction of wireless telecommunication facilities. These standards and requirements are
intended to regulate the location and installation of such facilities in order to:
1. Protect and promote public health, safety and welfare from potential problems, examples
of which are falling ice, telecommunication wave interference and attractive nuisance of
towers to children;
2. Protect and preserve the aesthetic quality of Freeport as set forth in the goals, policies and
objectives of the adopted Freeport Comprehensive Plan, examples of which are the
protection of scenic vistas, rural character and important historical areas, and the
regulations of the Freeport Zoning Ordinance, examples of which are buffering
requirements, by carefully regulating siting and design of wireless telecommunication
facilities;
3. Protect adjacent properties from potential damage from tower failure and falling ice
through careful siting regulations and engineering requirements;
4. Facilitate and encourage the managed development of telecommunications infrastructure
while at the same time not unduly restricting the development of needed
telecommunications facilities, including important amateur radio installations, and
5. Encourage co-location on existing and future wireless telecommunication towers and
maximize the use of existing and approved towers and other existing structures such as
utility poles, water towers and buildings to accommodate new wireless
telecommunication antennas in order to reduce the number of new towers needed to serve
the community's needs.
- 198 -
B. Exemptions:
The following uses are exempt from these regulations:
1. A ground, building or tower mounted antenna, operated by a federally licensed amateur
radio operator as part of the Amateur Radio Service, which is no higher than thirty-five
(35) feet in height, and is not licensed or used for any commercial purpose. The Codes
Enforcement Officer may permit additional height up to a maximum of seventy-five (75)
feet only if, after engineering documentation substantiating the need for the excess height
is submitted to and is acceptable to the Codes Enforcement Officer, the CEO determines
that a height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet is technically necessary to successfully
engage in this activity.
2. Radio or television satellite dish antenna for the sole use of the resident occupying a
residential parcel on which the satellite dish is located.
3. A single ground or building mounted receive-only radio or television antenna including
any mast, for the sole use of the occupant of a residential parcel on which the radio or
television antenna is located, with an antenna height not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet.
4. A ground or building mounted citizens band radio or two-way FM antenna including any
mast, if the height (post, and antenna and support structure if not on the ground) does not
exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
5. A municipal, public safety or public works wireless telecommunication facility up to a
maximum height of 100 feet.
C. Space Requirements:
1. Maximum Height:
Tower, single user, see Article IV
Tower, co-located, see Article IV
The height of any tower must be approved by the Project Review Board as part of the site
plan review process. The Project Review Board may approve a height that is up to the
final, total maximum listed in Article IV, only if it determines, as part of the site plan
review process, that the following conditions are met:
a. For existing towers, evidence is presented by the owner that the existing tower
height is not sufficient to meet the reasonable needs of the proposed additional
user(s) at this time and the additional height requested is the least height
technically necessary to serve all of the proposed users. The board may require a
peer review of this evidence.
b. For new towers, applicants are encouraged to design towers which will
accommodate co-location even if only one user will located on the tower at the
time of site plan review and approval. In this situation, the tower shall be
constructed no higher than the maximum height for a single user tower. When
additional users will locate on the tower, it may be constructed to the approved
- 199 -
co-located height, subject to the requirement that it meet all requirements of the
previously approved site plan. If no change is proposed, no additional review is
required.
c. All requirements of co-location (see Section 528 D below).
2. Mass of Antennas Per User:
The mass of antennas, including required antenna support structures, on a tower shall
not exceed five hundred (500) cubic feet per array, with no one dimension exceeding
twenty-one (21) feet per user. The Project Review Board may permit an increase in
the mass and dimensions if it will not significantly change the visual impact of the
structure. The mass shall be determined by the appropriate volumetric calculations
using the smallest regular rectilinear, cuboidal, conical, cylindrical or pyramidal
geometric shapes encompassing the entire perimeters of the array and all of its parts
and attachments.
3. Area:
A wireless telecommunications tower shall not be constructed on a lot that does not
conform to the minimum lot area required in the zoning district even if such lot is a
lawful non-conforming lot of record. If it is located on a lot which also contains a
use other than a water tower, the lot shall be of sufficient area to meet the minimum
lot area requirement for each use.
4. Setbacks:
a. The center of the base of any telecommunications tower must be set back a
minimum of 125% of the tower height, or the required minimum setback of
the District in which it is located, whichever is greater.
b. No part of the structure, including anchors, guy wires, overhead lines, masts,
etc., shall be located in the required District setback or in any required buffer
area both on the ground or in the air space above the ground.
c. Accessory support buildings containing electronic equipment and any other
structures accessory to the telecommunications tower shall meet the required
District building setback and the required buffer setback.
d. If more than one tower is proposed on a single lot or parcel, they shall be
clustered as closely together as technically possible.
e. If other non-accessory uses are located on the same lot or parcel as a wireless
telecommunications tower, all structures associated with such other uses shall
be located a minimum distance of 125% of the tower height from the base of
the tower.
- 200 -
f. A tower’s setback may be reduced by the Project Review Board to allow the
integration of a tower or antennas into an existing or proposed church steeple,
light standard, power line support device, water tower, or similar structure, or
to allow the location of a tower on the same lot as an existing water tower.
The applicant shall provide substantiating evidence to the Project Review
Board that the wireless telecommunication facilities are designed to collapse
in a manner that will not cause damage to other buildings, structures or
improvements.
g. Not withstanding the height limitations within a zoning district, in order to
accommodate co-location , a tower, existing as of August 6, 1997, may be
modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not to exceed a total maximum of one
hundred ninety-nine (199) feet, including all attachments, but only if that
additional height will not require any lighting or obstruction painting. The
additional tower height shall not require increased lot setbacks and the
tower’s pre-modification height shall be utilized to calculate required
setbacks.
D. Co-location Requirements:
1. On existing towers.
Applicants for site plan review for a new wireless telecommunication tower must
send written notice by pre-paid first class United States mail to all other
telecommunication tower owners and licensed telecommunication providers in the
Town utilizing existing towers, stating their sitting needs and/or co-location
capabilities in an effort to encourage tower co-location. Evidence that this notice
requirement has been fulfilled shall be submitted to the Project Review Board and
shall include a name and address list, copy of the notice which was sent, and a
statement, under oath, that the notices were sent as required. An application for a
new wireless telecommunication tower must include evidence that existing or
previously approved towers cannot accommodate the telecommunications equipment
(antennas, cables, etc.) planned for the proposed tower. Such evidence would be:
a. Planned, necessary equipment would exceed the structural capacity of
existing and approved towers, considering the existing and planned use of
those towers, and existing and approved towers cannot be reinforced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment.
b. Planned equipment will cause electromagnetic frequency interference with
other existing or planned equipment for that tower, and the interference
cannot be prevented.
c. Existing or approved towers do not have space on which planned equipment
can be placed so it can function effectively.
d. Other documented reasons that make it technically or financially unfeasible
to place the equipment planned by the applicant on existing and approved
towers.
- 201 -
2. Construction of new towers.
a. A proposal to construct a new co-located wireless telecommunication tower
taller than the maximum height permitted for a single user must include
evidence that the tower can structurally support a minimum of three (3)
antenna arrays for co-location purposes.
b. The Project Review Board shall require evidence of adequate structural
support to accommodate any proposed additional arrays.
E. Interest of Telecommunication Entity:
A proposal to construct or modify a wireless telecommunication tower must include
evidence of a commitment from a duly licensed entity to utilize the tower to provide
wireless telecommunication services.
F. Submissions:
In addition to all of the relevant site plan review submission requirements listed in Section
602.D, the following submissions shall be required unless waived by the Project Review
Board.
1. A report from a Registered Professional Engineer in the State of Maine that
describes the tower, the technical reasons for the tower design and the capacity of the
tower, including the number(s), type(s) and volume (as defined in Section 528.C.2
above) of antenna(s) that it can accommodate and the basis for the calculation of
capacity.
2. For building, pole mounted or tower facilities, certification by a Registered
Professional Engineer in the State of Maine that the design is adequate to support,
without failure, the maximum forces expected from wind, earthquakes, ice/snow
loading when the pole or tower is fully loaded with antennas, transmitters, other
equipment, and camouflaging, as described in the submitted plan.
3. Elevation drawings, cross-sectional area or silhouette, of the facility, drawn to scale
and showing all measurements, both linear and volumetric, showing front, sides and
rear of the proposed facility including all fencing, supporting system for
transmission cables running between the tower and accessory structures, control
panels, antennas, and existing structures and trees. Reference any design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness.
4. Detail of the tower base or method of attachment to a structure. If the facility will be
attached to an existing building or structure, provide measurements and elevations of
the structure.
5. Details of all accessory structures including buildings, parking areas, utilities, gates,
access roads, etc.
- 202 -
6. Written approval by all applicable state and federal agencies, including but not
limited to the FAA and FCC, or a statement from the agency that no approval is
required, including a description of any conditions or criteria for the approval or
exemption from approval.
7. An inventory of all of the provider’s existing and approved towers, antennas or sites
within the Town of Freeport and locations in surrounding communities where
wireless telecommunications are proposed to be utilized in conjunction with the
facility proposed in this application. Service area maps or network maps of the
applicant’s existing and proposed facilities in Cumberland, Androscoggin and
Sagadahoc Counties.
8. Site photos showing site vegetation, existing and adjacent structures, views of and
from the proposed site. Topography and land uses on the proposed parcel and on
abutting properties.
9. Landscaping plan reflecting location of proposed screening and fencing, planting
areas, proposed plantings, existing plant materials to be retained and trees or shrubs
to be removed.
10. Identify any other telecommunication facilities existing or proposed on the site.
11. A visual analysis, which may include photo montage, field mock up, or other techniques,
shall be prepared by or on behalf of the applicant which identifies the potential visual
impacts at design capacity, of the proposed facility. Consideration shall be given to
views from public areas as well as from private residences and from archaeological and
historic resources including historic districts, areas and structures, specifically those listed
in the National Register of Historic Places or eligible for inclusion. The analysis of the
impact on historical and archaeological resources shall meet the requirements of the
Maine State Historic Preservation Officer in his/her review capacity for the FCC. The
overall analysis shall assess the cumulative impacts of the proposed facility and other
existing and foreseeable telecommunication facilities in the area, and shall identify and
include all feasible mitigation measures consistent with the technological requirements of
the proposed telecommunication service.
12. A letter of intent that commits the tower owner and successors in interest to:
a. Respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request for information from a
potential co-location applicant.
b. Negotiate in good faith for shared use by other parties that have received federal
licenses;
13. Evidence that co-location on existing or approved towers is not possible, per Section
528.D above. If the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved
tower site, the applicant must assess whether such tower site could be changed to
accommodate the proposed tower, and generally describe the means and projected cost of
shared use of the existing or approved tower site.
- 203 -
14. Proof of financial capacity to build, maintain, and remove the proposed tower.
G. Design Standards:
The following design standards shall be met by the applicant. The Project Review Board, as part
of the site plan review process, shall determine if the applicant has complied with these
standards.
All telecommunications facilities shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment to
the greatest extent feasible. To this end all of the following measures shall be implemented.
1. Towers shall be constructed of metal or other nonflammable material unless
specifically waived by the Project Review Board.
2. Accessory facilities shall be adjacent to the tower base unless an alternative
location will be less visually obtrusive or topographic considerations require an
alternative location.
3. Accessory facilities shall be constructed out of non-reflective exterior materials
and shall be placed underground, if possible.
4. New accessory facilities shall be no taller than one story in height and shall be
treated to look like a building or facility typically found in the area.
5. All buildings, poles, towers, antenna supports, antennas and other components of
each wireless telecommunications facility site shall be initially painted and
thereafter repainted as necessary with a "flat" paint. The color(s) selected shall be
one that the Project Review Board determines will minimize their visibility to the
greatest extent feasible. To this end, improvements which will be primarily
viewed against soils or trees shall be painted colors matching these landscapes
while elements which rise above the horizon shall be painted a blue gray that
matches the typical sky color at that location unless the Board determines that an
alternative proposal will minimize visibility.
6. No obstruction painting or any lighting shall be permitted on any towers.
7. The Project Review Board may require special design of the facilities where
findings of particular sensitivity are made (e.g. proximity to historic or
aesthetically significant structures, views and/or community features).
8. Sufficient anti-climbing measures and other security measures preventing access
to the site shall be incorporated into the facility, as needed, to reduce the potential
for trespass and injury.
9. Only manually operated or motion detecting security lighting is permitted.
- 204 -
H. Location
All telecommunication facilities shall be located so as to minimize their visibility and to
minimize the total number of towers in the Town. The following measures shall guide the
location.
1. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be sited in areas of high visibility unless
a finding is made that no other location is technically feasible, and unless the facility is
sited below the ridgeline or designed to minimize its profile by blending with the
surrounding existing natural and man-made environment in such a manner as to be
effectively unnoticeable.
2. No facility shall be located so as to create a significant threat to the health or survival of
rare, threatened or endangered plant or animal species.
I. Additional Standards and Criteria:
In addition to the criteria and standards listed in Section 602.F below, these additional criteria
and standards shall be utilized by the Project Review Board in reviewing applications for site
plan review of proposed wireless telecommunications facilities.
1. Mitigation measures have been utilized to screen antennas and towers from view from
public rights-of-way or scenic vistas, either via landscaping, fencing or other architectural
screening.
2. Network interconnections from the communications site via land lines have been
proposed rather than the use of microwave link dishes, in order to minimize visual
impact.
3. Creative design measures have been employed to camouflage facilities by integrating
them with existing buildings and among other uses.
4. Other technically feasible sites have been investigated and, if available, the proposed
facility has been relocated in order to minimize the effect of the location on visually
sensitive areas such as residential communities, historical areas and open space areas.
5. Co-location, where technically feasible and visually desirable, on an existing tower, has
been investigated and, if technically and financially feasible, the proposed facility is colocated.
6. Use of an existing community facility site, such as on or adjacent to water tanks or utility
poles, has been investigated as a potential site for a tower, antennas and other equipment
and, if available and technically feasible and visually desirable, is proposed as the site for
the facility.
- 205 -
7. Adequate bonding for removal of the wireless telecommunication tower, as required in
Section 528.K below, has been submitted.
J. Amendments:
Any change to existing, previously approved and proposed towers requires site plan approval.
This includes, but is not limited to, modifications to approved height and to approved
attachments such as antennas and dishes as well as requests for additional attachments.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any change, up to five (5) cubic feet or less per array, to the
mass, dimensions or arrangement of an antenna, shall not require site plan review, unless such
change exceeds the design criteria and additional standards and criteria previously approved in
the original site plan approval.
K. Removal of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities:
1. If the tower ceases to be used or if the use of the tower is abandoned for any reason, it
shall be the responsibility of the owner of the facility to notify the Codes Enforcement
Officer of the date of abandonment or cessation of use. If the owner shall fail to give the
required notice, the CEO shall make a determination of such date, which determination
shall be conclusive as to such date.
2. In the case of a tower which is abandoned or the use of which ceases, it shall be removed
within one (1) year of its abandonment or cessation of use. All above ground structures,
equipment, foundations, guy anchors, utilities and access roads or driveways specifically
constructed to service the tower, structures, equipment or utilities shall be removed, and
the land returned to a condition as near to the original pre-construction condition as
possible.
3. At the time of approval, the applicant for a new tower shall submit to the Town a bond or
other financial surety, to be approved by the Town Manager, in the amount of 150% of the
estimated demolition cost of the tower and the removal of all accessory facilities as
described in Section 528.K.2 above, such cost to be determined by an independent
Registered Professional Engineer in the State of Maine and the amount shall be acceptable
to the Town Manager. The bond or other financial surety shall be in effect for as long as
the tower is in place.
4. The bond shall be used by the Town to demolish a tower which is abandoned or the use of
which has ceased, accessory facilities and associated abandoned structures only if the
owner has not done so within the required one (1) year period.
5. The owner may apply to the Town Manager for release of the bond at such time that the
owner or assigns removes the tower, accessory facilities and associated abandoned
structures as described above, and such completed removal is found to be satisfactory by
the Town Engineer. The cost of inspection by the Town Engineer shall be borne by the
owner.
- 206 -
L. Inspections:
The following procedure shall be undertaken by the owner of the tower:
1. Inspection of towers by an independent tower inspection firm shall be performed to insure
structural integrity. Such inspections shall be performed as follows:
a. Monopole towers B at least once every seven years following completion of
construction. The inspection shall take place between the sixth and seventh year
of the repeat sequence.
b. Self-supporting towers B at least once every five years following completion of
construction. The inspection shall take place between the fourth and fifth year of
the repeat sequence.
c. Guyed towers B at least once every three years following completion of
construction. The inspection shall take place between the second and third year of
the repeat sequence.
2. The inspection report shall be submitted to the Town Engineer within thirty (30) days of
its receipt by the tower owner. Based upon the results of the inspection, the CEO, upon
recommendation by the Town Engineer, may require repair or demolition of the tower
3. The cost of such inspections, reports, repairs or demolition required under this Section
528.L of the Ordinance shall be borne entirely by the tower owner. Required repairs
shall be completed within ninety (90) days or less as required by the CEO and agreement
by the Town Engineer for safety reasons.
4. Failure to provide required inspection reports in the required time schedule shall be
deemed primae facie evidence of abandonment.
Section 529. Stormwater Management
Adequate provisions shall be made to manage any stormwater flows generated by a development.
All developments subject to Site Plan and/or Subdivision Review shall meet the following standards
for stormwater management:
1. Stormwater shall be detained on the site using the natural features of the site to the
greatest extent possible.
2. The rate of stormwater flows from the site after development shall not exceed the
predevelopment rate of stormwater flow from the site unless the discharge is directly into
the ocean or into the Cousins, Royal or Harraseeket Rivers or if the applicant can
demonstrate through engineering studies that no negative impact on downgradient
drainage facilities due to increased stormwater runoff rates from a site will result.
- 207 -
3. The quality of the stormwater flows offsite shall be addressed. Retention of the first onehalf
inch of runoff from a storm event for 24 hours or other stormwater quality
improvement measures may be necessary to minimize or eliminate sediments and other
contaminants from the stormwater leaving the site.
4. In addition to any other applicable requirements of this Ordinance and the Freeport
Subdivision Ordinance, any development which would require a stormwater management
permit from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection under 38 M.R.S.A. 420-
D shall comply with the rules adopted by the Department of Environmental Protection
under 38 M.R.S.A. 420-D(1), as the same may be amended from time to time, and the
applicant shall document such compliance to the Freeport Project Review Board. Where
the standards or other provisions of such stormwater rules conflict with municipal
ordinances, the stricter (more protective) standard shall apply.
Section 530. Location of Adult Business
1. DEFINITIONS:
a. “Adult business” means any business in any use category, a substantial or significant
portion of which consists of selling, renting, leasing, exhibiting, displaying, or otherwise
dealing in materials or devices of any kind which appeal to prurient interest and which
depict or describe specified sexual activities.
b. “Specified sexual activities” means:
1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
2. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
3. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female
breast.
c. “Public Building” means a building owned, operated or funded in whole or in part by the
Town of Freeport which members of the general public have occasion to visit, either
regularly or occasionally, such as, but not limited to, the Town Hall, the Public Library,
the Police Station and Fire Stations.
2. LOCATION OF ADULT BUSINESS RESTRICTED
No adult business shall be located:
a. In any location where the customer entrance to the adult business would be closer than
1,000 feet, measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structure or objects,
to the nearest point on the boundary of any property which is:
i. Occupied by a residence, school, park, playground, religious institution or public
building.
ii. Located in the following residential zones: RR-I, RR-II, RR-IA, MDR-I, MDR-II,
MD-A, MD-B, V-I, V-II, RP-I, RP-II, ID
- 208 -
iii. Occupied by another adult business.
3. OUTSIDE DISPLAYS PROHIBITED
No materials or devises displaying or exhibiting specified sexual activities shall be visible from
the exterior of the building in which the adult business is located.
Section 531. Retirement Community Overlay District
A. Purpose
The Retirement Community Overlay District is intended to provide flexibility and creativity
in the design and development of retirement communities that provide a continuum of care
and a range of living environments for older residents in locations that are appropriate for
this type of development. The overlay district is designed to foster high quality
communities that are an asset to the Town while assuring that these developments are good
neighbors.
B. Effect of Designation as an Overlay District
The Retirement Community Overlay District is intended to function as an overlay district.
As such, the requirements of the underlying zoning district will remain in force and will
apply to all use of land and buildings within the Overlay District except as specifically
modified by the provisions of this Section 531. The designation of an Overlay District is
intended to recognize that a planned retirement community has special considerations that
do not apply to other uses and to allow for additional flexibility in the permitting of these
uses in return for an increased level of community oversight.
C. Definitions Applicable in the Retirement Community Overlay District
1. Care bed. A resident’s bed located within an elderly housing room and designed to
be occupied by only one person.
2. Elderly housing dwelling unit. A room or group of rooms within a retirement
community designed and equipped as living quarters for one elderly household,
including living, sanitary, sleeping and kitchen facilities, and not located within a
multi-unit building which also contains central dining facilities in which meals are
made available to residents as part of a supportive services program.
3. Elderly housing unit. A room or group of rooms within a retirement community
designed and equipped for occupancy by one elderly household, including living,
sanitary and sleeping facilities, but not including kitchen facilities, except that
kitchen facilities may be provided if the room or group of rooms is located within a
multi-unit building which also contains central dining facilities in which meals are
made available to residents as part of a supportive services program.
- 209 -
4. Elderly housing room. A room within a retirement community that is not part of an
elderly housing dwelling unit or an elderly housing unit, which contains sleeping
facilities and may contain sanitary facilities, but does not contain kitchen facilities or
living facilities.
5. Elderly person. A person age 55 or older.
6. Elderly household. A household which includes at least one elderly person and no
occupant less than 55 years of age unless any such occupant less than 55 years of age
is a full-time caregiver to the elderly person, or the spouse or companion of the
elderly person.
7. Kitchen. A room or portion of a room equipped for the preparation of full meals,
including, at minimum, a range (or built-in cooking top and oven), a sink and a
refrigerator.
8. Nursing home. As defined in Section 104, including those facilities categorized
under state and federal law as “assisted living facilities.” A nursing home may
include non-elderly persons with disabilities as residents.
9. Retirement community. A planned community which provides housing for elderly
households in a variety of housing types, at least some of which are elderly housing
dwelling units or elderly housing units; which may include a nursing home; which
can accommodate at least 150 residents; which provides a variety of levels of care
and a range of services to elderly households; and which is designed to provide a
sense of unified development with a common design character.
10. Senior center. A building or portion of a building located within a retirement
community and used for recreational, social, educational or cultural activities
designed primarily for elderly persons.
D. Designation of a Retirement Community Overlay District
The Town Council may designate any area of 30 acres or more, which will be served by
public water and sewer, as a retirement community overlay district, utilizing the procedures
for amending this ordinance under Section 203 and in accordance with the requirements of
state law for zoning amendments.
E. Submission Requirements
If the request for the designation of a Retirement Community Overlay District is initiated by
the owners of the property within the proposed overlay district, the request shall be
accompanied by the following submissions, which shall be in addition to the submissions
required by Section 203:
- 210 -
a. A narrative description of the range of care and service options to be offered and a
discussion of how these are consistent with the definition of a retirement community.
b. A conceptual master plan drawn to scale and showing, in general terms, the proposed
location and size of buildings, roads and drives, parking areas, recreational facilities,
and other development features. The conceptual master plan shall be prepared by a
registered landscape architect, registered architect, or registered professional
engineer. The scaled plan shall show in a conceptual nature the primary drainage
features and patterns of the proposed district, environmentally sensitive areas, prime
development areas, potential points of vehicular access, and other significant
manmade and natural features of the proposed district.
F. Amendments or Expansions
The Town Council may modify or expand the boundaries of a Retirement Community
Overlay District at any time, following the same procedures and standards as used in the
creation of the district.
G. Repeal
The Town Council may repeal a Retirement Community Overlay District created at the
request of the property owners within the district and terminate all rights in the overlay
provisions if:
1. Necessary Subdivision and/or Site Plan approvals have not been obtained for the
retirement community within two (2) years of the Town Council’s vote to create the
overlay district, and/or
2. Substantial construction has not begun on the improvements shown on the approved
Subdivision and/or Site Plan within three (3) years of the Town Council’s vote to
create the district.
3. The use of the property no longer qualifies as a Retirement Community as defined in
section C above.
H. Subdivision and/or Site Plan Approval
All retirement communities, as defined in this Ordinance, are subject to Subdivision and Site
Plan Review.
Once a Retirement Community Overlay District has been designated, all applications for
Subdivision and/or Site Plan approval shall be generally consistent with the conceptual
master plan if such a plan was submitted as part of the designation process. A plan for
Subdivision and/or Site Plan approval shall be deemed generally consistent with the
conceptual plan provided there are no changes to items such as increased density, additional
buildings, reduction in buffers, or significant changes in parking areas and/or road layouts
- 211 -
An applicant for an approval that is subject to a conceptual master plan may request a
change to the master plan by filing a revised plan with the Town Council. A change may
include, but is not limited to, items such as increased density, additional buildings,
reductions in buffers, or significant changes parking areas and/or road layouts. The Council
shall consider the submission as an amendment to the district designation and shall use the
same procedures and approval standards as for the initial designation of a district.
I. Permitted Uses
In addition to the uses allowed in the underlying zoning district, the following uses shall be
permitted uses in any Retirement Community Overlay District:
1. Elderly housing dwelling units
2. Elderly housing units
3. Nursing homes
4. Supportive facilities as part of a retirement community including, but not limited to,
administrative facilities, dining facilities, care facilities, common areas, recreational
spaces and facilities, maintenance facilities, and similar facilities necessary for the
operation of the retirement community or the provision of services to the residents or
that provide services or activities for residents of the retirement community and
other elderly people and/or people with disabilities, such as healthcare, physical
therapy, speech therapy, occupational therapy, rehabilitation services, financial
services, personal care services, and other convenience services that meet the day-today
needs of the residents of the community
5. Day care centers for children
6. Day care centers for adults
7. Senior centers
J. Space and Bulk Standards
Notwithstanding the requirements of the underlying zoning district, a retirement community
and all uses, buildings and structures associated with it shall be governed by the following
provisions:
1. Minimum site and lot size – a retirement community shall include a minimum of
thirty (30) acres.
- 212 -
2. Maximum net residential density for elderly housing dwelling units – one elderly
housing dwelling unit per six thousand (6,000) square feet of net residential acreage
within the retirement community.
3. Maximum net residential density for elderly housing units – one elderly housing unit
per three thousand (3,000) square feet of net residential acreage within the retirement
community.
4. Maximum net residential density for care beds – one care bed per two thousand
(2,000) square feet of net residential acreage within the retirement community.
5. Maximum lot coverage – the maximum lot coverage of the entire parcel shall be not
more than 25%.
6. Minimum building separation – no detached building or structure shall be located
closer than 10 feet to any other building or structure within the retirement
community.
7. Setback requirements from adjacent properties – buildings and structures of the
following heights must maintain the following minimum setbacks from the external
perimeter boundary of the retirement community:
Height Minimum
Setback
Less than thirty (30) feet fifty (50) feet
Between thirty (30) feet
and thirty-five (35) feet
ninety (90) feet
K. Parking requirements
A retirement community shall provide off-street parking in compliance with the
requirements of Section 514 of this Ordinance in the following numbers:
1. One parking space for each employee based on the expected average number of
employees per largest shift; and
2. One parking space (which may include garage spaces and single width driveways)
for each elderly housing dwelling unit; and
3. One parking space for every two elderly housing units; and
4. One parking space for every three care beds.
- 213 -
The Project Review Board may modify the parking requirements if the applicant for the
retirement community demonstrates that a reduction in the number of spaces is appropriate
due to the particular circumstances of the proposed development.
L. Development Along Adjacent Roads
When the development proposal provides for the construction or expansion of a building
within seventy-five (75) feet of an existing road on the perimeter of the retirement
community site, special consideration shall be paid to the design of the building and site to
be compatible with other development along the road. In general, buildings shall be
designed so that they front on the road, or as an alternative, do not turn their backs to the
road. No service or storage area shall be located between the building and the road.
Vehicular access shall be from internal streets or combined entrances where practical.
Parking lots shall be located on the retirement community side of these buildings where
practical rather than between the buildings and the existing road. If a sidewalk or pedestrian
way exists along the existing road, provisions shall be made to extend this past the site and
to link it with the planned buildings.
M. Design Elements
The design of the retirement community shall reflect an overall sense that the entire
community is part of a single development with a pedestrian friendly, neighborhood scale.
As such, the buildings shall convey a common character but need not be similar in either
design or scale. Common elements such as signs, lighting, and site furniture and
improvements should be used where practical to establish a sense of community. Where
appropriate, provisions for pedestrian and cart linkages should be made to bring the
elements of the retirement community together. In general, high intensity/high traffic uses
and core facilities should be sited in central locations within the community where feasible,
with lower intensity uses on the perimeter.
Section 532. Accessory Apartments
An accessory apartment is a small dwelling unit that is accessory and subordinate to the
principal use of a property as a single family dwelling. These standards are intended to allow
the addition of one accessory apartment to a single family dwelling only if such addition will
preserve the single family residential character of the property. The following standards shall
be met to create and maintain an accessory apartment:
1. An accessory apartment may be created in one of the following ways: {Amended,
Effective 10/03/17}
a) by using space within an existing or new dwelling;
b) by building an addition onto an existing dwelling such that the addition is made part
of the principal dwelling;
c) by using space within an existing or proposed accessory structure that is within 50 feet
of the single family dwelling;
- 214 -
d) buildings existing prior to February 7, 2012 that are greater than 50 feet from the
single family dwelling may be used for an accessory apartment provided no additions
are added to the existing structure; {Amended, Effective 02/07/12}
2. Accessory apartments located in the Shoreland Zone must be connected to the public water
and sewer system.
3. For the purposes of this section, accessory apartments outside of a shoreland zone shall not
be considered to be a second dwelling unit for determining the required minimum lot area, or
net residential density. {Amended, Effective 10/03/17}
4. If the accessory apartment will be located in a building that doesn’t conform to the setback
requirements, the apartment must be constructed so that the building is not made more nonconforming.
If the single family dwelling is non-conforming with regard to use, the creation
of an accessory dwelling will not make the single family more non-conforming,
5. If the lot is served by public sewerage, both the single family dwelling and the accessory
apartment must be connected to the sewer system. If the lot is served by subsurface sewage
disposal, the owner must demonstrate that the use conforms to the State of Maine Minimum
Lot Size law and that the sewage disposal system(s) for both the single family dwelling and
the accessory apartment complies with the Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal rules.
6. In all cases, the accessory apartment shall be no larger than 40% of finished and heated
portion of the single family home and have no more than one bedroom, nor no less than 320
square feet. {Amended, Effective 02/07/12}
7. Either the single family dwelling or the accessory apartment must be occupied by the owner
of the property. At least one of the units shall be occupied as a primary residence.
8. Any exterior alteration of the single family dwelling or accessory buildings or construction of
an accessory building shall preserve the single family appearance, architectural style, and
character of the original structure and shall be in harmony with the general appearance of the
neighborhood. Any alteration shall preserve the front entrance of the original structure to
preserve the single family character. A separate entrance for the accessory apartment may be
created but shall be clearly secondary to the main entrance, such as but not limited to an
entrance that is setback further from the road than the primary entrance.
9. At least three off street parking spaces shall be provided on the property. At least one space
shall be available for the occupant(s) of the accessory apartment. A garage bay may be
counted as one space for meeting the parking requirement. The parking shall be located and
designed to minimize the impact on adjacent properties and shall be buffered by landscaping
and/or fencing from abutting residential uses if it is located in the side or rear yard. Where
possible, a turn around shall be provided to avoid the need to back out of the driveway.
- 215 -
Section 533 – SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS {Amended, Effective 02/07/12}
Small wind energy systems (SWES) erected after (insert date of adoption) are considered
accessory uses and structures in the Rural Residential 1 & 2 Districts, Industrial 2, Commercial
1, and MD-A & B. SWES are prohibited in the Resources Protection District. The Code
Enforcement Officer may issue any necessary permits for the installation and operation of a
SWES provided the following performance standards are met. A SWES which complies with
the performance standards of this section is not subject to the space and bulk regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located.
1. Space and Bulk –
a. Number of SWES – With the exception of SWES allowed per subsection N.(12)
below, the number of SWES shall be limited as follows: on lots less than one (1) acre
in size a maximum of one (1) SWES is permitted per lot; on lots one (1) acre to five (5)
acres in size a maximum of two (2) SWES is permitted per lot; on lots greater that five
(5) acres in size, there is no maximum number of SWES per lot. SWES, and the
number of systems, shall be designed, sized and installed to generate energy only for
the building(s) located on the same lot. This standard is not intended to prohibit the
transfer of excess energy to the power grid.
b. Height – The height of a SWES shall be limited to eighty (80) feet. SWES height shall
be measured from the average elevation of the finished grade at the base of the tower
to highest point of the SWES.
c. Setbacks – The SWRS shall be setback a minimum of 75% of the systems height, as
measured in subsection b above, from all property lines or shall comply with the
minimum front, side, or rear yard setback requirement of the zoning district in which it
is located whichever is greater. The Codes Enforcement Officer may relax the 75% of
the SWES height setback standard if the applicant secures a restrictive easement(s)
from the abutting property owner(s) that allows for a lesser setback. The restrictive
easement shall restrict the uses and structures within the easement area so as to allow
the SWES to be located closer to the property line than the 75% requirement above. A
restrictive easement from an abutting property shall not however enable a SWES to be
sited closer to the abutting property line than the minimum front, side and rear yard
setback requirements of the zoning district.
2. SWES Energy Generation –
SWES shall be limited to a power generation capacity of 5 kilowatts in residential districts
and 50 kilowatts in commercial and industrial districts.
3. Design and Aesthetics –
a. Tower – The new installation of a tower for a SWES designed to generate electricity
shall be a monopole-style tower. The new installation of a lattice tower shall be
allowed for SWES designed to pump water. Electricity generating SWES affixed to
lattice towers existing (not aware of any) as of (insert date of adoption), that otherwise
comply with this subsection shall be permitted.
- 216 -
b. Color – SWES shall be a non-reflective, neutral color (light gray, white, brushed
aluminum etc.)
c. Signage – SWES shall not display signage or other forms of advertising, except
warning, direction and manufacturing labels, none of which shall exceed six (6) square
feet in area.
d. Appendages – Appendages to a SWES tower may be permitted, but are limited to
appendages that will not affect the normal operation, safety or stability of the SWES.
4. Safety
a. Access – Any climbing apparatus on a SWES tower shall be a minimum of fifteen (15)
feet from the ground.
b. Blade Clearance – The SWES’s blades shall not rotate to within twenty five (25) feet
of the ground at their lowest point.
5. Lighting
Exterior lighting on a SWES may be permitted but the lightings placement on the SWES
shall comply with the maximum building height limit (35’)of the zoning district in which the
SWES is sited, except for lighting that may be required by the Federal Aviation
Administration.
6. Electrical Service
Electrical wiring and connections from the wind energy system to the building(s) they serve
shall be underground, unless an applicant demonstrates to the Code Enforcement Office that
the subsurface conditions of a particular site makes the installation of an underground
electrical service impracticable. All SWES shall be UL listed.
7. Noise
a. Over-Speed Control - The SWES shall be equipped with either a manual or automatic
brake, governing, furling or feathering mechanism that controls and moderates the
rotation of the system’s blade and prevents over-speed. Conformance with this
requirement shall be confirmed and documented by the wind energy system’s
manufacturer.
b. Db(A) Level – The SWES shall be designed and operated to not exceed 20 db(A)
above the ambient noise level at the closest property line. After approval and
installation of the SWES, the Code Enforcement Officer may require the applicant to
perform sound measurements to determine conformance with this standards.
8. Foundation
The foundation design for a SWES shall comply with the SWES manufacturer’s minimum
standards regarding the specific wind energy system and the soils type at which the
installation is proposed.
9. Submission Requirements For Permitting
A plot plan; specifications and an illustration of the SWES provided by the manufacturer; a
detailed description of how the SWES, and the lot on which it is proposed, complies with
the performance standards of this subsection N; structural drawings of the wind tower, base
- 217 -
and foundation prepared by the manufacturer or a professional engineer; and electrical and
building permit applications shall be submitted prior to Code Enforcement review and
approval.
10. Removal Requirements
a. Unsafe SWES – A SWES that is found to be unsafe by Code Enforcement shall either
be repaired to correct the safety issue or shall be removed by the property owner.
b. Abandonment – A SWES that is not working or is not being used for a consecutive
twelve (12) month period shall be removed by the property owner.
12. SWES within Common Open Space
To the extent permitted by applicable state and/or federal law, SWES may be allowed by the
Project Review Board within the common open space of a residential subdivision reviewed
under Section 504A of the Zoning Ordinance, subject the following requirements:
a. The open space shall be of sufficient size and dimensions to accommodate the
SWES(s) and the 75% setback requirement of subsection.N.1.c. above, within the
boundaries of the open space.
b. The installation of a SWES, and necessary associated improvements, shall not impact
wetlands or otherwise compromise the intent of a conservation subdivision to protect
wetlands or other natural resources.
c. The SWES shall comply with all the performance standards other than subsection N.1.
Number of SWES, and shall require Planning Board approval of the location of the
SWES within the subdivision prior to application to Code Enforcement. The number
of SWES shall be determined by the Planning Board and shall be based on the
forecasted energy consumption of the dwellings and uses with the subdivision as well
as the sites ability to comply with subsection 12.a. and 12.b. a. above.
- 218 -
ARTICLE VI
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
Section 601. Enforcement
A. Enforcement Officer: It shall be the duty of the Codes Enforcement Officer of the Town of
Freeport to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. If the Codes Enforcement Officer shall find
that any of the provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, he shall notify in writing the
person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the
action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, building, or
structures, removal of illegal building or structures or of additions, alterations, or structural
changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action
authorized by this Ordinance to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
The Codes Enforcement Officer may employ an independent, recognized consultant, if
necessary, at the expense of the applicant, to assure compliance with performance standards of
this Ordinance and abatement of nuisances.
B. Legal Action and Violation: When any violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be
found to exist, including failure to comply with any subdivision or site plan approved by the
Planning Board or the Project Review Board, or condition imposed by the Planning Board or the
Project Review Board or Board of Appeals, the Codes Enforcement Officer shall notify the
Town Manager who shall then initiate any and all actions to be brought in the name of the Town.
The Town Manager shall notify the Town Council before any formal action begins.
C. Fines: Any person, firm or corporation being the owner of or having control or use of
any building or premises who violates any of the provisions hereof commits a civil
violation and is subject to such fines as the Town Council shall have established for violations of
this Ordinance. Each day such a violation is permitted to exist after notification thereof shall
constitute a separate offense. All fines collected hereunder shall inure to the Town of Freeport.
D. Building Permit: A Building Permit issued by the Codes Enforcement Officer shall be required
for the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and
occupancy, change of use, location, relocation, maintenance, removal and demolition of any
building or other structure, as defined in the most current Maine Uniform Building and Energy
Code. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this
Ordinance and all other applicable ordinances of the Town of Freeport and any conditions
imposed pursuant to said ordinances. A building permit secured under the provisions of this
Ordinance shall expire if the work or change is not commenced within one (1) year of the date on
which the permit is granted, and if the work or change is not completed within two (2) years of
the date on which the permit is granted. All building permits heretofore issued shall be subject to
the provisions of this Paragraph. {Amended, Effective 06/19/12}
- 219 -
E. Application for Building Permit: All applications for building permits for the erection
or enlargement of any new or existing building shall be accompanied by plans drawn to scale,
showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the sizes and locations on
the lot of buildings already existing, if any, the location and dimensions of the proposed building
or alteration, and the proposed sewage disposal system as required by the Maine State Plumbing
Code. The application shall include such other information as may be required by the Codes
Enforcement Officer to determine conformance with and to provide for the enforcement of this
Ordinance. Applications shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be established by the Town
Council. The Codes Enforcement Officer shall maintain a public record of all building permits
which are issued.
If any part of the structure is proposed to be located closer than 5 feet to the minimum front, side,
rear or shore setbacks required by the applicable zoning district regulations; or if the Codes
Enforcement Officer determines that special conditions such as complex curves in the property
lines, or other unusual features of lot shape or topography, the Codes Enforcement Officer may
require that the foundation be set and pinned by a professional land surveyor.
F. Certificate of Occupancy
1. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any land,
building, structure or part thereof in which the construction, alteration, movement,
enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, change of use, location,
relocation, maintenance, removal and demolition of the use of any land, building, or
structure as defined in the most current Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code until a
Certificate of Occupancy is issued therefore by the Codes Enforcement Officer and
endorsed to the effect that the proposed use of the land, building or structure conforms
with the requirements of this Ordinance. {Amended, Effective 06/19/12}
2. An applicant for a building permit shall also make application for a Certificate of
Occupancy, which application must be received before a building permit may be issued.
Upon completion of the work permitted by the building permit, the Codes Enforcement
Officer shall issue the Certificate of Occupancy upon finding that the building, structure
or land and the use or occupancy thereof comply with the provisions of this Ordinance,
with all provisions of any site plans or subdivision plans approved by the Planning Board
or the Project Review Board and with any conditions imposed by the Planning Board or
the Project Review Board or Board of Appeals. The Codes enforcement Officer shall
maintain a public record of all Certificates of Occupancy which are issued. Failure to
obtain a Certificate of Occupancy shall be a violation of this ordinance.
G. Board of Appeals:
1. Appointment and Composition: There shall be a Board of Appeals consisting of
seven (7) voting members who are appointed by the Town Council for three (3) year
terms. Members shall annually elect a Chairman, who shall preside at all Board
meetings, and a Secretary, who shall provide for the keeping of the proceedings of the
- 220 -
Board. A quorum shall consist of four members qualified to vote on an appeal. A
decision shall require a majority vote of those present and voting. A tie vote shall
constitute denial of an appeal.
2. Powers and Duties: Appeals shall lie from the decision of the Codes Enforcement
Officer to the Board of Appeals and from the Board of Appeals to the Superior Court
according to the provisions of Maine Revised Statutes. The Board of Appeals shall have
the following powers and duties:
a. Administrative Appeals. To hear and decide where it is alleged there is an error
in any order, decision, interpretation, or ruling of the Codes Enforcement Officer
in the enforcement of this Ordinance. Action of the Codes Enforcement Officer
may be overturned only by a majority vote of those members present and voting.
b. Variance Appeals. To hear and decide appeals requesting such variance from the
terms of this Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing
to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance
would result in undue hardship. A variance may be granted only by majority vote
of those members present and voting, and may include such conditions and
safeguards as are appropriate under this Ordinance. The words “undue hardship”
as used in this subsection mean:
(1) That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a
variance is granted;
(2) That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the
property and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
(3) That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the
locality; and
(4) That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a
prior owner.
No variance from the 75 foot setback from a stream in the Shoreland Zone shall
be granted unless the Zoning Board of Appeals finds that the criteria under
Section 602.F.1.L. are satisfied.
The applicant shall submit specific information to substantiate that the land in
question cannot yield a reasonable return.
Except where specifically limited or prohibited, variances may be authorized only
for minimum setback, maximum building/lot ratio, parking requirements for
housing for the elderly, minimum frontage, minimum area, 15% expansion of
non-conforming uses and buildings, and destroyed or demolished non-conforming
buildings. Only the minimum variance which will alleviate the hardship shall be
granted.
c. Miscellaneous Appeals. To hear and decide only the following miscellaneous
- 221 -
appeals. Such appeals may be granted only by a majority vote of those
members present and voting.
(1) Where uncertainty exists, to determine the precise location of any Zoning
District Boundary line as specified in Section 303.3.
d. Limited setback reduction. To hear and decide requests for a limited setback
reduction for a lot in residential use.
1) The following provisions apply for limited setback reductions for
buildings and structures other than ground mounted solar panels. Such
limited setback reductions may be granted in order to permit (i) the
expansion or enlargement of an existing building or structure, (ii) the
construction of a new building or structure which will be accessory to
an existing building or structure, (iii) the construction of a new
building or structure on a vacant non-conforming lot of record which
can be built upon pursuant to Section 202(D) of the Ordinance; (iv) the
dividing off of a new conforming lot from an existing lot of record that
contains an existing building or structure; or (v) the creation of a new
right of way within the required setback.
“Limited setback reduction” means the reduction of a front, side or rear
setback (but not a shore setback) by no more than 50% of the
requirement of the applicable zoning district regulations except for the
RR-1, RR-2 and RP-2 Districts where the reduction can be no more
than 75% of the applicable zoning district regulations. A “lot in
residential use” means a lot on which a dwelling has existed for at least
three years prior to the date the limited setback reduction is requested
or a vacant non-conforming lot of record on which a dwelling is
proposed. A limited setback reduction may be granted only by a
majority vote of those members present and voting and may include
such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this
Ordinance.
(i) the existing buildings or structures on the lot were erected at
least three years prior to the date the limited setback reduction
is requested, or the lot is a vacant non-conforming lot of record
which can be built upon pursuant to Section 202(D) of this
Ordinance;
(ii) the limited setback reduction is reasonably necessary to permit
the owner or occupant of the property to use and enjoy the
property in essentially the same manner as other similar
properties are utilized in the zoning district;
(iii) due to the physical features of the lot and/or the location of
existing structures on the lot, it would not be practical to
- 222 -
construct the proposed expansion, enlargement, the new
structure, new lot, or new right of way in conformance with the
currently applicable setback requirements;
(iv) the impacts and effects of the enlargement, expansion, new
building or structure, new lot, or new right of way on existing
uses in the neighborhood will not be substantially different
from or greater than the impacts and effects of a building or
structure which conforms to the setback requirements. In
determining whether the applicant has met this standard, the
Board of Appeals may consider the presence or absence of
neighborhood support for or opposition to the request; and
(v) the applicant has not commenced construction of the
enlargement, expansion, building or structure, new lot, or new
right of way for which the limited setback reduction is
requested, so that the Board of Appeals is not considering an
after-the-fact application.
(2) The following requirements apply for applications for limited setback
reduction for ground mounted solar panels. Notwithstanding the
above requirements, if the applicant’s property is benefitted by a solar
easement meeting the requirements of 33 M.R.S.A. § 1401 and the
setback reduction is necessary to allow the location of the ground
mounted solar panels on the portion of the applicant’s property that is
protected by that easement, an applicant may request a reduction
greater than the allowances listed above. The applicant for a limited
setback reduction for ground mounted solar panels must demonstrate
the following:
(i) the limited setback reduction is reasonably necessary for
obtaining the best possible orientation to the sun.
(ii) due to the physical features of the lot, the location of mature
trees and other buildings it is not practical to locate the ground
mounted solar panels in conformance with the applicable
setback requirements,
(iii) the impacts and effects of the ground mounted solar panels on
existing uses in the neighborhood will not be substantially
different from the impacts and effects of the ground mounted
solar panels if they conformed to the setback requirements. In
determining whether the applicant has met this standard, the
Board of Appeals may consider neighborhood support or
opposition to the project.
- 223 -
(3) Whenever the Board grants a limited setback reduction, the Board shall
prepare a certificate indicating the name of the current property owner,
identifying the property by reference to the last recorded deed in its
chain of title, indicating that a limited setback reduction has been
granted and setting forth the date it was granted. The applicant shall
cause the certificate to be recorded in the Cumberland County Registry
of Deeds within 90 days of approval of the limited setback reduction,
or the approval shall be invalid.
(4) The granting of a limited setback reduction pursuant to this subsection
601(G)(2)(d) shall not require or be construed as the granting of a
variance to relieve hardship. Notwithstanding Section 601(g)(4)(f),
the denial of a variance request shall not preclude a subsequent
application for a limited setback reduction under this subsection and
the denial of a request under this subsection shall not preclude a
subsequent application for a variance. If an application for a variance
is pending, the Town shall not accept an application for a limited
reduction of the same setback dimension on the same property; if an
application for a limited setback reduction is pending, the Town shall
not accept an application for a variance from the same setback
dimension on the same property.
{Amended, Effective 08/05/14}
e. Mislocated building appeal. To hear and decide, only by majority vote of
those members present and voting, setback reduction appeals in specific cases
where existing buildings are found to be in violation of the setback requirements
and where the Board concludes it would not serve the public interest to require the
building to be relocated or removed and that allowing the building to remain in its
existing location would not be contrary to the public health, safety or welfare.
Before granting an appeal under this subsection, the Board must find that the
setback violation is not the result of a willful, premeditated act or of gross
negligence on the part of the applicant, a predecessor in title to the applicant or an
agent of either of them. An appeal under this subsection shall permit the existing
building or structure to remain, but shall not authorize any expansion, enlargement
or relocation of the structure.
3. Conditions attached to Variances
The Board of Appeals may attach such condition(s), in addition to those required by other
provisions of this Ordinance, as it finds necessary to insure compliance with all standards
and all other applicable requirements of this Ordinance. Violation of any of those
conditions shall be a violation of this Ordinance. Such conditions may include, but are
not limited to, specifications for: type of vegetation; increased setbacks and yards;
specified sewage disposal and water supply facilities; landscaping and planting screens;
hours of operation; operation controls; professional inspection and maintenance; sureties;
location of piers and docks; parking and signs; and types of construction.
- 224 -
4. Appeals Procedure
a. When the owner of property or authorized agent is informed by the Codes
Enforcement Officer that an appeal is required, an application for the permit shall
be filed with the Board of Appeals on forms provided for this purpose. The
application shall be accompanied by a filing fee which shall be established by the
Town Council, all information which is required for application for a building
permit, and other information required by this section of the Ordinance. The
applicant may submit any additional information relevant to the appeal.
An administrative appeal shall be commenced within 30 days of the order,
decision, interpretation or ruling of the Codes Enforcement Officer. A variance
appeal or miscellaneous appeal which does not allege an error in any order,
decision, interpretation, or ruling of the Codes Enforcement Officer may be
commenced at any time.
b. Variance requests within a shoreland zone. A copy of each variance request,
including the application and all supporting information supplied by the applicant,
shall be forwarded by the municipal officials to the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection at least 20 days prior to action by the
Board of Appeals. Any comments received from the Commissioner prior to the
action by the Board of Appeals shall be made part of the record and shall be taken
into consideration by the Board of Appeals.
c. The applicant for a variance or a limited setback reduction must present plans
drawn to scale showing all lot lines of the property, the location of each existing
building or structure and the location of each proposed expansion, enlargement or
new building or structure. Upon review of the application, the Codes
Enforcement Officer may require the applicant to provide a standard boundary
survey showing the foregoing information if the Codes Enforcement Officer
determines that the locations of the lot lines relevant to the request for a variance
or a limited setback reduction cannot be determined accurately without a survey.
In addition, the Board of Appeals, upon review of the application, may require a
standard boundary survey and additional information such as, but not limited to,
copies of recorded deeds and such other materials as the Board deems necessary
to render its decision. The applicant is ultimately responsible for providing
documentation and verification of the facts asserted by the applicant, and any
decision of the Board based on incorrect or inaccurate information provided by or
on behalf of the applicant may be declared invalid by the Board and neither the
Board nor the Town shall be stopped from applying and enforcing the provisions
of this Zoning Ordinance based on correct and accurate information subsequently
discovered.
- 225 -
d. Before making a decision on any appeal or application, the Board of Appeals shall
hold a public hearing within 60 days of receipt of an application. Notice of the
nature of the appeal and the time and place shall be published at least seven days
in advance of the date of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation
in the area. Owners of property within 200’ from the property which is the
subject of the public hearing, the Project Review Board and the Town Manager
shall be mailed copies of the notice of hearing at least 10 days in advance of the
hearing date. For the purposes of this subsection, the persons against whom
municipal property taxes are assessed shall be considered owners of property.
Failure of any property owner to receive notice by mail under this subsection shall
not invalidate this action by the Board of Appeals.
e. The Codes Enforcement Officer or designated assistant shall attend all public
hearings and may present to the Board all plans, photographs, or other material he
deems appropriate to a proper understanding of the appeal or application. Persons
wishing to be heard by the Board may appear in person or through an agent or
attorney. The Board of Appeals may adopt additional rules of procedure
governing the conduct of meetings. The hearing shall not be continued to other
times except to obtain additional evidence which cannot be produced at the
scheduled hearing and only after a vote of the majority of the members present
and voting to continue the hearing. If within 60 days of the public hearing the
Board has not reached a decision, the application shall be deemed to have been
denied, unless the board and the applicant agree to an extension of the 60 day
period. A decision of the Board of Appeals becomes final when it is rendered and
may not be reconsidered except in accordance with the provisions of subsection
(I)(4)(d) of this Section 601.
f. If the Board of Appeals shall deny an appeal or application, a second appeal or
application of a similar nature for the same property may not be brought before
the Board within one year of the date of denial of the first appeal or application,
unless, in the opinion of the majority of the Board, substantial new evidence can
be brought before the Board, or unless the Board finds, in its sole and exclusive
judgment, that an error or mistake of law or misunderstanding of fact has been
made.
g. A permit secured under the provisions of this Ordinance by vote of the Board of
Appeals shall expire if the work or change involved is not commenced within one
(1) year of the date on which the permit was issued. Upon application, before
expiration of the original permit, to the Codes Enforcement Officer, the officer
may grant a one (1) year extension, without change, of the permit. The permit
shall expire if the work or change is not completed within two (2) years of the
issuance of the original permit.
h. When a building or structure is erected pursuant to a variance or a limited setback
reduction approved by the Board of Appeals, the Board may require the location
of the foundation to be set and pinned by a professional land surveyor.
- 226 -
i. Shoreland Zoning Variances: A copy of all variances granted by the Board of
Appeals to all land areas within the Shoreland Zone shall be submitted to the
Department of Environmental Protection within fourteen (14) days of the
decision.
Section 602. Site Plan Review {Amended, Effective 01/22/13}
A. Purpose
The purpose and objectives of the Site Plan Review requirements are to conserve the Town’s
natural beauty and visual character and to provide for public safety and environmental
stewardship of the immediate neighborhood including light and noise and by insuring that
structures, signs and other improvements are properly related to their sites and to surrounding
sites and structures, especially in regard to the natural terrain and landscaping, and that the
exterior appearance of structures, signs and other improvements harmoniously relates to their
environment.
B. Applicability
1. Site Plan Review is required for all development proposals as outlined in Article IV of
this Ordinance. In addition, , in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. In
addition Site Plan Review is required for the following activities:
a. A change of use when the new use is subject to Site Plan Review, except that a
change of use of an existing building in the VC-I District from a restaurant to
retail trade or from retail trade to a restaurant may be approved by the Town
Planner as allowed in Section 602 (C)(c) (1), provided the building is located on a
lot which does not abut a lot in residential use and no change occurs to the
existing elements and features of the site except for necessary changes to the
content of signage.
b. A reduction in the number of or a reconfiguration of parking spaces serving a
restaurant in the VC-I District, where such reduction or reconfiguration is allowed
under Section 514(A)(5) of this Ordinance as amended on April 3, 2001; such
reduction may be approved by the Town Planner as allowed in Section 602(C)(c)
(1).
2. Build according to plan. Construction, site development and landscaping shall be
carried out in accord with the plans, drawings, sketches, and other documents approved
by the Project Review Board, unless altered with Board approval. Nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to prevent ordinary repair, maintenance and improvement
of existing structures and facilities.
- 227 -
3. Multiple Reviews. When a development is subject to multiple reviews such as Site Plan
Review, Design Review, and/or Subdivision Review, the Project Review Board shall
conduct a concurrent review; the project is required to meet the criteria and standards of
all ordinance under review. If Subdivision Review is required, the procedures of
Subdivision Ordinance shall be used. If the development requires action by the Board of
Appeals, Project Review Board review shall not commence until the Board of Appeals
has made a decision.
C. Administration
1. The following procedures and requirements shall apply to all applications for site plan
review:
a. Pre-Application Conference. Prior to submitting a formal application for a
project requiring Site Plan Review, the owner of the property or agent, as
designated in writing by the owner, is urged to schedule a pre-application
conference with the Town Planner. The purpose of this meeting is to familiarize
the applicant with the review procedures, submission requirements and the
approval criteria and to familiarize the Town Planner and other relevant Town staff
with the project. The Town Planner shall determine who has the authority to
review the project: the town planner, the Staff Review Board, or the Project
Review Board.
b. Notification. Notwithstanding other notification requirements included in Sec.
602, all agendas of the Project Review Board and the Staff Review Board shall be
posted in the Town Clerk’s Office and the Freeport Community Library for
inspection during normal business hours and the notice shall be placed on
Freeport’s local cable channel 7 and the Town’s website.
c. Classification of Site Plans:
1. Town Planner review. The Town Planner has the authority to review
and take action on projects that do not modify the intent of the approved
site plan. They shall be shown on a plan submitted by the applicant to the
Town Planner and the Town Planner shall sign and date the plan to record
agreement that the change does not modify the intent of the approved site
plan. Examples include, but are not limited to, minimal lighting,
recalculations of parking requirements, landscaping changes and changes
to previously approved ground and building mounted signs and new
building mounted signs provided the signs meet the standards of the
Freeport Sign Ordinance, building modifications up to 500 square feet,
impervious surface modifications up to 500 square feet, and site plan
renewals in which the plans still meet the local standards.
Notwithstanding the above, either the Town Planner or the applicant may
request a hearing by the Project Review Board. {Amended, Effective 01/02/18}
- 228 -
2. Staff Review Board. Developments that meet the criteria of Sec.
602.C.c.2.a-g below shall be considered minor amendments and shall be
eligible for review by the Staff Review Board. Developments that also
require a Design Review Certificate or Subdivision approval are not
eligible for review by Staff Review Board , those projects require review
by the Project Review Board. The Staff Review Board shall consist of the
Town Planner, the Fire Chief, the Codes Enforcement Officer, the Town
Engineer and the Public Works Superintendant, or the designee of any of
them, with input from other Town departments as needed. The Staff
Review Board shall have the same powers and duties as the Project
Review Board. A public hearing shall not be required; however,
notification of the nature of the application and the time and place of the
meeting shall be given by mail to the applicant and the owners of all
property within 200 feet of the property involved at least 5 days in
advance of the meeting. The Staff Review Board shall accept public
comment for all application. A quorum of the Board necessary to conduct
an official Board meeting shall consist of at least three (3) members.
Action on any application by the Staff Review Board shall require a
majority of those members present and voting. An audio recording of
each meeting shall be made and retained by the Town. The completed
application for site plan review, together with the documentation required
in these regulations shall be placed on the Staff Review Board’s agenda
for consideration within 20 days. Any appeals from the decisions of the
Staff Review Board shall be taken directly to the Project Review Board
within 30 days of decision. The following developments shall be eligible
for staff review:
a. Change of use from one permitted use to another permitted use
provided any expansions do not exceed the limits stated in
Section 602.C.c.2.b-c.. listed below
b. Building footprint modifications greater than 500 square feet but
less than 1,500 square feet.
c. Parking lot modifications greater than 500 square feet but less
than 1,500 square feet.
d. Filling of lands or creation of ponds on properties where the
primary use is residential.
e. Filling of lands or creation of ponds where the primary use of the
property is commercial which are greater than 200 cubic yards
but less than 600 cubic yards of material.
f. Renewal of gravel pit operations that do not include an
expansion or other modification.
g. Any increase in height of a wireless telecommunication tower
that is more than 20 feet or 10%, whichever is greater; any
appurtenance to the tower that protrudes out from the edge of the
tower more than 20 feet or the width of the tower at the level of
the appurtenance, whichever is greater; the installation of more
than 4 cabinets per carrier for the technology involved; any
- 229 -
excavation or deployment outside of the limits of the approved
site plan; changes around the base of the tower structure that
reduces the concealment elements of the support structure;
amendments that alter the approved site plan. {Amended, Effective
10/03/17}
If, however, the Town Planner or the applicant determines that a project
appears to be complicated or disputed, the Town Planner may refer the
application to the Project Review Board for their review at the next
available meeting.
3. Project Review Board. Developments that don’t meet the criteria for
review and action by either the Town Planner or the Staff Review Board
shall require review and action by the Project Review Board. The
Project Review Board shall accept public comments on any item at any
stage of the review process. A public hearing shall not be required, but the
Project Review Board may decide to schedule a public hearing if the size
and/or nature of the development is perceived to have a significant impact
on the community, not just the nearby properties.
Projects that amend previously approved site plans, and that have
sufficient information to be considered complete by the Town Planner,
may be reviewed and have action taken in a single meeting of the Project
Review Board.
Projects that are proposed on undeveloped land, that include the
demolition of buildings, that are located in the Resource Protection 1
District, or when a building and/or parking area is more than doubled in
size than the existing building and/or parking area should first submit a
conceptual plan. A conceptual plan should include environmentally
sensitive areas such as wetlands, water bodies, streams, and steep slopes,
locations of passing test pits if a subsurface sewage disposal system is
proposed, the location of buildings and parking areas, and building
elevations if a building is proposed. Conceptual plans should not be
engineered plans. The purpose of the conceptual plan is to introduce the
project to the Board and to contact property owners near the development.
This portion of the review gives the Board and nearby property owners an
opportunity to comment on the project before any engineering is done for
the project. This phase of the review process is to direct the applicant as
to what changes should be made and what information should be included
in the final plan.
d. Timing of review. The completed application for site plan review, together with
the documentation required in these regulations, shall be placed on the Project
Review Board’s agenda for consideration within thirty (30) days of its receipt for
either conceptual or final review unless the Project Review Board and applicant
agree to a continuance; however, any application which is not complete shall not
- 230 -
be placed on the agenda but shall be returned to the applicant by the Town
Planner with an indication of the additional information required. Within sixty
(60) days of the receipt of a Site Plan submission which is determined by the
Project Review Board to be complete, the Project Review Board shall act
e. Possible action. Action may include approval, approval with conditions, or
disapproval of the site plan as submitted or amended.. If the Project Review
Board shall vote to disapprove an application, the owner or authorized agent shall
be notified in writing and the specific cause of disapproval shall be noted.
f. Site walk. The Project Review Board or Staff Review Board may schedule a site
visit of the property before making a final decision on the application. All
property owners within 200 feet of the property on which a development proposal
is being made will be notified of the date, time and location of the site visit and
the Board will report on its findings at its next scheduled meeting.
g. Conditions of approval. The Project Review Board or Staff Review Board may
attach such condition(s) as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with the
purpose and standards of Site Plan Review and all other applicable sections of this
Ordinance. Requests for changes in the conditions of approval require Project
Review Board review under the provisions of this section.
h. Review by an expert. The Project Review Board or Staff Review Board may
require that the Town Engineer or other expert consultant(s) review one or more
submissions of an application and report as to compliance or noncompliance with
this Ordinance and, advise if necessary, of procedures which will result in
compliance. The consultant shall estimate the cost of such review and the
applicant shall deposit with the Town the full estimated cost which the Town shall
place in an escrow account. The Town shall pay the consultant from the escrow
account and reimburse the applicant if funds remain after payments are
completed. If the actual cost is more than the estimated cost, the applicant shall
pay any overages before the Notice of Decision of the Board is issued to the
applicant. The consultants shall be fully qualified to provide the required
information as determined by the Town of Freeport Project Review Board in its
sole discretion. .
The Project Review Board may require the applicant to undertake any study
which it deems reasonable and necessary to insure that the requirements of the
Ordinance are met. The costs of all such studies shall be borne by the applicant.
i. Public Hearing. If the Project Review Board decides to hold a public hearing a
notice of the nature of the application and of the time and place of the public
hearing shall be given by mail to the applicant and the owners of all property
within two hundred (200) feet of the property involved at least ten (10) days in
advance of the hearing and shall be published at least seven (7) days in advance in
a newspaper of general circulation in the area.
- 231 -
The owners of property shall be considered to be those against whom taxes are
assessed. Failure of any property owner to receive a notice of public hearing shall
not necessitate another hearing or invalidate any action by the Project Review
Board.
j. Performance Guarantee: The Project Review Board as a condition of approval
may require the applicant to post a performance guarantee. The performance
guarantee may be in the form of an escrow agreement, irrevocable letter of credit,
or other surety in such amount as is approved by the Project Review Board as
being reasonably necessary to ensure completion of site improvements such as
erosion control, stormwater management facilities, parking areas, landscaping,
retaining walls, lighting and any off-site improvements that were required as a
condition of approval.
The Town shall have access to the site at all times to review the progress of the
work and shall have the authority to review the field logs maintained by the
construction monitor. Any deficiencies noted by the Town representative shall be
brought to the attention of the construction monitor who shall see that remedial
measures are taken. If the Municipal Engineer or appointed representative shall
find, upon inspection of the improvements performed before expiration date of the
performance bond, that required improvements have not been constructed in
accordance with plans and specifications filed by the applicant, he shall so report
to the Municipal Officers or their appointed designee. The Municipal Officer
shall then notify the applicant and, if necessary, the issuer of the performance
guarantee, and take necessary steps to preserve the municipality’s rights under the
performance guarantee.
k. Payment of fees At the time of application for a building permit, the applicant
shall pay to the Town Treasurer any fees that were required as a condition of the
approval. Fees such as an inspection fee to cover ensure that the project is
constructed as approved, impact fees, and the administrative fee on the
performance guarantee.
l. Pre-construction meeting. The applicant shall notify the Municipal Officers or
their appointed designee when construction of such improvements shall
commence so that the Municipal Officers or their appointed designee can cause
inspection to be made to assure that all municipal specifications and requirements
shall be met during the construction of required improvements and to assure the
satisfactory completion of improvements and utilities required by the Project
Review Board; or
m. As-built plans. The Project Review Board, Planning Staff or Codes Enforcement
Officer may require that as a condition of approval, or for an occupancy permit,
that upon completion of construction , the owner shall present to the Town a set of
as-built drawings indicating the location of underground utilities on the developed
- 232 -
site and in all abutting roads and easements/right of ways. These "as-built" plans
shall be submitted in both paper and electronic copies (including a pdf copy) prior
to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the project or occupancy of the
building. {Amended 06/06/17}
n. Review of future plans. No new plan by the applicant shall be approved by the
Project Review Board as long as the applicant is in default on a previously
approved plan.
o. Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be granted until
the Codes Enforcement Officer determines that the completed project meets all of
the requirements of the plan as approved by the Project Review Board.
Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the Town from pursuing any other
action.
p. Existing development. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in
plans, construction or structure, the construction of which shall have been
diligently prosecuted previous to the date of enactment or amendment of this
Ordinance, provided plans for such building or structure shall have been timely
filed with and approved by the Codes Enforcement Officer.
q. State and federal permits. The applicant shall comply with all State and Federal
requirements and receive all relevant approvals before application is made for a
building permit and/or any development activities may begin. The Codes
Enforcement Officer shall issue a building permit after a determination that the
application complies with the plan approved by the Staff Review Board or the
Project Review Board.
r. Approval duration. The approval of a site plan shall become void if construction
of site improvements is not initiated within two (2) years of the date of such
approval unless such time limit is extended by the Project Review Board. The
site may be developed and used only as shown on the approved site plan. All
elements and features of the plan are conditions of the approval and no change
from the approved plan is permitted unless an amended plan is first submitted to
and approved by the Freeport Project Review Board. {Amended, Effective 02/08/11}
s. Violations. Failure to comply with any conditions of the Site Plan Review,
subsequent to approval of the Plan, shall be construed to be a violation of this
Ordinance and shall be the grounds for revoking the approval, initiating legal
proceedings to enjoin construction or any specific activity violating the conditions
of approval, or imposing such fines as the Town Council shall have established
for violations of this Ordinance, for each day that the violation continues to exist
after official notification by the Codes Enforcement Officer.
- 233 -
D. Submission Requirements: When the owner of the property or authorized agent makes formal
application for Site Plan Review, the application for the Site Plan or an amendment to an
approved plan shall contain at least an application, a deed for the property, plans, building
elevations, and a cover letter. More details on each of these items are listed below. The Town
Planner shall make an initial review of the application to determine if it is complete.
1. Application: A fully executed and signed copy of the application for Site Plan Review.
The application form will be provided by the planning department.
2. Deed: A copy of the recorded deed for the property. If the applicant is not the property
owner a purchase and sale agreement or a lease agreement shall also be submitted to
show that the applicant has a serious interest in the project and sufficient title, right,
and/or interest to complete the project. The amount being paid for the property may be
blacked out.
3. Cover letter: A cover letter explaining the project should include details on any
proposed construction or change of use that can’t be explained by the plans. The cover
letter should also list other local, state, or federal permits or licenses that will be
required. If applicable, the cover letter should include the applicant’s intent for
ownership of the open space.
4. Plans: At least twelve (12) copies of a site plan drawn at a scale sufficient to allow
review under the Criteria and Standards of section (G) of this Section, but at not more
than 50 feet to the inch for that portion of the total tract of land being proposed for
development and twelve (12) copies of the plan on 11 X 17” size sheets. All plan
sheets must also be submitted electronically in a pdf format. All plans shall include the
following information: {Amended 06/06/17}
a. Owner’s name, address and signature;
b. Boundaries of all contiguous property under the control of the owner or applicant
regardless of whether all or part is being developed at this time;
c. The bearings and distances of all property lines, and easements and the location
of the adjacent right-of-way.. A formal survey is recommended for new
developments; however, the Project Review Board may waive the requirement of
a formal boundary survey when sufficient information is available to establish, on
the ground, all property boundaries;
d. Zoning classification(s) of the property and the location of Zoning District
boundaries if the property is located in two or more Zoning Districts;
e. The lot area of the parcel and the road frontage;
f. The location, size, and type of all existing and proposed buildings and structures
(including size and height) and the setbacks from property lines, driveways,
- 234 -
sidewalks, parking spaces, loading areas, open spaces, large trees, open drainage
courses, signs, exterior lighting, service areas, easements and landscaping;
Developments proposed on land that hasn’t been previously developed,
redevelopment of property, and or significant expansion shall also include the
following information. The Town Planner may determine what additional
information will need to be submitted. The Project Review Board may require
additional information or may waive the additional submission requirements required
by the Town Planner.
g. Sketch map showing general location of the site within the town;
h. The location of all buildings within 150 feet of the parcel to be developed and the
location of intersecting roads or driveways within 200 feet of the parcel;
i. Existing and proposed topography of the site at two foot contour intervals if
major changes to the existing topography are being proposes;
j. A stormwater drainage plan showing:
(1) the existing and proposed method of handling stormwater run-off;
(2) the direction of flow of the run-off through the use of arrows;
(3) the location, elevation and size of all catch basins, dry wells, drainage
ditches, swales, retention basins, and storm sewers;
(4) engineering calculations used to determine the increased rate of drainage
based upon the pre and post development conditions of a two year, ten
(10) year and twenty-five (25) year storm frequency. The drainage plan
shall result in no increase to the rate of off site-drainage from the predevelopment
rate.
(5) Plan for maintaining and/or improving stormwater quality. Retention of
the first one-half inch of run-off from a storm event for 24 hours may be
required.
(6) Compliance with Section 529.4, if applicable.
k. A utility plan showing provisions for water supply and waste water disposal,
including the size and location of all piping, holding tanks, leach fields, etc., and
showing the location and nature of any solid waste collection facility and all
electrical, telephone and any other utility services to be installed on the site.
Impact on groundwater shall be evaluated. All utilities shall be underground
whenever feasible as determined by the Project Review Board.
l. Lighting showing the location, type, radius and intensity in foot candles of all
exterior lighting, including sidewalk lighting in the Village Commercial 1 and 2
Districts.
m. A landscaping schedule keyed to the site plan and indicating the varieties, sizes,
and the locations of trees, shrubs, plants and any other landscaping elements to be
- 235 -
retained or to be planted or placed on the site. It should include proposed
methods of protecting existing trees and growth during and after construction.
n. If a new entrance is proposed; sight distances at the entrance is required in both
directions
o. Building elevations: For new building construction, building elevation drawings
of all sides of the building including the description of type, color, and texture of
all buildings.
p. Estimated peak-hour traffic to be generated by the proposal.
q. The type and size of all permanent machinery likely to generate appreciable noise
at the lot lines.
r. The amount and type of any raw, finished or waste materials to be stored outside
of roofed buildings, including their physical and chemical properties, if
applicable.
s. A list of construction items that will be included in the performance guarantee and
the estimated or actual cost of completing those items.
t. Provisions for maintenance agreements of all common areas, if applicable.
u. Condominium declarations, if applicable, including, but not limited to,
organization of the homeowners’ association and provisions for maintenance of
common areas.
The Project Review Board may waive any of these submission requirements if it
determines that the scale of the project is of such size as to make the information
unnecessary. The Project Review Board may require other pertinent information
necessary to determine if the planned use meets the provisions of this Ordinance.
E. All applications for Site Plan Review shall meet all applicable provisions of Sec. 602.F, Criteria
and Standards.
F. Criteria and Standards
1. The following criteria and standards shall be utilized by the staff and the Project Review
Board in reviewing applications for Site Plan Review. These standards are intended to
provide a guide for the applicant in the development of site and building plans as well as
a method of review for the Project Review Board. These standards shall not be regarded
as inflexible requirements. They are not intended to discourage creativity, invention and
innovation. The Project Review Board may waive the criteria presented in this section
upon a determination by the Project Review Board that the criteria are not applicable to
the proposed action or upon a determination by the Project Review Board that the
- 236 -
application of this criteria are not necessary to carry out the intent of this Ordinance. The
Project Review Board shall approve the site plan unless the plan does not reasonably
meet the intent of one or more of the following criteria provided that the criteria were not
first waived by the Project Review Board.
a. Preservation of Landscape: The landscape shall be developed in such a manner
as to be in keeping with the character of the surrounding neighborhoods and in
accordance with good development practice by minimizing tree and soil removal,
retaining existing vegetation where desirable, and keeping any grade changes in
character with the general appearance of neighboring areas. If a site includes a
ridge or ridges above the surrounding areas and provides scenic vistas for
surrounding areas, special attempts shall be made to preserve the natural
environment of the skyline of the ridge. Existing vegetation and buffering
landscaping are potential methods of preserving the scenic vista.
b. Relation of Proposed Buildings to the Environment: The design and layout of
the buildings and/or other development areas shall encourage safety, including
fire protection. Proposed structures shall be related harmoniously to the terrain
and to existing buildings and land uses in the vicinity which have a visual
relationship to the proposed buildings. Visual compatibility, not uniformity with
the surrounding area, shall be emphasized. Special attention shall be paid to the
scale (mass), height and bulk, proportions of the proposed buildings, the nature of
the open spaces (setbacks, landscaping) around the buildings, the design of the
buildings (including roof style, facade openings, architectural style and details),
building materials and signs.
If the structure is in the Design Review District, the Project Review Board shall
incorporate the findings of the standards or the Design Review Ordinance in its
Site Plan Review findings.
c. Vehicular Access: The proposed layout of access points shall be designed so as
to avoid unnecessary adverse impacts on existing vehicular and pedestrial traffic
patterns. Special consideration shall be given to the location, number, and control
of access points, adequacy of adjacent streets, traffic flow, sight distances, turning
lanes, and existing or proposed traffic signalization and pedestrial-vehicular
contacts. The entrance to the site shall meet the minimum sight distance
according to MDOT standards to the greatest extent possible
d. Parking and Circulation: The layout and design of all means of vehicular and
pedestrial circulation, including walkways, interior drives, and parking areas shall
be safe and convenient and, insofar as practical, shall not detract from the
proposed buildings and neighboring properties. General interior circulation,
separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, service traffic, drive-up facilities,
loading areas, and the arrangement and use of parking areas shall be considered.
- 237 -
e. Surface Water Drainage: Adequate provisions shall be made for surface
drainage so that removal of surface waters will not adversely affect neighboring
properties, down-stream conditions, or the public storm drainage system. The
increase in rate of runoff in the post development condition shall be held to a zero
or less percent of the predevelopment condition unless an engineering study has
been performed as described in Section 529.2 above. On-site absorption shall be
utilized to minimize discharges whenever possible. All drainage calculations
shall be based on a two year, ten year and twenty-five year storm frequency.
Emphasis shall be placed on the protection of floodplains; reservation of stream
corridors; establishment of drainage rights-of-way and the adequacy of the
existing system; and the need for improvements, both on-site and off-site, to
adequately control the rate, volume and velocity of storm drainage and the quality
of the stormwater leaving the site. Maintenance responsibilities shall be reviewed
to determine their adequacy.
f. Utilities: All utilities included in the site plan shall be reviewed as to their
adequacy, safety, and impact on the property under review and surrounding
properties. The site plan shall show what provisions are being proposed for water
supply, wastewater, solid waste disposal and storm drainage. Whenever feasible,
as determined by the Project Review Board, all electric, telephone and other
utility lines shall be installed underground. Any utility installations above ground
shall be located so as to have a harmonious relationship with neighboring
properties and the site.
g. Advertising Features: The size, location, texture and lighting of all exterior
signs and outdoor advertising structures or features shall not detract from the
layout of the property and the design of proposed buildings and structures and the
surrounding properties, and shall not constitute hazards to vehicles and
pedestrians.
h. Special Features: Exposed storage areas, exposed machinery installations,
service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings and structures, similar
accessory areas and structures, shall be subject to such setbacks, screen plantings
or other screening methods as shall reasonably be required to prevent their being
incongruous with the existing or contemplated environment and the surrounding
properties.
i. Exterior Lighting: All exterior lighting shall be designed to encourage energy
efficiency, to ensure safe movement of people and vehicles, and to minimize
adverse impact on neighboring properties and public ways. Adverse impact is to
be judged in terms of hazards to people and vehicular traffic and potential damage
to the value of adjacent properties. Lighting shall be arranged to minimize glare
and reflection on adjacent properties and the traveling public. For all proposed
lighting, the source of the light shall be shielded and the light should be directed
to the ground, except in the case of ground sign lighting. In the Village
- 238 -
Commercial 1 and 2 Districts, lighting for pedestrian walkways and adjacent
public sidewalks shall also be provided.
j. Emergency Vehicle Access: Provisions shall be made for providing and
maintaining convenient and safe emergency vehicle access to all buildings and
structures at all times.
k. Landscaping: Landscaping shall be designed and installed to define, soften, or
screen the appearance of off-street parking areas from the public right(s)-of-way
and abutting properties, to enhance the physical design of the building(s) and site,
and to minimize the encroachment of the proposed use on neighboring land uses.
Particular attention should be paid to the use of planting to break up parking
areas. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practical, by
minimizing tree and soil removal, retaining existing vegetation where desirable,
and keeping any grade changes in character with the general appearance of
neighboring areas. Landscaping shall be provided as part of the overall site plan
design and integrated into building arrangements, topography, parking and
buffering requirements. Landscaping may include trees, bushes, shrubs, ground
cover, perennials, annuals, plants, grading and the use of building and paving
materials in an imaginative manner.
l. Environmental Considerations: A site plan shall not be approved unless it
meets the following criteria:
(1) The project will not result in water pollution, erosion or sedimentation to
surface waters;
(2) The project will not result in damage to spawning grounds, fish, aquatic
life, bird and other wildlife habitat;
(3) The project will conserve shoreland vegetation;
(4) The project will conserve points of public access to waters;
(5) The project will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
(6) The project will protect archaeological and historic resources;
(7) The project will not adversely affect existing commercial fishing or
maritime activities in the Marine Waterfront District.
H. Project Review Board Appeals.
Any appeals from the decisions of the Project Review Board shall be taken only directly
to Superior Court.
Section 603. Validity and Severability
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the Courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other Section or provision of this Ordinance.
- 239 -
Section 604. Conflict with Other Ordinances
This Ordinance shall not repeal, annul, or in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance
with any other rule, regulation, bylaw, permit or provision of law.
Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings or structures, the
provisions of this Ordinance shall control.
Section 605. Effective Date
The effective date of this Ordinance is June 6, 1986, as amended.
- 240 -
ARTICLE V
LEASED PARKING STANDARDS
The Town of Freeport hereby orders that the Freeport Traffic and Parking Ordinance be amended by
enacting the following new Article V:
ARTICLE V LEASED PARKING STANDARDS
The Town of Freeport hereby orders that the Freeport Traffic and Parking Ordinance be amended by
enacting the following new Article V:
Section 48-501 The priorities, terms and conditions for leased parking spaces in the Village
Commercial I District, as established by the Freeport Zoning Ordinance, are established by this Article.
The Town may lease parking spaces to applicants who require leased parking spaces from the
municipality in order to satisfy the parking requirements of the Freeport Zoning Ordinance. The leased
parking spaces shall be located either in a lot which is owned in fee by the Town of Freeport or owned
in fee by a person or organization who has entered into a lease agreement with the Town to provide
parking spaces as regulated by this Article. All parking lots regulated in this article shall be located in
the Village Commercial I District.
Section 48-502 Leased parking spaces shall be allocated according to the following priorities:
1. Applicants with existing buildings who want to expand or change their use within the existing
footprint of the building;
2. Applicants with existing buildings who want to expand the footprints of the existing buildings,
to create additional square footage for existing or changed uses.
3. Applicants who want to build a new building after the date of adoption of this Article.
Section 48-503 The terms and conditions for all leased parking
spaces shall include the following:
1. Non-Municipal owners of parking lots shall enter into a lease agreement with the Town which
contains the following provisions:
a. Proof of adequate public liability insurance equal to that of the Town shall be submitted
by the owner;
b. Notarized agreement to maintain the parking lots, including but not limited to paving,
striping, landscaping, signs, stormwater facilities and other amenities, shall be submitted
by the owner;
- 241 -
c. Statement that the parking spaces offered for lease are not required to satisfy pending
and/or approved development plans on the same or abutting lot;
d. Notice of termination of this lease shall be sent by registered mail to the Town and to all
leaseholders of the premises a minimum of one year before the lease expires;
e. The Town may set any other provisions it deems appropriate.
2. Applicants for parking spaces shall be the owners and not the lessees of premises requiring
parking spaces.
3. The schedule of parking fees shall be established by the lot owner.
4. The Town shall bill the leaseholder and charge the lot owner 5% of the yearly lease fee to cover
its administrative costs. On a case by case basis, the Town Council may, by order, exempt a
non-profit lot owner from this 5% fee, provided that the lot owner agrees to bill the lease
holder(s) directly and report the payment status of all leases to the Finance Department on a
quarterly basis. The Town Council shall have the authority, by order, to revoke any such
exemption for just cause.
5. The Town shall decide, based on the priorities established by Section 48-502, which applicant is
next eligible for a lease. The applicant may choose to lease whichever spaces are available. If
the applicant chooses not to enter into a priority list becomes eligible for a lease and the
previous applicant may remain on the list.
6. Applicants for parking spaces shall provide a notarized statement which states that continued
occupancy of part or all of the premises requiring leased parking spaces is contingent on
continued leasing of parking spaces.
7. Failure by the owner of a premises to continue to provide the required parking spaces shall
result in the revocation of its Certificate of Occupancy.
- 242 -
Zoning Map Attachment: Please visit the Town Office to view the Official Zoning Map
(and any amendments) which supplement this document.
Freeport Village Overlay District
FREEPORT VILLAGE OVERLAY DISTRICT
(FVOD)
Village Commercial I
District
not included in the
FVOD
Addendum 1 of the Zoning Ordinance of Freeport, Maine
Adopted August 2, 2005, amended April 3, 2007 (corrected 02/05/13)
By: Orcutt Consulting and Freeport Planning Staff
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 2 -
T a b l e o f C o n t e n t s
I n t r o d u c t i o n
Purpose 3
Appl icabi l i ty 3
Map of the Freepor t Vi l lage Over lay Dist r ict 4
Design Standard Cer t i f icate 5
Def ini t ions 5
S e c t i o n 1 (existing one and two family homes)
Setback Reduct ions 7
S e c t i o n 2 (new one and two family homes)
Minimum Bui lding Height 9
Resident ial Archi tecture 9
S e c t i o n 3 (new multi-family units and projects subject to Site Plan Review and
Subdivision review)
Light ing 14
Landscaping 14
S e c t i o n 3 A (subdivisions, developments that create a new road or that are on an
existing roads)
St reet Trees 20
Roads 21
Cul -de-Sacs and Dead End Roads 21
Sidewalks 22
Bicycle Lanes and Trai ls 23
S e c t i o n 4 (Village Mixed Use Districts)
Setbacks / Bui l t to Requi rements (VMU-1 only) 25
Bui lding Height 26
Archi te ctura l Standards 26
A p p r o v a l P r o c e s s 28
A p p e a l P r o c e s s 29
C o n f l i c t D e s i g n R e v i e w
O r d i n a n c e 30
W a i v e r s o f S t a n d a r d s 30
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 3 -
I n t r o d u c t i o n
P u r p o s e
This document summarizes the site design and architectural standards for buildings in the
Freeport Village Overlay District. It is intended to assist the property owner, architect/designer
and builder. Following these procedures from the start through to final inspection will insure
that your building and the buildings of your neighbors reflect the overall vision for Freeport
Village.
The purpose of such a thorough and meticulous approach to traditional designs is to lead you
down the most efficient route to the goal of an appropriate and harmonious design for your
building. The intent is also to insure that your efforts result in a building that maintains and
increases its value, maintains the value of your neighbor’s homes and businesses, and that gives
joy not only to you, but to all who pass through in years to come.
A p p l i c a b i l i t y
The Freeport Village Overlay District is defined on a map titled Freeport Village Overlay
District, found in the Freeport Zoning Ordinance. This map is reproduced in this document for
reference purpose only.
These Freeport Village Design Standards do not apply to lots within the VC-1 District, which is
generally described as the core of the historic Freeport Village retail area. These Freeport
Village Design Standards do apply to lots within the Design Review District that are also in the
Freeport Village Overlay District but fall outside the VC-1.
The various standards included in this document apply differently depending on use. Each
section states how the standards of that section apply to various uses. For example, the
landscaping standards apply only to new multi-family dwelling units and conversions of single
family residences or duplexes to a multi-family regardless of whether the building is expanded to
create the new units. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the replacement of a mobile home is
not considered a new one family dwelling and is not subject to Section 2. Mobile homes are
considered an existing one family dwelling; therefore, Section 1 of this Ordinance does apply.
For the purposes of these Design Standards, the following uses will be referenced:
1. existing one and two family dwelling unit(s) – See Section 1, page 7
2. new one and two family dwelling unit(s) – See Section 2, pages 9 - 12
3. new multiple family dwelling units and building additions that create new units that
require Site Plan Review and/or Subdivision Review – See Section 3, pages 14 – 20
4. subdivisions along a public road, and developments that create a new public road, and/or
developments requiring Site Plan Review along a public road, and developments that
create a new public road – See Section 3A, pages 20 – 23
5. new commercial or mixed use developments in the Village Mixed Use Districts
requiring Site Plan Review approval and/or Subdivision approval.
6. building additions that create new units in the Village Mixed Use Districts so as to
require Site Plan Review and/or Subdivision approval.
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 4 -
1000 0 1000 2000 Feet
FREEPORT VILLAGE OVERLAY DISTRICT
Freeport Village Overlay District
Legend
Note:
The area highlighted in yellow depicts the properties included
in the Freeport Village Overlay District (FVOD). This District
encompasses the following Zoning Districts: Village I (V-I),
Village Commercial II (VC-II), Village Commercial II (VC-II),
Village Commercial III (VC-III), and Village Commercial IV (VC-IV),
as these district lines may be amended from time to time.
The District lines of the official Freeport Zoning Map shall
override the Overlay District of this map.
The Freeport Village Design Standards
apply as noted in those Standards
within the boundaries of the
Freeport VillageOverlay District.
June 2005
Village Commercial 1
District
not included in the
FVOD
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 5 -
D e s i g n S t a n d a r d C e r t i f i c a t e
Any new construction, addition, or reconstruction of buildings or structures within the Freeport
Village Overlay District must comply with the applicable standards set forth in these Design
Standards. Prior to commencement of the construction or reconstruction, the applicant must
obtain a Design standard Certificate. The process for obtaining a Design Standard Certificate is
forth on page 25 of these Design Standards
Project Review Board
In considering Site Plan Review and Subdivision applications for permits, the Staff Review
Board and/or the Project Review Board shall use the standards of Sections 3 and 3A of these
Design Standards. A Design Standard Certificate shall be required before a permit to proceed is
issued in the Freeport Village Overlay District.
Administrative Review
The Codes Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to review and make decisions on applications for
a project in the Freeport Village Overlay District not requiring Site Plan Review and/or Subdivision
approval using the standards of Sections 1 and 2 as applicable. Either the Codes Enforcement Officer or
the applicant may request that the application be reviewed by the Project Review Board. A Design
Standard Certificate shall be considered a permit to proceed in the Freeport Village Overlay District as
described in these Design Standards. Refer to page 29 of these Design Standards for information on the
Approval process, submission requirements and the Action on applications for a Design Standard
Certificate.
D e f i n i t i o n s
Words and terms used in these Design Guidelines shall have the meanings set forth below. Words and
terms which are not defined below but are defined in the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Freeport,
Maine or the Subdivision Ordinance of the Town of Freeport, Maine shall have the meanings set forth in
those ordinances. Words or terms which are not defined either below or in the Zoning Ordinance or the
Subdivision Ordinance or the Design Review Ordinance shall have their customary dictionary meanings.
Where the definitions set forth below include regulations, restrictions, limitations, prohibitions, criteria or
standards, the definitions constitute enforceable requirements of these design standards.
Building Wherever the word "building" is used, it also refers to all structures, excluding walls,
fences, posts for mailboxes or lighting, patios.
District In these Design Standards, District refers to the Freeport Village Overlay District.
Reconstruction The rebuilding, or constructing again, of a building or part of a building. The
reconstruction may or may not be a return to the original design of the building.
Visually Compatible It is not the intent that all buildings in a neighborhood should look the
same, but that a mix of styles, sizes, etc. that blend together well shall be allowed.
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 6 -
S E C T I O N 1
Applies to:
• existing one family homes,
• existing two family homes
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 7 -
S e t b a c k R e q u i r e m e n t R e d u c t i o n s
Front Setback - - Front setback will be as described in the Zoning Ordinance for the appropriate
district except for conditions where the proposed lot is adjacent to an existing lot with a non-conforming
front setback. In this case, the proposed lot may increase or decrease the front setback up to half the
distance between the existing non-conforming setback and the required setback.
In the case that lots on both sides have existing non-conforming front setbacks, the
minimum setback will average the difference between the two non-conforming setbacks
to create a mitigating setback. The proposed setback can be set anywhere between this
mitigating setback line and the required setback.
In the case where buildings are non-conforming with regard to the front setback, the
building may be expanded in the front, provided the building doesn’t protrude any closer
to the front property line more than the existing building.
In order to encourage the use of open or screened porches in the District, open or
screened porches may be built in the front setback, up to a distance of 3’ from the edge
of sidewalk. Occupied space on an upper floor over the porch may not sit within the
front setback.
EXAMPLES:
One non-conforming side lot
Both non-conforming side lots
Side and Rear Setback
Side setback shall be 10’, accessory structures such as sheds and detached garages shall be 5’
Rear setback shall be 15’, accessory structures such as sheds and detached garages shall be 5’.
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 8 -
S E C T I O N 2
Applies to:
• new one family homes,
• new two family homes,
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 9 -
1. All of the standards included in Section 1 are applicable to construction
allowed in Section 2,
2. Minimum Height Requirement, and
One story building shall have a roof pitch of no less than 6 in 12.
Exceptions:
Bell towers, antennae, cupolas, steeples, chimneys, widow’s walks, weathervanes and other
subordinate roof appendages, not integral to the overall building mass, are excluded from the
minimum height requirement.
3. Architecture
Character
The architectural expressions of existing residential buildings in Freeport are predominately
those of historic styles dating from the late 18th and 19th and 20th centuries. There are notable
examples of New England Colonial, Federal, Greek revival, Queen Anne, Gothic revival,
Italianate, Shingle Style and simple farmsteads and maritime homes. Homeowners are
encouraged to use any one style of this eclectic mix to aid in the design of their home. In doing
so, they are encouraged to incorporate the dominant features of the preferred style, and mixing
dominant features of different styles is discouraged. For example, a federal fan should not be
added to a colonial cape. Additions to existing homes shall harmonize with the existing, original
style of home and not introduce a competing style to the overall design.
The Freeport Historical Society is available to assist homeowners interested in constructing an
historical style of house. Homeowners are encouraged to enlist designers and homebuilders as
participants in creating an overall harmonious and comprehensive character for the community.
Foundat ions
Foundation walls faced with granite, brick or natural stone shall be visible up to 24 inches in
height. If a concrete foundation is used, up to 18” of exposure is allowable. When site
conditions require that foundation walls be extended substantially above ground, the surface
exposed beyond the maximums stated above shall be clad with a siding material consistent with
that of the other parts of the façade.
Exter ior Wal ls
Exterior walls shall reflect the quality of permanence. The use of traditional wood clapboard
siding or simulated-wood (such as vinyl siding), or composite materials with the appearance of
wood siding is the basic standard. Vertical and diagonal siding patterns integrated into the
overall building design are acceptable. Diagonal siding, industrial metal siding, standing seam
metal siding, or asphalt shingle siding is prohibited. Windows, doors, and other openings in wall
areas shall be trimmed.
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 10 -
Brick or stone masonry walls or partial walls are acceptable, but the employment of these
features within the design must be carefully integrated to avoid the appearance of mid 20th
century tract homes with first-story
brick and second-story horizontal
siding. Brick material shall be of New
England character, normally red to
reddish brown in color, and shall be
laid with three courses in eight inches.
The use of economy shapes, square
brick or elongated brick is not
permitted. Nominal brick size shall be
2 3/8 x 3 5/8 x 7 5/8. Multi-color brick
products or patterns composed of
different colors of bricks are
prohibited, and any pattern in the brick
masonry shall be muted with all
patterns composed of brick of the same
color.
Horizontal siding with trim at openings and along building edges.
Windows and Doors
Modern technology has made possible greater use of glass in residential construction, when
compared with that of older historic structures. These standards recognize this development and
encourage the liberal use of glass in windows and doors, including passive solar designs, in the
construction or renovation of dwellings. However, the placement, rhythm,
framing, subdivisions and shapes of doors and windows shall be visually compatible with
existing residential patterns.
In general rectilinear window
and door openings are the
basic standard. Shapes of
windows other than squares
or rectangles are permitted;
with the restriction that they
may not exceed 2.5 feet in
diameter, length, width or
height and that their
placement is limited to one
such window per façade.
These windows are not
permitted in facades adjacent
to those in which those
shapes are already employed.
The use of reflective or
heavily tinted glass is prohibited in residential structures.
Large expanses of glass shall be subdivided to create a rhythm or pattern, harmoniously
proportionate with existing architectural character of the district. It is required that large
Recognizable front door with rectilinear windows
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 11 -
expanses of glass or passive solar panels face internal or private areas of the home site, rather
than the public face of the residence.
The incorporation of a recognizable front door facing the street is required. Sliding glass doors
or patio doors leading to exterior spaces are acceptable only in locations leading to usable
outdoor space not facing the public space.
Roofs
Roofs are dominant architectural forms in the townscape, particularly as viewed when
approaching town or from higher elevations. Roof forms such as gable, hipped or slight
variations are acceptable. Buildings shall have a roof pitch in the ranges of 6 in 12 to 12 in 12.
Roof dormers with pitched or shed roof forms are permitted, and skylights within the roof plane
are acceptable. Shed roofs that are integrated
with the building form are also acceptable.
Preferred roof materials are asphalt shingle, fire
treated wood shingles, natural slate or composite
material made to resemble slate, or metal
standing seam. Roof colors shall be those colors
found on residential buildings within the village.
Chimneys
Concrete block chimneys and exposed metal chimney flues on the side of the house facing
the street are prohibited. Metal chimney flues on the sides of houses shall be enclosed and
sided with the same or similar siding as the house. Exposed metal chimney flues out of the
roof are permitted. Direct vents are not considered chimneys.
Exter ior Stai rs
Residential buildings shall not have more than one exterior stairway leading to a second or
higher story of a building. The design of the exterior stair shall match the design of the primary
structure.
Garages
The garage building form, architectural character, materials and finishes shall be consistent with
those of the primary residential building. Garages must be setback at least 4’ from the front of
the primary structure.
Gable roofs, integrated chimney
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 12 -
Porches and Decks
Open or screened porches may sit within the front setback.
The minimum porch length should be appropriate to the
building style. Porches may wrap around corners of the front
façade, especially at corner lot locations. Second floor space
may extend above porch areas provided the setback
requirements are met. Porches shall have open railings with
vertically proportioned balusters or other patterns, or solid face
and shall be consistent with the local building codes. The
height of porch railings shall be consistent with local building
codes. Full height walls surrounding porches are not
permitted. Screens in the warmer months and storm windows
in the cold months are permitted, this does not include the
installation of combination storm and screen windows. Front Porch facing street.
Fencing and Si te Wal ls
Fences are not required for new residences within the district. If fences are constructed they
shall use the following standards:
Façade – Fences shall be post and rail type with wood, wood composite, stone or masonry posts
and wood top and bottom rails. Infill between rails shall be vertical pickets or other patterns
consistent with older residence within the district. Fences in these locations shall not exceed 42
inches in height and shall be located within two feet of the residential side of the sidewalk.
Side and Rear Elevations – Fences in these locations shall be vertical or horizontal wood
patterns with post and rail construction. They shall not exceed six feet in height. Chain link
fence enclosures for animals are allowed provided the fencing meets the rear and side setback
requirement for primary structures and are only allowed behind the primary structure.
In general site walls should be used for the purposes of retaining earth to adjust grades on the
site, and to allow for acceptable slopes on sidewalks. Site walls (retaining walls) shall be natural
stone, pre-cast concrete made to resemble stone or brick masonry. The use of other modular
concrete material is not permitted for the wall face. Pre-cast concrete wall caps are permitted.
Site walls (retaining walls) shall not exceed 42 inches in height and shall be located no closer
than two feet of the sidewalk.
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 13 -
S E C T I O N 3
Applies to:
• new multiple family buildings
requiring Site Plan Review approval
and/or Subdivision approval ,
• building additions that create new
units so as to require Site Plan Review
and/or Subdivision approval
S E C T I O N 3 A
Applies to:
• subdivisions
• development projects requiring Site Plan
Review approval and/or Subdivision
approval that are along a public road,
• development projects that create a new
public road
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 14 -
1. All of the standards included in Section 1 and 2 are applicable to construction
allowed in Section 3, and
2. Lighting, and
All proposed lighting, including building, street, parking lot, pedestrian and security lighting,
shall use full cut-off lighting fixtures. This means that the source of the light (light bulb) is not
directly visible. This can be achieved by using shields or by using frosted glass.
3. Landscaping
G e n e r a l L a n d s c a p e P r i n c i p l e s
The proposed planting on the site plan shall develop an environment that complements the
architecture, reinforces circulation paths, highlights entrances, provides shade, and adds seasonal
interest. Freeport Village should be unified by a rich variety of street trees, flowering shrubs,
and masses of color.
Trees in Freeport Village shall be planted at building entrances, throughout parking lots, and in
open spaces. Large shade trees shall be planted within or near road right-of-ways to create a
more unified and pleasant streetscape.
Coordination with Utilities. The proposed planting on the site plan shall illustrate how plantings
will be integrated with underground and overhead utilities and lighting.
Variety. The use of plant materials that exhibit seasonal color and interesting texture is required
to create a distinctive, yet low maintenance environment. Proposed planting on the site plan
shall strike a balance between monoculture (the use of a single species) and too much variety.
Integration. Plantings shall be massed to soften edges, corners, large, blank walls and elevations
and pavement areas, and to integrate the building into the landscape.
Tree and Plant Protection. Every effort shall be made to preserve existing or unique trees or
other plant material, especially in locations visible to the public. The site plan shall illustrate the
location of all individual existing trees over 12” in caliper. The site plan shall illustrate trees
over 12” in caliper that will be removed as well as illustrate all trees over 12” in caliper or
masses of significant existing vegetation that will be preserved and what protection measures
will be taken during construction.
Safety. The mature form and height of plant materials shall be considered so they will not create
unsafe conditions or block sight lines for pedestrians, bicyclists, or motorists. The lower
branches of trees shall be at least eight feet above the pavement to minimize interference with
pedestrian movement.
Root Zones. Trees shall be planted in locations where their root development and branching
patterns will not interfere with window displays, signage, underground or overhead utilities,
streets, and sidewalks.
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 15 -
Roadside Plantings. Trees shall be planted a minimum of 5’ from the edge of the roadway.
Trees and other landscaping planted at intersections shall preserve an adequate sight triangle, as
determined by the applicant’s traffic engineer and/or the Town’s reviewing engineer
Minimum Plant Sizes. Unless otherwise required by site conditions and approved by the Project
Review Board, plant materials shall meet the following size Guidelines:
Canopy Trees 2” – 2 1/2” caliper
Flowering Trees 2” – 2 1/2” caliper
Evergreen Trees 4’-5’ height
Deciduous Shrubs 24” – 30” height
Evergreen Shrubs 18” – 24” ht. or spread
Perennials 2 year clumps or cuttings
Ornamental Grasses 2 year clumps
Ground Covers 3” pots or flats
L a n d s c a p e M a i n t e n a n c e
The proposed plants illustrated on the site plan shall anticipate a 3-8 year growing cycle to
achieve maturity for shrubs, and 15-20 years for trees. Proper maintenance shall be assured so
the site continues to improve as the landscaping achieves maturity. The proposed plants
illustrated on the site plan should be designed and plantings selected with due consideration for
maintenance requirements.
Maintenance Plan. As part of the application, at the request of the Staff Review Board or the
Project Review Board or CEO, a written maintenance plan shall be provided for all landscape
elements to be installed on the property. Topics to be addressed include initial installations,
guarantee period, replacement policy, periodic and seasonal maintenance, special considerations,
use of pesticides and fertilizers, irrigation, and seasonal displays.
Replacement Planting. Where plant materials specified on the site plan do not survive or are
damaged, they shall be replaced and/or reinforced in accordance with the one-year performance
guarantee to maintain conformance with the approved site plan and to provide the necessary
landscape effect.
Guarantee Period. All lawns and plant materials installed in Freeport Village shall be
guaranteed for a period of not less than 1 year. Any plant material that is damaged or dies within
12 months of planting shall be replaced with the same or similar species of plant and guaranteed
for another 12 months.
S h r u b s a n d O r n a m e n t a l P l a n t i n g s
A variety of shrubs and ornamental plantings should be used throughout Freeport Village to add
seasonal color, provide visual interest, help define spaces, screen undesirable elements, and
emphasize circulation routes.
Types of Plantings. A listing of suitable plantings are provided in these Standards. Selection of
plant material shall be from that list. See Plant Materials List.
Selection. The selection of plantings shall consider ultimate height and spread, maintenance,
pest and disease tolerance, and their nuisance potential (e.g., leaf litter, thorns, insect attraction).
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 16 -
B u f f e r s
Buffers are required on any lot used for any use other than a one-family or two-family dwelling which
abuts a lot occupied by a one-family or two-family dwelling; except that the Project Review Board may
reduce the width of the buffer if existing buildings or driveways are within 15 feet of the property line.
Additional buffers may be required, at the discretion of the Project Review Board, and the additional
buffers shall comply with these standards. Buffers shall be a minimum of 15’ in width and shall contain
the following plant material, as a minimum, for every 100 lineal feet; however, the Staff Review Board
and/or the Project Review Board may alter the plant material or substitute with a non-plant material
provided the abutting property owner and the applicant agree that the alternative plant material will
provide an adequate buffer:
3 Street trees 2/ 1/2” – 3” caliper minimum
6 Evergreen trees 5’ – 7’ ht. minimum
4 Ornamental trees 8’ – 10’ ht minimum.
20 shrubs 3’ – 4’ ht minimum.
Buffers can sit within the setback. If
existing plant material is within the
buffer, existing plants should be
retained, if possible. Existing plants
can be counted towards the buffer
requirement, if the existing plants are
at least the minimum size required.
Each existing plant shall count as one
plant in the buffer requirement,
regardless of the size of the existing
plant. Plant material shall to be chosen
from the plants listed in the Plant
Materials List.
Examples of buffer layouts
S c r e e n i n g
Fence screening shall be required to hide unsightly areas from view. Unsightly areas are considered to be service yards,
dumpsters, recycling bins, propane tanks, condensers units, electrical transformer units, communication equipment, etc.
Opaque fencing, with openings no greater than 1”, and tall enough to completely hide the unsightly area, is required.
Fencing material shall be wood, composite material with the appearance of wood, or masonry. Chain link fencing is
prohibited.
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 17 -
Landscape screening can be used in conjunction with fencing. In this case, the openings in the fencing can
increase to no greater than 6”, but the fence must still be tall enough to completely hide the unsightly area.
The landscape screening shall be a minimum of 6’ in width and tall enough to cover up to 75% of the
height of the fence. Plant material to be used for screening purposes shall be chosen from the following
list:
Up to 4’ in height:
Plant min. 30” OC triangulated
Enkianthus campanulatus Redveined Enkianthus
Potentilla fruticosa Bush Cinquefoil
Taxus cuspidata ‘nana’ Dwarf Japanese Yew
4’ – 8’ in height
Plant min. 4’ OC triangulated
Euonymus alatus Burningbush
Ilex verticillata Winterberry
Prunus maritima Beach Plum
Rhododendron sp. Rhododendron sp.
Rosa rugosa Rugosa Rose
Viburnum trilobum American Cranberrybush
8’ – 15’ in height:
Plant min. 5’ OC triangulated
Forsythia x. intermedia Forsythia
Myrica pennsylvanica Bayberry
Taxus cuspidata Japanese Yew
Viburnum prunifolium Blackhaw Viburnum
Taller than 15’:
Plant min. 7’ OC triangulated
Amelanchier canadensis Shadblow Serviceberry
Hydrangea paniculata Peegee Hydrangea
P l a n t M a t e r i a l L i s t
The following plant lists have been developed by two registered Landscape Architects
and are known to thrive well in this region and in more built-up areas. Plant material to
be used on proposed projects seeking a Design Standards Certificate shall be selected
from the following Plant Material List. Street trees and screening plants shall be
selected from the lists provided in these sections within this document. A hybrid of the
same species, listed in this list, may be specified.
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 18 -
ORNAMENTAL TREES
Flowering trees - average height 15’ – 30’ unless noted
See Street Trees list for large shade trees averaging 30’ – 70’ in height
Acer campestre Hedge Maple
Acer ginnala Amur Maple
Aesculus pavia Red Buckeye
Amelanchier canadensis Shadblow Serviceberry
Carpinus caroliniana American Hornbeam
Cornus kousa Kousa Dogwood
Cornus mas Cornealian Cherry Dogwood
Cotinus obovatus American Smoketree
Crataegus crus-galli inermis’ Cockspur Hawthorn (thornless)
Crataegus phaenopyrum Washington Hawthorn
Crataegus viridis Winter King Hawthorn
Halesia carolina Carolina Silverbell
Magnolia stellata Star Magnolia
Malus species Crabapple
Nyssa sylvatica Black Tupelo (grows up to 40’ and higher)
Ostrya virginiana Hop Hornbeam, Ironwood (grows up to 40’)
Phellodendron amurense Amur Corktree
Prunus subhirtella ‘Autumnalis’ Higan Cherry (non-weeping form)
Pyrus calleryana ‘Bradford’ Bradford Pear (grows up to 40’ and higher)
Sorbus alnifolia Korean Mountain-Ash (grows up to 40’)
Syringa reticulata ‘Ivory Silk’ Japanese Tree Lilac
E V E R G R E E N T R E E S
Green year-round - average height 30’ – 60’ unless noted
Abies concolor White Fir
Abies balsamea Balsam Fir
Picea abies Norway Spruce
Picea glauca White Spruce
Pinus nigra Austrian Pine
Pinus resinosa Red/Norway Pine
Pinus strobus Eastern White Pine (can grow much taller)
Thuja occidentalis American Arborvitae
Tsuga canadensis Canadian Hemlock
Tsuga carolinana Carolina Hemlock
ORNAMENTAL SHRUBS
Flowering plants - average height 5’ – 15’ unless noted
Aesculus parviflora Bottlebrush Buckeye
Aronia arbutifolia Red Chokecherry
Calycanthus floridus Carolina Allspice
Clethra alnifolia Summersweet
Cotinus coggygria Smokebush
Cotoneaster adpressa Creeping Cotoneaster (prostrate: up to 6”)
Cotoneaster horizontalis Rockspray Cotoneaster
Deutzia gracilis Slender Deutzia
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 19 -
Enkianthus campanulatus Redveined Enkianthus
Euonymus alatus Burning Bush, Winged Euonymus
Forsythia x. intermedia varieties Forsythia
Hydrangea paniculata Peegee Hydrangea (grows up to 20’)
Iles glabara Inkberry (evergreen)
Ilex verticillata Winterberry
Kalmia latifolia Mountain-laurel (evergreen)
Myrica pensylvanica Bayberry
Potentilla fruticosa Bush Cinquefoil
Prunus maritima Beach Plum
Rhododendron species Rhododendron varieties (evergreen)
Rosa rugosa Beach Rose
Viburnum dentatum Arrowwood Viburnum
Vibrunum plicatum tomentosum Japanese Snowball
Viburnum prunifolium Blackhaw Viburnum
Viburnum trilobum American Cranberrybush
Xanthorhiza simplicissima Yellowroot
E V E R G R E E N S H R U B S
Green year-round - average height 5’ – 30’ unless noted
Kalmia latifolia Mountain-laurel
Juniperus communis Common Juniper
Jounipeerus horizontalis Creeping Juniper (prostate; up to 12”)
Rhododendron species Rhododendron varieties
Pinus mugo mugo Mugo Pine
Taxus cuspidata Japanese Yew
Taxus x. media Anglojap Yew
P E R E N N I A L S
Achillea millefolium Yarrow
Aster x frikartii New England Aster
Astilbe varieteis Astilbe
Coreopsis verticillata Moonbeam Coreopsis
Echinacea purpurea Purple coneflower
Hemerocallis species Daylilies
Iridaceae species Iris
Liatris spicata Gayfeather
Liliaceae species Hosta
Malva alcea ‘Fastigiata’ Hollyhock Mallow
Perovskia atriplicifola Russian Sage
Rudbeckia ‘Goldstrum’ Black-Eyed Susan
Sedum telephium Autumn Joy Sedum
O R N A M E N T A L G R A S S E S
Deschampsia caespitosa Tufted Hair Grass
Festuca ovina ‘glauca’ Fescue Grass
Miscanthus sinensis Purple Silver Grass
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 20 -
Section 3A
S t r e e t T r e e s
Street trees are to be planted on lots that front an Arterial, Collector or Minor Street, or
along new roads that are created for new developments. Trees will be planted in a
minimum 25 SF planting area.
Trees will be planted a minimum of 30’ OC or 3.25 trees per 100 Lineal feet, matching
specimens for like species. Tree species shall be chosen from the following list of Street
Trees:
Acer rubrum Red Maple
Acer saccharum Sugar Maple
Carpinus betulus European Hornbeam
Gleditsia triacanthos Thornless Honey Locust
Pyrus calleryana Cleveland Pear
Quercus palustris Pin Oak
Quercus rubra Red Oak
Ulmus americana Valley Forge Elm (Liberty Elm)
U. japonica x U. wilsoniana Accolade Elm (Elm hybrid)
Tilia cordata Littleleaf Linden
Zelkova serrata Zelkova
In cases where a planting of street trees already exists, and the proposed street trees are a continuation of
this pattern, the proposed street trees shall match the species of the existing trees. Any one species can
total up to 75% of the species of trees planted on a single street.
Street trees create an impressive edge. Street trees along Main Street, early 20th century.
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 21 -
R o a d S t a n d a r d s
Collector Street
New collector Streets shall meet the provisions of Chapter 26, Street Acceptance Ordinance with the
following exceptions:
Section 303 Design Standards for Streets
1. Minimum Right-of-Way Width: 50’
2. Minimum Width of Pavement:
a. Road only 26’
b. Road w/ one side of parallel parking 35’
c. Road w/ two sides of parallel parking 44’
3. Width of Shoulders (without curb): included in 2.
4. Minimum Center-Line Radius on Curve: 150’
5 Minimum Tangent Length
Between Reverse Curves: 75’
6. Design Speed: 25 MPH
Where there is on-street parking, the road should neck down to accommodate pedestrian crossings. The
locations of pedestrian crossings shall be determined by the Project Review Board. Crosswalk markings
shall be installed by the developer and shall be made of brick, pavers, embedded plastics or other
material that is durable, long-lasting, is distinct in appearance from the surrounding roadway that requires
minimal maintenance and must be approved by the Project Review Board.
Minor Street
New minor Streets shall meet the provisions of Chapter 26, Street Acceptance Ordinance with the
following exceptions:
Section 303 Design Standards for Streets
1. Minimum Right-of-Way width 50’
2. Minimum Width of Pavement: 24’
3. Width of Shoulders included in 2.
4. Curbing (required with sidewalks) Vertical
5. Minimum Center-Line Radius on Curve: 150’
6. Minimum Tangent Length
Between Reverse Curves: 75’
7. Design Speed: 25 MPH
C u l - d e - s a c s a n d D e a d E n d R o a d s
Ideally Freeport Village will be accessible through a series of interconnected roads and street grid patterns.
Cul-de-sacs and dead-end roads will be permitted by Project Review Board approval only. The applicant
must prove to the Board that it is not possible to connect to an existing or proposed road to adequately serve
the proposed development.
In the case of a cul-de-sac or dead-end road approval, a 50’ Right-of-way must be maintained off the end of
the cul-de-sac or dead-end road to the edge of the property for future road and/or bicycle and pedestrian
connections.
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 22 -
S i d e w a l k S t a n d a r d s
Walks are to create a continuous character throughout the Village, tying together neighborhoods and
commercial areas. Sidewalks are required on all new road construction, for both public and private roads.
Sidewalks within Freeport Village shall conform to the Town of Freeport Sidewalk Specifications with the
following exceptions:
1) New sidewalks shall have an 8” gravel base; 2 1/2” of crushed gravel and one of the following finish
courses:
a. 3” of compacted sand
under a butt-jointed brick
walk. Brick shall have
sand swept joints and
appropriate edging where
the walk is not set
adjacent to curbing.
b. 1 1/2” of “B” grade
bituminous material with
butt-jointed brick
adhered to the
bituminous with a
neoprene modified
asphalt adhesive. Brick
shall have sand swept joints
and appropriate edging where
the walk is not set adjacent to curbing.
c. 4” of reinforced concrete, with control joints at least 4’
OC and broom finish.
d. 3” of bituminous asphalt; 1 1/2” layer of base
bituminous with 1 1/2” of finish bituminous surface as
final layer.
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 23 -
B i c y c l e L a n e s a n d T r a i l s
Subdivisions with more than 700’ of frontage on a public road shall provide a 20’ wide public ROW
easement between lots @ 500’ on center or at reasonable distance to provide access to desired
destinations.
When required, bicycle lanes on proposed roads shall be 4’ in width marked to separate vehicular and
bicycle travel and further marked to indicate bicycle travel only within the bicycle lane.
The Project Review Board shall designate paths and trails as one of three options:
1. A Cleared Path
Minimum 4’ in width cleared of plant material, smooth
grade for walking, compacted sub-grade, continuous
surface.
2.
3.
2. A Walking Path
Minimum 5’ in width, cleared of plant material,
smooth grade for walking, compacted sub-grade, 8”
gravel base; 2 1/2” of crushed gravel, with a finish
layer of 2” of stone dust or 2” of bituminous asphalt.
3. A Bicycle Trail
Minimum 8’ in width, cleared of plant material, smooth grade
for walking, compacted sub-grade, 8” gravel base; 2 1/2” of
crushed gravel, with a finish layer of 2” of stone dust or 2” of
bituminous asphalt.
If the proposed trail is connecting to an existing trail, the new
trail shall match the existing trail in width and material at the
point of connection.
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 24 -
S E C T I O N 4 . 1 , 4 . 3 , a n d
4 . 4
Applies to:
• new commercial or mixed use
developments in the Village Mixed Use
District 1, 2 &3(VMU 1, 2, &3)
requiring Site Plan Review approval
and/or Subdivision approval ,
• building additions that create new
units in the Village Mixed Use Districts
1, 2, &3 (VMU-1, 2, &3) so as to
require Site Plan Review and/or
Subdivision approval
S E C T I O N 4 . 2
Applies to:
New construction (residential,
commercial, and/or mixed use) in the
Village Mixed Use District 1 (VMU-1) so
as to require Site Plan Review and/or
Subdivision approval
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 25 -
1 . All of the standards included in Section 1, 2, 3 and 3A are applicable to
construction to which Section 4 is applicable. In case where the standards of
this section conflict, the standards of this section shall apply.
2 . S e t b a c k s a n d B u i l d - T o
R e q u i r e m e n t s f o r V i l l a g e M i x e d
U s e D i s t r i c t 1
Front Bui ld- to l ine - The purpose of a bui ld-to requi rement is to retain and
create a consistent l ine of bui ldings along the st reet , that encloses the st reet
and sidewalk whi le al lowing for var iat ion f rom bui lding to bui lding. The
façade of the bui lding shal l occupy a minimum of 60 percent (60%)of the f ront
bui ld-to l ine.
Locat ion and/or Use Bui ld- to Line
Bow St . , and School St .
Commercial 1s t f loor
Resident ial 1s t f loor
proper ty l ine – 10’
7’ – 17’
Al l other st reets 10’ 25’
Parking is prohibi ted in the f ront of bui ldings, wi th the except ion of on-st reet
parking. The area between the sidewalk and the st ructure shal l be used for
st reet t rees, pedest r ian ameni t ies such as benches or other st reet furni ture,
landscaping, ar t , or expanded sidewalks. The Project Review Board shal l have
the author i ty to vary the f ront bui ld-to l ine i f st r ict compl iance to this standard
would resul t in a bui lding that was out -of -place wi th the sur rounding
bui ldings . In determining an appropr iate bui ld-to l ine in these cases, the
Board may increase or decrease the bui ld-to l ine up to hal f the distance
between the exist ing non-conforming bui ld-to l ine and the requi red bui ld-to
l ine.
Side Bui ld- to l ine commercial , mul t i -fami ly resident ial or mixed use
developments – The purpose of side bui ld-to l ines are to enhance the vi l lage
by developing compact shopping and l iving areas that are pedest r ian f r iendly.
Bui ldings may be bui l t to the proper ty l ine i f the adjacent proper ty is vacant or
has exist ing commercial or mixed use bui ldings . Bui ldings may be bui l t up to
10’ f rom the proper ty l ine to al low a walkway f rom the sidewalk to rear
parking, or 18’ i f access to rear parking is requi red. Proposed commercial or
mixed use bui ldings that are adjacent to an exist ing single fami ly or two
fami ly st ructure shal l have a 10’ setback requi rement unless the owner of the
single fami ly or two fami ly home submi ts a notar ized af f idavi t grant ing
permission to bui ld closer to the proper ty l ine. Any other spaces wider than
10’ shal l be developed as a publ ic area that may be owned ei ther publ icly or
pr ivately. Publ ic areas at a minimum shal l provide seat ing, shade, and
landscaping. Ext ra ameni t ies such as a dr inking fountain, t rel l is or pergola,
playground, publ ic per formance space, water features such as fountains or
pools, and a gazebo are encouraged where the space permi ts.
Side setback requi rement – setback requi rement – single fami ly and two fami ly
– 10’ accessory st ructures such as sheds and detached garages shal l be 5’ .
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 26 -
Rear setback requirement – 15’ , accessory st ructures such as sheds and
detached garages shal l be 5’
3 . B u i l d i n g H e i g h t
Minimum building height of 1 ½ stories
4 . A r c h i t e c t u r a l S t a n d a r d s
The purpose of this section is to encourage rehabilitation of existing structures and new development that
will maintain and improve the existing New England village character of Freeport through the
incorporation of design elements that are compatible with and sensitive to existing nearby buildings of
historical, architectural, and neighborhood significance and character.
More specifically, the purpose of these standards is to:
• Retain Freeport’s historic, small town New England appeal.
• Encourage better design and site planning within Freeport village.
• Encourage compatibility of development with both community and neighborhood
characteristics.
• Encourage a scale of new development which is generally in character with the existing
surrounding neighborhoods and with Town development.
• Protect investment in the preservation and rehabilitation of existing historically
significant structures.
• Create an interesting and viable mixed use neighborhood in the downtown area.
A. Buildings with facades that exceed 50 feet in width shall include features that modulate the
façade walls in increments of thirty feet or less, in order to create variety and interest along
the public way. These features may include:
1. Recess and/or project portions of the façade, for the entire height of the building, up to
two feet from the build-to line.
2. In combination with #1, increase or decrease the height of portions of the facade.
3. If appropriate for the building use(s), recess storefronts or entrances from the overall
front of the building.
4. Provide canopies or awnings at sidewalk level.
5. Use different but compatible materials on different portions of the façade; for example,
alternate wood clapboard and wood shingles.
6. Use different but harmonious colors on different portions of the façade.
7. Use a small number of different details and/or door and window arrangements, shapes
and/or sizes along the façade.
8. Use horizontal or vertical trim bands to relieve long facades.
Use a minimal number of these features judiciously so that a larger building shall present a
human-scaled appearance along Town streets while remaining a unified design composition.
The intent of this standard is to encourage buildings with architectural relief and interest.
B. Commercial facades at the pedestrian level along public streets shall be designed using
traditional storefront design as exhibited by many of the retail buildings along Main Street in
downtown Freeport.
1. Sidewalk-level storefronts of commercial facades shall have display
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 27 -
windows comprising at least 60 percent of the storefront surface area.
2. Display windows shall have bulkheads extending from grade to between 12” and 24”
above grade, and the glass shall extend from the top of the bulkhead to at least 8 feet
above grade.
3. Multi-faceted display windows, and transom windows above the display windows, are
encouraged.
4. Mirrored or reflective glazing materials are prohibited.
5. All windows shall be detailed with sills, frames, and other architectural features
appropriate to traditional storefront design.
C. Walls that are perpendicular to a public street that are not flush with an adjacent building
shall have windows that occupy at least 25 percent of those portions of the walls that are
within 15 feet of the façade line.
D. Upper floors shall have windows that occupy at least 25 percent of the wall area on the
façade, and 20 percent for sidewalls.
E. The main building entrance shall be located on a public street, or shall have a porch and
canopy, or other architectural treatment, that announces a side or recessed entrance by
extending to the sidewalk or street. Main entrances shall be defined by features such as
transom windows, sidelights, recesses, lighting, architectural details, signs, or awnings.
F. Secondary entrances, not including emergency exits, shall be defined with features such as
awnings, signs, lighting, or plantings.
G. Buildings located at street intersections should be built or renovated to accentuate the corner
with a corner entrance, corner display window, or other distinctive architectural feature.
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 28 -
A p p r o v a l P r o c e s s
No application for a building permit, site plan approval or subdivision approval within the
Freeport Village Overlay District shall be finally approved until the applicant has received a
Design Standard Certificate under these Design Standards as they are applicable. For projects
which do not require site plan review and/or subdivision review, the Design Standard Certificate
shall be issued by the Codes Enforcement Officer, except that either the Codes Enforcement
Officer or the applicant may choose instead to have the application reviewed by the Project
Review Board. For projects requiring site plan review and/or subdivision review, the Design
Standard Certificate shall be issued by the Project Review Board (or Staff Review Board, where
applicable).
Where the Codes Enforcement Officer has the authority to issue a Design Standard Certificate,
review under these Design Standards shall be undertaken simultaneously with the processing of
the application for a building permit.
Where the Project Review Board (or the Staff Review Board) has the authority to issue a Design
Standard Certificate, review under these Design Standards shall be undertaken simultaneously
with site plan review and/or subdivision review.
In addition to the submissions otherwise required for a building permit, site plan review or
subdivision review, the applicant seeking a Design Standard Certificate shall submit the
following information:
Site Plan
A plan of the site, at a scale of no greater than 1" = 50', that illustrates lot boundaries, any
easements, ROW or other legal limitations set on the property, existing structures and roads, any
existing trees over 12" in caliper, the location of the proposed building or renovation, any
proposed landscaping including plant material, walkways, drives, walls, fences, lighting,
signage, service areas, transformers, propane tanks or other utility requirements. The Plan shall
also indicate the current zone, applicable setbacks, and size of lot. An applicant for site plan or
subdivision approval need not submit a separate plan if the foregoing information is contained
on the site plan or subdivision plan.
Elevations
Elevations, at a minimum scale of 1" = 16'-0", of all exposed sides of the proposed building or
renovations. The elevations shall indicate proposed materials, roof pitches, finished grade and
building height.
Photographs
For projects that involve the addition to, or reconstruction to a structure, photographs of the
facades shall be submitted, in order to evaluate the existing conditions against the proposed
elevations.
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 29 -
A c t i o n o n A p p l i c a t i o n s f o r D e s i g n
S t a n d a r d C e r t i f i c a t e
A. The application for a Design Standard Certificate shall be made in the Town Office on
forms provided therefore. If Site Plan Review or Subdivision review is required, the preapplication
conference is recommended with the Town Planner. Each application shall be
accompanied by such sketches, drawings, photographs, descriptions, or other information
showing the proposed alterations, additions, reconstruction, or changes or new
construction as may be required for the Board to make a decision.
B. The staff shall transmit the application for a Design Standard Certificate, together with the
supporting information and material, to the Board at its next meeting for examination and
approval. The Board shall act within 60 days from the date the applicant files a completed
application and pays all required application fees and outside professional services deemed
necessary. If the Board does not act within 60 days, the application is deemed to be
approved and a Design Standard Certificate shall be issued.
C. Nothing herein shall prohibit an extension of time, by a formal action for a specific period
of time, for review and approval of the application if the parties have mutually agreed that
more information and/or discussion are required. Unless the Board disapproves an
application, a Design Standard Certificate shall be issued with or without conditions.
When the Board disapproves an application, its reasons shall be issued to the applicant in
written form.
D. If an activity regulated by these Design Standards also requires a building permit, the
permit shall not be issued until the Design Standard Certificate is granted.
E. The Project Review Board shall conduct a simultaneous review if Site Plan review and/or
Subdivision review is required.
A p p e a l P r o c e s s
A. Appeals from a decision of the Codes Enforcement officer under these Design Standards
may be taken to the Project Review Board.
B. Appeals from a decision of the Project Review Board under these Design Standards may be
taken to the Board of Appeals.
1. Administrative Appeals
a. Any person who has participated before the Project Review Board and can
demonstrate particularized injury may appeal the final decision of the Project
Review Board on an application for a Design Certificate to the Board of Appeals
within 30 days after the Project Review Board has issued its written decision. The
appeal must be in writing and must be accompanied by a filing fee which shall be
established by the Town Council
b. The Board of Appeals shall consider the appeal at a meeting held within 60 days of
receipt of the written request for an appeal. The Board of Appeals shall publish the
time, date, and place of the meeting in a newspaper of area-wide circulation a
minimum of 7 days prior to the meeting. Written notice of the meeting shall be sent
F r e e p o r t V i l l a g e D e s i g n S t a n d a r d s
- 30 -
to all owners of property within 200 feet from the property which is the subject of
the appeal a minimum of 10 days prior to the meeting. The meeting is a public
proceeding as defined by law.
c. The Board of Appeals shall not conduct a de novo hearing, but shall review the
record of the proceeding before the Project Review Board. If the Board of Appeals
finds the Project Review Board record to be insufficient, the Board of Appeals may
remand the matter to the Project Review Board for findings and conclusions or for
further proceedings, findings and conclusions.
d. The Board of Appeals may allow persons to present their positions orally or in
writing, based on the record of the proceedings before the Project Review Board.
The Board of Appeals shall not receive new evidence, including testimony or
exhibits, which is not part of the record of the proceedings before the Project
Review Board.
e. The Board of Appeals may reverse the decision of the Project Review Board, in
whole or in part, only upon a finding that the decision is contrary to the provisions
of these Design Standards or that the decision is unsupported by substantial
evidence in the record.
f. The decision of the Board of Appeals shall be in writing and shall contain findings
and conclusions that clearly state, on all relevant factual and legal issues, the action
taken by the Board and the reasons for such action. The Board of Appeals shall
adopt its written decision within 21 days of the meeting, unless the Board makes a
finding that it is unable to do so, or unless an extension has been agreed upon
amongst the parties.
2. Appeals to Superior Court
Appeals of decisions of the Board of Appeals under these Design Standards shall be to
Superior Court according to the provisions of the Maine Rule of Civil Procedure 80B.
C o n f l i c t D e s i g n R e v i e w
O r d i n a n c e
Where these standards impose a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings or structures,
the provisions of these standards shall control.
W A I V E R S O F S T A N D A R D S
Where the project Review Board makes written findings of fact that, due to a special
circumstance of a particular parcel proposed to be developed or modified in some way, the
provision of certain standard is not required to provide for the public health, safety, and welfare,
or is inappropriate or unnecessary to a special or unique attribute of the property, the Board may
waive such standard or standards provided the waivers do not have the effect of nullifying the
intent and purpose of the Freeport Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Ordinance, the Design
Review Ordinance, or these Design Standards and provided the public health, safety, and welfare
will not be compromised by the waiver.
Freeport Village Design Standards
Applicability Chart
Existing Single Family
New Single Family
Existing Duplex
New Duplex
Existing Multi-Family
New Multi-Family
Subdivision, with road
Projects for Site Plan Review
Projects for Site Plan Review, VMU 1, 2, 3
VMU-1 Only
Requirement Location
Lot Requirements (Setbacks) Section 1, pages 6-7
Minimum Roof Pitch Section 1, pages 6-7
ResidentIal Architecture Section 2, pages 8-12
Lighting Section 3, pages 13-14
General Landscape Principles Section 3, pages 14-15
Shrubs and Ornamental Plantings Section 3, pages 15
Landscape Maintenance Section 3, pages 15
Buffers Section 3, pages 16
Screening Section 3, pages 16-17
Plant Material List Section 3, pages 17-19
Street Trees Section 3-A, pages 19-20
Roads Section 3-A, pages 20-21
Cul-de-sacs and Dead End Roads Section 3-A, pages 21
Sidewalks Section 3-A, pages 21-22
Bicycle Lanes and Paths and Trails Section 3-A, pages 22-23
Lot Requirements (Setbacks) VMU-1 Section 4.2, page 25
Min. Building Height Section 4.3, page 26
Architectural Standards Section 4.4, pages 26-27
Design Standard Certificate - Codes Enf. Off. pages 5, and 28-31
Design Standards Certificate - Proj. Rev. Bd. pages 5, and 28-31
M W
R R 1
R R 1
R R 2
R R 1
C 1
I 2
R R 2
R P 2
M D A
V 1
R R 1
M D B
V 2
R P 2
R R 2
R P 2
M D R 1
M D R
2
C 3
I 1
M D R 1
V C
1
C 4
R P 2
B UST I N S
I D
I D
M D R
2
L B
R P 2
I D
R R 1A
V C 2
I D
V C
3
I D
V M U
2
V C
4
I D
R P 1
I D
V M U
1
I D
I D
I D
Adopted
BUSTINS
Island District ID
Parcels (2012)
Setback from top of bank
Marine Waterfront MW
Stream Protection SP
Shoreland Area SA
Protected Eagle's Nests
Text
Town of Freeport
Official Zoning Map
0 1,900 3,800 7,600 11,400 15,200
Feet
Legend
Zoning Districts
Commercial 1 C1
Commercial 3 C3
Commercial 4 C4
Industrial 1 I1
Industrial 2 I2
Local Business LB
Medium Density A MDA
Medium Density B MDB
Medium Density Residential 1 MDR1
Medium Density Residential 2 MDR2
Resource Protection 1 RP1
Resource Protection 2 RP2
Rural Residential 1 RR1
Rural Residential 1A RR1A
Rural Residential 2 RR2
Village Commercial 1 VC1
Village Commercial 2 VC2
Village Commercial 3 VC3
Village Commercial 4 VC4
Village Mixed Use 1 VMU-1
Village Mixed Use 2 VMU-2
Village 1 V1
Village 2 V2
µ
Amended 4/23/2019
1
DESIGN REVIEW ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 22
Section I Purpose
A. General Purpose
The center of the Town of Freeport is a mixed residential and business use district. District
1 is comprised predominantly of buildings which were constructed before 1930. It includes
the Main Street Historic District, many significant historic buildings representing a variety of
architectural styles, other buildings which contribute to the historic setting, and a number of
contemporary buildings. District 2 is predominantly residential with a few businesses and is
wedged between the Main Street Historic District and the Harraseeket Historic District. The
purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general
welfare of the Town of Freeport, to provide for the protection and preservation of buildings,
structures and places of historic value, and to promote design which is compatible with the
present character of Freeport, pursuant to the provisions of Title 30 M.R.S.A. Section 1917
as amended.
B. Specific Intent
It is the specific intent of this Ordinance to:
1. Encourage the continued use of existing historically or architecturally important
buildings and those which contribute to the character of the Districts and discourage
their demolition and removal;
2. Prevent inappropriate alterations of buildings of historic value;
3. Assure that new buildings are designed and built in a manner compatible with the
character of the Districts in terms of scale and visual effect;
4. Assure that changes to contemporary buildings and new construction do not detract
from adjacent historic buildings.
Section II Definitions
Architectural Significance
A building or structure shall be determined to have architectural significance if it embodies
distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction, represents the work of
a master architect or builder, or possesses high artistic values.
Building
Wherever the word "building" is used, it also refers to all structures and places (i.e.
cemeteries, parks, etc.) which may or may not have buildings located on them and which are
classified under this Ordinance.
Demolition
The permanent removal, dismantling or destruction of all or any portion of an existing
building or structure or any related attachment, appurtenance or accessory to that building.
2
Districts
In this Ordinance, Districts refers to the Freeport Design Review Districts.
Historical Significance
A building or structure shall be determined to have historical significance if it is associated
with events which have contributed to the formation and development of the Town of
Freeport, if it is associated with the lives of people who have been important to the
community or if it has made a contribution to the broader patterns of our common history.
Material Change
Material change is defined as a modification to the architectural style, general design and
general arrangement of the exterior of a building or structure, including but not limited to the
kind of texture of the building materials and the type and style of all windows, the colors of a
building, doors, light fixtures, other appurtenant fixtures and other features such as walks,
walls, fences, signs, driveways and parking areas. In addition, all activities that affect the
exterior of the building and require a building permit are also included in this definition.
Neighborhood Significance
A building shall have neighborhood significance if it contributes to the creation of a physical
setting representing a period important in the evolution of the Town. It is understood, in this
case, that the physical setting, which is composed of buildings, landscape features and open
space, and other natural and architectural features, can transcend the sum of its parts in
creating a sense of history.
Some examples of situations in which a building would have neighborhood significance are:
it is one of a group of similar buildings constructed and/or designed by an individual
important in Freeport history; it is a compatible element in a group of buildings of similar or
equally important significant architectural styles; its location (i.e., on a corner lot, on a rise of
land, or a curve, on a large parcel of land, as the first building to visually introduce an
important group of buildings) makes it an important element in the neighborhood; its size
gives it a dominant place in the neighborhood.
Reconstruction
The rebuilding, or constructing again, of a building or part of a building. The reconstruction
may or may not be a return to the original design of the building.
Rehabilitation
The upgrading of a building, previously in a dilapidated or substandard condition, for human
habitation or use. Rehabilitation does not necessarily retain the building's original
architectural features.
Restoration
The replication or reconstruction of a building's original architectural features. Restoration
usually describes the technique of preserving historic buildings.
3
Violation
It shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance if an applicant fails to comply with the plans
and conditions as approved by the Project Review Board when it issued the Design
Certificate, and/or if any activity listed in Section V is carried on without first obtaining a
Design Certificate which permits the activity to proceed.
Visually Compatible
It is not the intent that all buildings in a neighborhood should look the same, but that a mix of
styles, sizes, etc. that blend together well shall be allowed and that facade designs that
predate 1930 in Design Review District 1 and 1950 in Design District 2 be encouraged, but
not necessarily required.
Section III Name and Boundaries
A. Classifications
Within the Freeport Design Review Districts, all buildings shall be classified and designated
as shown on the map annexed hereto and made a part hereof as Exhibit A. All buildings
shall be divided into three classifications as follows:
1. Class A - Buildings existing in 1930 in Design Review District 1 and 1950 in Design
District 2 which have major architectural, historical and/or neighborhood
significance;
2. Class B - All buildings existing in 1930 in Design Review District 1 and 1950 in
Design District 2 which have architectural, historical and/or neighborhood
significance;
3. Class C - Buildings not classified A or B.
B. Classification Procedure
Three categories - historical, architectural and neighborhood significance - were rated for
each building in the Districts. In District 1 on buildings constructed before 1930, and in
District 2 on buildings constructed before 1950. A scale of 1 to 5 points, with 5 as the
highest number of points, was used for each category. The maximum total number of points
a building could receive was 15 and the minimum number of points was 3. All buildings
receiving total scores of 12 to 15 points were rated A. All buildings receiving total scores of
7 to 11 points were rated B. All other buildings were rated C.
C. Reclassification
Buildings may be reclassified to A, B, or C upon recommendation of the Project Review
Board to the Town Council. A public hearing will be held by the Council following
sufficient written notice to the owners of the affected property and the posting of notice in the
Council's normal manner. New buildings shall be Class C buildings regardless of prior or
other classifications on a parcel without action by the Town Council.
The Council may adopt a resolution designating one or more buildings or structures A, B, or
C utilizing the following criteria:
1. Architectural, historical and neighborhood significance;
4
2. Suitability for preservation or restoration.
Upon adoption of the resolution, the owners and occupants of each newly reclassified
building shall be given written notification of such reclassification by the Council.
D. Design Review Districts
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following Districts are recognized:
1. Design Review District 1
2. Design Review District 2
3. Color Overlay District
The Design Review Map, which may be amended from time to time shall be the final
authority as to the boundary of the Districts.
Section V Design Certificate
A. Project Review Board
In considering applications for permits, the Project Review Board shall use the guidelines
appearing in Section VIII of this Ordinance. A Design Certificate shall be required before a
permit to proceed is issued for any of the following:
1. Any demolition of a building classified A or B;
2. Any moving of a building classified A or B;
3. Any material change in the exterior appearance of existing buildings classified as A
or B by additions, reconstruction or alteration;
4. Any new construction of a building or accessory building or structure subject to view
from a public street or public right of way within the Districts;
5. Any material change in existing walks, walls, fences, signs, driveways and parking
areas or construction of new walls, fences, driveways, and parking areas if subject to
view from a public street or public right of way within the Districts. Public
improvements by the Town of Freeport or its agents in the public right of way are
exempt from this requirement;
6. Any proposed new, or material change of any type of lighting if subject to view from
a public street or public right of way within the Districts;
7. Any material change in the exterior appearance of existing Class C buildings by
addition, reconstruction or alteration, if subject to view from a public street or public
right of way within the Districts;
8. Material changes to existing or additional signage on Class A, B, and C buildings and
sites.
9. Color changes to the exterior of Class A, B, or C buildings within the Color Overlay
District only if the color is not included on the palette of historical colors of any paint
manufacturer.
5
B. Administrative Review
The Town Planner shall have the authority to review and make a decision on the following
proposed minor modifications to a project in the Design Review Districts. Both the Town
Planner and the applicant may request that the application be reviewed
by the Project Review Board. The Town Planner shall make a decision on the application
within 14 days of submittal of a complete application.
1. Minor modifications to previously approved signs which do not change the visual
appearance of the signs. Examples would be substitution of a name or modest color
and/or design changes.
2. Minor additions of signage which will not materially change the visual appearance of
the site. Examples would be the addition of new directional signs and non-business
residential name signs.
Section VI Project Review Board
A. Four members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. The Board shall act on an application
by voting on a motion to approve (with or without conditions) or a motion to deny. A motion
to approve prevails and the application is approved unless four members vote against the
motion. A motion to deny fails and the application is approved unless four members vote in
favor of the motion. An application is denied only if four members vote against a motion to
approve or in favor of a motion to deny. The Board shall adopt rules for the transaction of its
business and consideration of applications which shall provide for the time and place of
regular meetings and for the calling of special meetings.
B. The Board may from time to time issue publications describing design guidelines or
standards which further the purposes of this Ordinance.
C. The Board, subject to the Town Council's prior consent, shall have the right to retain and pay
for the services and expenses of professional help required in carrying out the purposes of
this Ordinance. The cost of such services shall be borne by the applicant.
D. The Board shall hold a public hearing on a Category I application. Notice requirements shall
follow the regulations required by the Freeport Zoning Ordinance for Site Plan review by the
Freeport Project Review Board.
Section VII Action on Applications for Design Certificate
A. The application for a Design Certificate shall be made in the Town Office on forms provided
thereof. For Category I applications, a pre-application conference with the Town Planner is
required. If Site Plan Review is also required, the pre-application conference shall be with
the Town Planner. Each application shall be accompanied by such sketches, drawings,
photographs, descriptions or other information showing the proposed alterations, additions,
changes or new construction as may be required for the Board to make a decision.
6
B. The staff shall transmit the application for a Design Review Certificate, together with the
supporting information and material, to the Board at its next meeting for examination and
approval. The Board shall act within 60 days from the date the applicant files a completed
application and pays all required application fees and outside professional services deemed
necessary. If the Board does not act within 60 days, the application is deemed to be
approved and a Design Certificate shall be issued.
C. Nothing herein shall prohibit an extension of time, by a formal action for a specific period of
time, for review and approval of the application if the parties have mutually agreed that more
information and/or discussion is required. Unless the Board disapproves an application, a
Design Certificate shall be issued with or without conditions. When the Board disapproves
an application, its reasons shall be issued to the applicant in written form.
D. If an activity regulated by this Ordinance also requires a building permit, the permit shall not
be issued until the Design Certificate is granted.
E. The Project Review Board shall conduct a simultaneous review if Site Plan review is
required.
Section VIII Design Guidelines
A. Buildings Classified as A or B
1. A or B Buildings: Any building classified as A or B, or any part of appurtenance
thereof, including but not limited to walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, driveways, parking
areas and paving shall only be moved, reconstructed, altered or maintained in a manner
that will preserve its historical, architectural and neighborhood significance. When
making that determination, recognition shall be given to the design and placement of
buildings previously on the site and their past relationship with surrounding buildings.
2. Demolition or Removal of A or B Buildings: Should a property owner want to demolish
or remove all or any portion of a building classified A or B, a four (4) month notice of the
proposed demolition or removal shall be given before a demolition or removal permit is
issued. The owner of the affected building shall cause notice to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation at least three (3) times prior to demolition or removal.
The first notice shall be published no later than fifteen (15) days after the application for
a permit for demolition or removal is filed and the final notice shall be published
approximately fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the Project Review Board meeting
where action on the application is expected. The purpose of this section is to further the
purposes of this Ordinance by preserving buildings classified A or B which are important
to the architectural, historical and neighborhood significance of the Town, and to afford
the Town, interested persons, historical societies or organizations the opportunity to
acquire or to arrange for preservation of such buildings. The notice of the proposed
removal shall be forwarded to the Freeport Historical Society, the Freeport Town Council
and the Freeport Planning Board. The Project Review Board shall conduct a public
7
hearing prior to its vote on an application to provide an opportunity for public comment
of the proposed demolition or removal.
In addition, the property owner shall also submit a statement to the Board describing the
need for demolition and why the building can’t be saved or renovated for another use.
3. Negotiation to Avoid Demolition: During this four (4) month period, the Board may
negotiate with the owner of the property and with any other parties in an effort to find a
means of preserving the property. Such negotiations may include relocation to a new
site, recommendation for a historic easement pursuant to Section XI of this Ordinance,
adaptive re-use of the structure, or inducements to interested third parties to purchase the
property for the purpose of preserving it. The Project Review Board may issue a permit
to remove a building prior to the expiration of the 4 month notice period if adequate
provisions are made to move the building for the purpose of preserving it.
B. Buildings Classified as C
The construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any building and its appurtenances
classified as "C" shall be generally of such design, size, building material, texture, and
location on the lot as will be compatible with other buildings in the Districts and particularly
those designated "A" or "B".
The intent of this section is not to require that a contemporary or "C" building be constructed
or altered to meet a specific architectural style (i.e., colonial, federal, etc.). Rather,
compatibility with other buildings shall be determined by factors such as: type and style of
buildings previously on the parcel, historical design of the buildings and relationship with
surrounding buildings.
C. Design Guidelines for All Buildings Within the Districts Newly constructed or reconstructed
buildings as well as existing buildings and their appurtenances, which have been altered,
repaired or moved, shall be visually compatible with the buildings, squares and places to
which they are visually related and specifically with nearby and/or adjacent "A" or "B"
buildings in terms of the following factors:
1. Scale of the Building. The scale of a building depends on its overall size, the mass of
it in relationship to the open space around it, and the sizes of its doors, windows,
porches and balconies. The scale gives a building "presence"; that is, it makes it
seem big or small, awkward or graceful, overpowering or unimportant. The scale of a
building should be visually compatible with its site and with its neighborhood.
2. Height. A sudden dramatic change in building height can have a jarring effect on the
streetscape, i.e., the way the whole street looks. A tall building can shade its
neighbors and/or the street. The height or buildings should be visually compatible
with the heights of the buildings in the neighborhood.
3. Proportion of Building's Front Facade. The "first impression" a building gives is that
of its front facade, the side of the building which faces the most frequently used
8
public way. The relationship of the width to the height of the front facade should be
visually compatible with that of its neighbors.
4. Rhythm of Solids to Voids in Front Facades. When you look at any facade of a
building, you see openings such as doors or windows (voids) in the wall surface
(solid). Usually the voids appear as dark areas, almost holes, in the solid and they are
quite noticeable, setting up a pattern or rhythm. The pattern of solids and voids in the
front facade of a new or altered building should be visually compatible with that of its
neighbors.
5. Proportions of Opening within the Facility. Windows and doors come in a variety of
shapes and sizes; even rectangular window and door openings can appear quite
different depending on their dimensions. The relationship of the height of windows
and doors to their width should be visually compatible with the architectural style of
the building and with that of its neighbors.
6. Roof Shapes. A roof can have a dramatic impact on the appearance of a building.
The shape and proportion of the roof should be visually compatible with the
architectural style of the building and with those of neighboring buildings.
7. Relationship of Facade Materials. The facades of a building are what give it
character, and the character varies depending on the materials of which the facades
are made and their texture. In Freeport, many different materials and colors are used
on facades - clapboards, shingles, patterned shingles, brick - depending on the
architectural style of the building. The facades of a building, particularly the front
facade, should be visually compatible with those of other buildings around it. In the
Color Overlay District colors shall be compatible with historic buildings and the
colors should not dominate the architectural features of the building and other
buildings around it.
8. Rhythm of Spaces to Building on Streets. The building itself is not the only thing you
see when you look at it; you are also aware of the space where the building is not, i.e.,
the open space which is around the building. Looking along a street, the buildings
and open spaces set up a rhythm. The rhythm of spaces to buildings should be
considered when determining visual compatibility, whether it is between buildings or
between buildings and the street (setback).
9. Site Features. The size, placement and materials of walks, walls, fences, signs,
driveways and parking areas may have a visual impact on a building. These features
should be visually compatible with the building and neighboring buildings.
10. In addition to the requirements of the Freeport Sign Ordinance, signs in the Freeport
Design Review Districts shall be reviewed for the following: materials, illumination,
colors, lettering style, location on site or building, size and scale. Minor changes that
do not alter the dimensions or lettering style of an existing sign need not be reviewed,
i.e. personal name changes for professional offices, or changes in hours of operation.
9
See Special Publication: "Sign Application Requirements".
Section IX Appeals
Appeals from a decision of the Project Review Board under this Ordinance may be taken to the
Board of Appeals.
1. Administrative Appeals
a. Any person who has participated before the Project Review Board and can
demonstrate particularized injury may appeal the final decision of the Project
Review Board on an application for a Design Certificate to the Board of
Appeals within 30 days after the Project Review Board has issued its written
decision. The appeal must be in writing and must be accompanied by a filing
fee which shall be established by the Town Council
b. The Board of Appeals shall consider the appeal at a meeting held within 60
days of receipt of the written request for an appeal. The Board of Appeals
shall publish the time, date, and place of the meeting in a newspaper of areawide
circulation a minimum of 7 days prior to the meeting. Written notice of
the meeting shall be sent to all owners of property within 200 feet from the
property which is the subject of the appeal a minimum of 10 days prior to the
meeting. The meeting is a public proceeding as defined by law.
c. The Board of Appeals shall not conduct a de novo hearing, but shall review
the record of the proceeding before the Project Review Board. If the Board of
Appeals finds the Project Review Board record to be insufficient, the Board of
Appeals may remand the matter to the Project Review Board for findings and
conclusions or for further proceedings, findings and conclusions.
d. The Board of Appeals may allow persons to present their positions orally or in
writing, based on the record of the proceedings before the Project Review
Board. The Board of Appeals shall not receive new evidence, including
testimony or exhibits, which is not part of the record of the proceedings before
the Project Review Board.
e. The Board of Appeals may reverse the decision of the Project Review Board,
in whole or in part, only upon a finding that the decision is contrary to the
provisions of this Ordinance or that the decision is unsupported by substantial
evidence in the record.
f. The decision of the Board of Appeals shall be in writing and shall contain
findings and conclusions that clearly state, on all relevant factual and legal
issues, the action taken by the Board and the reasons for such action. The
Board of Appeals shall adopt its written decision within 21 days of the
meeting, unless the Board makes a finding that it is unable to do so, or unless
an extension has been agreed upon amongst the parties.
2. Appeals to Superior Court
Appeals of decisions of the Board of Appeals under this Ordinance shall be to
Superior Court according to the provisions of the Maine Rule of Civil Procedure 80B.
10
Section X Acquisition of Historic Easements
The town may acquire, by purchase or donation, historic easements in any area within its
jurisdiction wherever and to the extent that the Town Council, upon the recommendation of the
Board, determines that the acquisition will be in the public interest. For the purpose of this
section, the term "historic easement" means any easement, restriction, covenant or condition
running with the land, designed to preserve, maintain or enhance all or part of the existing state
of places of historic, architectural, or neighborhood significance.
Section XI Ordinary Maintenance Allowed; Public Safety
A. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair
of any exterior feature in the Districts which does not involve a change in design, material, or
outer appearance.
B. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration,
restoration or demolition of any such feature which the Codes Enforcement Officer shall
certify is required by the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition.
Section XII Exceptions
This ordinance does not apply to:
1) signs erected and maintained by a governmental entity pursuant to and in discharge of
a governmental function, or
2) signs otherwise required by law, ordinance or governmental regulation.
Section XIII Enforcement
A. It shall be the duty of the Codes Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance. If the Codes Enforcement Officer shall find that any of the provisions of this
Ordinance are being violated, he shall notify, in writing, the person responsible for such
violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct
it, including but not limited to the discontinuance of the activities undertaken without
obtaining a Design Certificate as required by the Ordinance.
B. The Codes Enforcement Officer shall inspect, from time to time, those buildings, structures
and any appurtenances for which a Design Certificate has been issued to ensure compliance
with the terms contained in the Certificate. If the Codes Enforcement Officer shall find that
any of the terms contained in the Certificate are being violated, he shall notify, in writing, the
person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the
action necessary to correct it.
C. When any violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be found to exist, and the
violation is not corrected after order of the Codes Enforcement Officer pursuant to
11
Paragraphs A or B of this section, the Codes Enforcement Officer shall notify the Town
Manager, who shall then initiate any and all actions to be brought in the name of the Town.
The Town Manager shall notify the Town Council before any formal action begins.
D. A Design Certificate, secured under the provisions of this Ordinance, shall expire if the work
is not commenced within two (2) years of the date on which it is granted, An extension of
one (1) year may be granted by the Board provided the extension is applied for before the
approval expires.
E. Failure to obtain a Design Certificate before construction commences shall result in a fine of
One-Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00).
Section XIV Penalties
A. Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a civil violation
and shall be punished by a fine of not more than One-Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) and not
less than One-Hundred Dollars ($100.00).
B. For the purpose of this Ordinance, each day during which there exists any violation of any
provision herein shall constitute a separate violation of such provisions.
Section XV Separability
If any provision of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is
held invalid, the remainder of this Ordinance and the application of such provisions to other
persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
Section XVI Fees
All applications for design review approval shall be accompanied by a fee as described below:
Category I - $165.00
Renovations or new construction of significant scale to require a normal review by the
Board.
Category II - $55.00
Renovations or new construction of a minor scale that would require limited review by
the Board.
The staff person for the Project Review Board will determine the Fee to be paid. Any applicant
aggrieved by the staff person's decision may appeal to the Project Review Board. The Board can
overturn the staff person's decision by a majority vote of the entire Board.
Section XVII Conflict with Other Ordinances
This Ordinance shall not repeal, annul, or in any way impair or remove the necessity of
compliance with any other rule, regulation, bylaw, permit or provision of law.
12
Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon buildings or structures, the
provisions of this Ordinance shall control.
Amended 04/23/2019 adding section XII Exceptions



Amended July 21, 2015
1
TOWN OF FREEPORT
CHAPTER 23
FREEPORT SIGN ORDINANCE
Section 1 - Def initions
1.1 Bi l lboard - A structure designed, intended or used for advert ising a
product , property, business, entertainment , service, amusement or the l ike,
and not located where the mat ter advert ised is avai lable or occurs. A
bi l lboard is deemed not to be a sign as otherwise defined herein.
1.2 Business or Establ ishment - A business or establ ishment occupying an
ent ire bui lding or a part of a bui lding. A business occupying part of a
bui lding must meet the fol lowing condi t ions in order to be el igible for the
signage described in Sect ion 5.5 below: accessed by i ts own separate
entrance door; surrounded by permanent floor to cei l ing wal ls and
containing a minimum of 500 square feet of int erior floor area.
1.3 Directory Board - A wal l sign erected on a bui lding wal l at the ground
floor level and containing name ident ificat ion for more than one act ivi ty
or business located on a single bui lding or a group of bui ldings. Each
l ist ing shal l be no larger than one (1) square foot . A directory board shal l
be considered to be one wal l sign.
1.4 Free Standing Sign - A sign supported by one or more uprights or braces
permanent ly affixed into the ground.
1.5 Ground Sign - An outdoor sign which is direct ly and permanent ly
supported and physical ly separated from any other structure and contains
informat ion on act ivi t ies or businesses. A ground sign shal l have a
maximum height of 25' from the ground level . It shal l not be erected in or
project over the publ ic right -of-way.
1.6 Identif ication Sign - A sign indicat ing the locat ion of, or direct ion to, a
separate funct ion performed wi thin one port ion of that bui lding. Examples
of ident ificat ion signs are: "entrance", "exi t", "audi torium", etc.
Ident ificat ion signs do not name or advert ise the act ivi ty conducted wi thin
or wi thout the premises.
1.7 Kiosk - A free standing structure erected on a sui table foundat ion and
designed to provide advert ising space for a bui lding or a group of
bui ldings containing three or more businesses on a single premises or
group of cont iguous premises
Amended July 21, 2015
2
1.8 Person - Includes a firm, associat ion, organizat ion, partnership, trust
company, or corporat ion as wel l as an individual but does not include a
governmental uni t .
1.9 Premises - One or more parcels of land which are in the same ownership
and are cont iguous.
1.10 Publ ic Way - Any way designed for vehicular or pedestrian use and is
maintained wi th publ ic funds.
1.11 Portable Sign - A sign not designed or intended to be permanent ly affixed
into the ground or to a structure. Movable direct ional signs are not
considered to be portable signs.
1.12 Projecting Sign - An outdoor sign which is at tached to a wal l at an angle.
Project ing signs must clear the ground by at least eight ( 8) feet and
contain advert ising for no more than two act ivi t ies or businesses.
1.13 Roof Sign - A sign located upon or over a roof of a bui lding.
1.14 Sign - A sign is an object , device or structure, or part thereof, si tuated
outdoors or displayed in a window, visible from a publ ic way, free
standing or at tached, which is used to advert ise, ident ify, display, direct or
at tract at tent ion to an object , person, inst i tut ion, organizat ion, business,
product , service, event , or locat ion, by any means including words, let ters,
figures, design, symbols, advert ising flags, fixtures, colors, i l luminat ions
or projected images. Each face of a sign shal l const i tute a separate sign
except that a sign wi th two sign faces shal l be counted as one sign.
1.15 Sign Area - The area of the square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or
combinat ion thereof, which encompasses the facing of a sign, including
copy, insignia, background and borders. The structural supports of a sign
are to be excluded in determining the signable area. Where a support ing
structure bears more than one sign, al l such signs on the structure shal l be
considered as one sign, and so measured. The area of one face of a two -
sided sign shal l be considered in determining the total area of the sign.
1.16 Sign Face - The surface of a sign visible from the publ ic way. Each sign
face counts as one sign. Each sign face counts as one sign except that a
sign wi th two sign faces shal l be counted as one sign.
1.17 Temporary Sign - A sign or advert ising display (such as a pol i t ical
poster) designed, intended to be displayed or displayed for a short period
of t ime.
Amended July 21, 2015
3
1.18 Wal l Sign - An outdoor sign which is at tached flat to, painted on, or
pinned away from a bui lding wal l or part thereof, and does not project
more than 18 inches from the wal l .
1.19 Wal l Sign Area - The area of the facade of a bui lding up to the roof l ine.
The façade includes the gable areas for pi tched roofed bui ldings.
1.20 Visible - Capable of being seen wi thout visual aid by a person of normal
visual acui ty.
Section 2. General Provisions
2.1 Purpose - The purpose of regulat ing signs is to promote and protect the
publ ic heal th, safety and welfare by regulat ing exist ing and proposed
outdoor advert ising, outdoor advert ising signs, and outdoor signs of al l
types; to protect property values; enhance and protect the physical
appearance of the communi ty; preserve the scenic and natural beauty and
provide a more enjoyable and pleasing communi ty; to reduce sign or
advert ising distract ions and obstruct ions th at may contribute to traffic
accidents; reduce hazards that may be caused by signs overhanging or
project ing over publ ic right of way; provide more open space, and curb the
deteriorat ion of natural beauty and communi ty environment .
2.2 Sign Permits - Except as otherwise herein provided, no person shal l erect ,
modify or move any signs visible from the publ ic way wi thout first
applying for and obtaining from the Codes Enforcement Officer a sign
permi t . Appl icat ions shal l be on forms prescribed and provided by the
Codes Enforcement Officer set t ing forth such informat ion as may be
required by him for a complete understanding of the proposed work.
2.3 Maintenance and Conformance of Signs - No sign shal l be erected or
al tered except in conformi ty wi th the provi sions herein. The sign must be
kept clean, neat ly painted and free from al l hazards such as, but not
l imi ted to, faul ty wiring and loose fastenings, and must be maintained at
al l t imes in such safe condi t ion so as not to be detrimental to the publ ic
heal th or safety or detrimental to physical appearance or scenic or natural
beauty of the communi ty, or const i tute a distract ion or obstruct ion that
may contribute to traffic accidents.
2.4 General Safety Standards for Signs - No sign, whether new or exist ing,
shal l be permi t ted that causes a sight , traffic, heal th or welfare hazard or
resul ts in a nuisance due to i l luminat ion, placement , display, or manner of
construct ion.
Amended July 21, 2015
4
2.5 Exceptions - For the purpose of this ordinance, the term "sign" does not
include signs erected and maintained for publ ic safety and welfare or
pursuant to and in discharge of any governmental funct ion, or required by
law, ordinance or governmental regulat ion, nor to a "name sign" not
exceeding one (1) square foot in area ident ifying the name(s) of the
residents of the premises where such sign is located.
Section 3. - Temporary Signs
The fol lowing temporary signs are permi t ted and shal l conform to standards
wi thin municipal , state or federal ordinances, statutes or regulat ions.
Temporary signs specified in this sect ion shal l not be at tached or painted
to fences, trees, or other natural features, ut i l i ty poles, or the l ike and
shal l not be placed in a posi t ion that wi l l obstruct or impair vision or
traffic or in any manner create a hazard or disturbance to the heal th and
welfare of the general publ ic.
3.1 Temporary Pol itical Signs - Temporary pol i t ical signs on publ ic property
or wi thin publ ic rights -of-way shal l be permi t ted for a period of thirty (30)
days before the elect ion date to which the sign refers and must be removed
wi thin twenty-four (24) hours after the elect ion has occurred. The
maximum size of temporary pol i t ical signs shal l be 4 feet by 4 feet . The
Codes Enforcement Officer shal l specify and post the date and t ime that
signs can be placed on publ ic property or wi thin publ ic rights -of-way.
3.2 Temporary Real Estate Signs – a real estate sign advert ises the lease or
s al e o f l an d , s p ace o r s t r u ct u r e. A r eal es t at e s i gn f ace may n o t ex ceed 2 ’
b y 2 ’ f o r t h e s al e o r l eas e o f a resident ial structure in al l zoning districts.
Fo r al l o t h er u s es an d v acan t l an d , t h e s i gn may n o t ex ceed a 4 ’ b y 4 ’ s i gn
face in the VC-I, VC-II, VC-III, VC-IV, C-III, V-I and I-I. In al l other
d i s t r i ct s , a 4 ’ b y 8 ’ s i gn f ace i s t h e max imum s i z e al l ow ed. Al l real estate
signs must be physical ly located on the actual property for sale or lease,
and only one sign can be located per street frontage.
Real estate signs must be removed wi thin ten business days of the date of
sale or lease of property. Fr eep o r t ’ s P u b l i c Wo r k s Dep ar tmen t wi l l
remove signs that remain after the ten-day period, and violators wi l l be
charged for the cost of removal . If legal act ion is necessary to col lect
fines, violators must also reimburse the Town of Freeport for associate d
legal and court costs. Addi t ional ly, the Town wi l l not issue bui lding
permi ts or permi t the erect ion of new signs in the Town for the property
ci ted for a sign violat ion unt i l al l fines and costs have been paid.
Amended July 21, 2015
5
3.3 Temporary Banners – Temporary banners on the poles provided on Route
One, across from the intersect ion wi th Desert road shal l be al lowed by
permi t only. Only non-profi t organizat ions advert ising an event which
wi l l take place in Freeport are permi t ted to apply. Maximum t ime al lowed
for banners is 7 days. Removal is required wi thin 24 hours after the date
of the event . The hanging and removal of banners wi l l be the
responsibi l i ty of the appl icant . Permi ts wi l l be issued on a first come,
first serve basis from the Codes Officer. An appl ic at ion for a permi t must
be submi t ted in the same calendar year in which the banner is to be hung.
Only one banner, regardless of size, may be hung on the poles at any given
t ime. Only one permi t per event is al lowed. Maximum size of the banner
shal l be 42 inches by 30 feet . If there is a product sponsor(s), logos shal l
n o t ex ceed 1 0% o f t h e b an n er . Al l b an n er s s h al l comp l y wi t h t h e “Ban n er
Req u i r emen t s ” ( as may b e amen d ed f r om t ime t o t ime) o n f i l e wi t h t h e
Freeport Codes Enforcement Officer.
Section 4. - Regulations Appl icable to Signs in Al l Districts
The fol lowing provisions relat ing to signs are appl icable in al l districts.
4.1 One sign ident ifying the name, address and profession of a permi t ted home
occupat ion or a lawful ly exist ing nonconformi ng home occupat ion is
al lowed provided such sign does not exceed 6 sq. ft . in area.
4.2 A bul let in board or simi lar sign in connect ion wi th any church, museum,
l ibrary, school or simi lar publ ic structure not exceeding 12 sq. ft . is
al lowed.
4.3 No sign, except tradi t ional barber poles for l icensed barber shops, shal l
have visible moving parts, bl inking, moving or glaring i l luminat ion, or any
part consist ing of banners, pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners or other
simi lar devices. This regulat ion does not prohibi t a wal l name sign
consist ing solely of a rectangular banner made of a flexible cloth -type
material , at tached at al l corners ei ther perpendicular or flat , and
co n f o rmi n g t o al l p r o v i s i o n s o f S ect i o n 5 . 4 . In ad d i t i o n , “Op en ” f l ags ar e
permi t ted only as described in Sect ion 5.7 below.
4.4 A string of l ights shal l not be used for the purpose of advert ising or
at tract ing at tent ion unless as an integral part of a permi t ted sign.
4.5 Any sign which no longer advert ises a bonafide business conducted,
product sold, act ivi ty being conducted, or publ ic not ice, shal l be taken
down and removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use
of the bui lding or premises upon which such sign may be found wi thin ten
Amended July 21, 2015
6
(10) days after the act ivi ty has cea sed, or if the removal has not occurred,
wi thin thirty (30) days after wri t ten not ificat ion from the Codes
Enforcement Officer. Temporary signs shal l be removed in accordance
wi th Sect ion 3.
4.6 Il luminat ing signs whose specific purpose is out l ining any part of a
bui lding, such as a gable, roof, sidewalk or corner, are prohibi ted.
4.7 Il luminat ion of signs shal l be permi t ted only between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m. , except that this t ime restrict ion shal l not apply to the
i l luminated signs of emergency faci l i t ies and retai l , commercial and
industrial establ ishments during such hours as the establ ishments are
lawful ly open to the publ ic or work hours are regularly in effect .
4.8 District setback requirements shal l not apply to signs; however, no sign
shal l project over the publ ic right -of-way if i t is located in a District
which has a front setback bui lding requirement . No ground or portable
signs shal l be permi t ted in the publ ic right -of-way.
4.9 In addi t ion to the maximum number and size of s igns permi t ted,
direct ional signs solely indicat ing ingress and egress placed at driveway
locat ions, containing no advert ising material , having a display area not
exceeding five (5) square feet , and not extending higher than seven (7)
feet above ground level , are permi t ted wi th permission of the Codes
Enforcement Officer.
4.10 Nonconforming signs may cont inue but may not be al tered, rebui l t or
relocated on the same premises; however, non -conforming signs located on
land which is acquired for governmental purposes by governmental act ion
may be relocated on the same premises. Normal maintenance and repairs
are permi t ted.
4.11 In addi t ion to the maximum number and size of permi t ted signs,
ident ificat ion signs may be erected over or by the doorway or entrance to
such port ion of the bui lding. The sign area shal l not exceed ten percent
(10%) of the area of such doorway or entrance to such port ion of the
bui lding.
4.12 A sign wi th a double signboard or display area shal l be construed to be one
sign for the purpose of this Ordinance.
4.13 No portable signs shal l be permi t ted.
Amended July 21, 2015
7
4.14 There shal l be no off premises signs except as are regulated by the Town
of Freeport Direct ional Sign Ordinance. This standard shal l not apply to
businesses on separate lots that share a common access point .
4.15 Authorized Town Personnel have the authority to immediately remove any
unauthorized off premise sign.
Section 5. - Specif ic Standards
5.0 The standards of this Sect ion 5 for maximum number and maximum square
footage of signage are l imi ts which cannot be exceeded, but which do not
create any right or ent i t lement to the maximums. Signage is also regulated
by the Freeport Design Review Ordinance and the si te plan review
provisions of the Freeport Zoning Ordinance, under which the Project
Review Board may impose more stringent l imi ts.
The standards of this Sect ion 5 apply on a per bui lding basis. In
calculat ing al lowable signage, each principal bui lding together wi th i ts
accessory bui ldings or structures, if any, shal l count as one bui lding.
5.1 The fol lowing signs are not regulated by this sect ion:
5.1.1. Temporary signs;
5.1.2. Signs displayed wi thin the interior of a window of a bui lding if the
sign or grouping of signs does not occupy more than one -third of the
surface area of such window;
5.1.3. Direct ional signs as described in Sect ion 4.10.
5.1.4. Ident ificat ion signs as described in Sect ion 4.12.
5.2 Kiosk Signs
5.2.1A bui lding or a group of bui ldings on a single premises or group of
cont iguous premises containing three or more businesses, may have
one kiosk in addi t ion to the signage l imi tat ions mandated in 5.5 and
5.6 below. A bui lding or a group of bui ldings on a single premises or
group of cont iguous premises containing three or more businesses,
which is visible from two or more roads, and whose bui lding setbacks
are al l greater than 100 feet , may have two kiosks in addi t ion to the
signage l imi tat ions mandated in 5.5 and 5.6 below. In this si tuat ion,
kiosks shal l be located so that no more than one kiosk is readable
Amended July 21, 2015
8
from any locat ion. Each business wi thin the plaza or mal l may have a
sign wi thin the kiosk. They shal l al l be equal in size and shape.
5.2.2. In the VI, VC I, VC II, VC III, VMU-1, VMU-2, MDR I, LB and MD
Districts, the fol lowing requirements shal l be met :
Each business sign shal l not exceed three (3) square feet in size.
The total kiosk size may not exceed:
Twenty (20) square feet for five (5) or fewer businesses;
Thirty-five (35) square feet for six (6) to ten (10) businesses;
Fifty (50) square feet for more than ten (10) businesses.
5.2.3. In the C I, II, III, and IV, and al l Industrial zones, the fol lowing
requirements shal l be met :
Each business sign shal l not exceed six (6) square feet in size.
The total kiosk size may not exceed:
Fifty (50 square feet for five (5) or fewer businesses;
Seventy-five (75) square feet for six (6) to ten (10) businesses;
One hundred (100) square feet for more than ten (10) businesses.
5.2.4. The maximum height shal l be twenty-five (25) feet .
5.3 Ground signs
Unless otherwise provided, al l ground signs shal l conform to the fol lowing:
5.3.1. Smal l Ground Sign - The maximum gross display area of each sign
face for up to two businesses shal l not exceed thirty-two (32) square
feet measured from the tops of the topmost dis play elements to the
bot tom of the lowest display element including any blank space
between the elements. Bui ldings, or lots, or clusters of three or
more businesses sharing one access may add an addi t ional twelve
square feet per business up to a total of 80 square feet .
5.3.2 Large Ground Sign - Only on Route #1 where the speed l imi t is 40
mph or more, the maximum gross display area of each sign face for
up to two businesses shal l not exceed 64 square feet . Bui ldings, or
lots, or clusters of three or more businesses sharing one access may
add an addi t ional 12 square feet for each addi t ional business up to a
total of 100 square feet . Notwi thstanding the above, signs wi th
changeable let ters shal l not be permi t ted on or facing Interstate 95.
In addi t ion to any smal l ground signs, one large ground sign per lot ,
bui lding, or group of businesses is al lowed.
5.3.3. Maximum height is twenty-five (25) feet .
Amended July 21, 2015
9
5.3.4. Maximum side dimension is sixteen (16) feet .
5.4 Wal l , Projecting and Roof Signs
Unless otherwise provided, wal l , project ing and roof signs shal l conform to the
fol lowing:
5.4.1. Maximum gross sign area shal l not exceed ten percent (10%) of the
wal l area to which i t is at tached. Where two signs are ut i l ized, the
gross sign area shal l be the area of both signs added together.
5.4.2. Maximum height shal l be seven (7) feet above the eaves.
5.4.3. No wal l or project ing sign shal l extend beyond the wal l to which i t
is at tached or party wal l separat ing occupancies into the wal l area of
other premises.
5.5 Permitted Al lowances
5.5.1 No more than eight signs are permi t ted per bui lding, except that , if
more than four businesses or establ ishments occupy the bui lding,
then each addi t ional business or establ ishment in excess of four may
have up to two name signs containing a maximum total sign area of
50 square feet .
5.5.2 The total maximum sign area per bui lding for al l ground, wal l ,
project ing and roof signs combined shal l be l imi ted as fol lows:
Bui lding Size Maximum Sign Area
* Bui ldings containing 10,000 square 200 square feet
feet or less of gross floor area.
* Bui ldings containing more than 200 square feet plus an
10,000 square feet but less than addi t ional 35 square feet
20,000 square feet of gross for each 1,000 square
floor area. feet of gross floor area
over 10,000 square feet ,
but not to exceed 400
square feet of total sign
area.
* Bui ldings containing 20,000 400 square feet plus an
square feet or more of addi t ional 100 square
Amended July 21, 2015
10
gross floor area: feet for each 10,000
square feet of addi t ional
gross floor area over
20,000 square feet, not
to exceed 700 square
feet of total sign area.
5.5.3 A bui lding which contains 10,000 square feet or less of gross floor
area and has at least two facades, a front façade facing a publ ic
street and a secondary façade which is visible primari ly from a rear
street or a rear parking area, may have, in addi t ion to the maximum
number and total square footage of signage al lowed . The secondary
façade may have sign(s) of up to 5% of the wal l area of that façade.
The 5% shal l include the total square footage of al l signage on the
secondary façade which exists as of June 17 1998.
A bui lding which contains more than 10,000 square feet of gross
floor area and has at least two facades, a front façade facing a publ ic
street and a secondary façade which is visible primari ly from a rear
street or a rear parking area, may have, in addi t ion to the maximum
number of signs al lowed, an addi t ional number of signs on the
secondary façade which cover up to 5% of the wal l area of the
secondary façade. The 5% shal l include the total square footage of
al l signs on the secondary façade which exists as of June 17, 1998.
Total sign area of al l signs for a bui lding shal l meet the
requirements for maximum sign area in Sect ion 5. 5.1 above. No
addi t ional sign area shal l be permi t ted for the addi t ional signs
al lowed by this provision.
5.6 Open Flags
5.6.1 In addi t ion to the maximum number, total square footage per lot and
size of permi t t ed s i gn s , “Op en ” f l ags ar e p ermi t t ed i n al l d i s t r i ct s
except on Main Street in the Vi l lage Commercial I and Vi l lage
Commercial II Districts subject to the fol lowing condi t ions:
5.6.2 Only one flag per business establ ishment shal l be permi t ted.
5.6.3 The flag shal l be flown only during open business hours.
5.6.4 The flag area is l imi ted to a maximum of sixteen (16) square feet ,
except that in the VC-I and VC-II Districts flag area is l imi ted to
twelve (12) square feet .
Amended July 21, 2015
11
5.6.5 Flag design shal l be l imi ted t o t h e s t an d ar d “Op en ” t yp e wi t h r ed ,
whi te and blue coloring only.
5.6.6 Flags that project over a Sidewalk must be at least 6.5 feet above
the sidewalk at i ts lowest hanging point and at a 45 degree or greater
angle.
5.7 Internal ly i l luminated signs
Internal ly Il luminated Signs are permi t ted in al l districts except the
Vi l lage Commercial I, Vi l lage Commercial II , Vi l lage Commercial III,
Vi l lage Mixed Use 1, and Vi l lage Mixed Use 2 districts, where they are
prohibi ted. Notwi thstanding anything to the co ntrary in 1 M.R.S.A.
Sect ion 302, any sign instal led after Apri l 1, 2003 must comply wi th this
sect ion, whether or not an appl icat ion was fi led or a permi t was issued
prior to the effect ive date of this sect ion. Any internal ly i l luminated sign
lawful ly exist ing in the Vi l lage Commercial I, Vi l lage Commercial II or
Vi l lage Commercial III districts on Apri l 1, 2003 may cont inue to be used,
maintained, or repaired wi th no design change but i t must be converted to
or replaced by a sign which is not internal ly i l luminated if changed or
modified in any way. For the purposes of this sect ion, a menu board
located at the point where customers place their orders for pickup at a
drive-up or drive-through window shal l not be considered an internal ly
i l luminated sign.
Section 6. - Fees
The fol lowing fee schedule shal l apply to al l signs except :
Temporary signs and signs displayed wi thin the border of a window if the sign or
grouping of signs does not occupy more than one -third of the surface area of
such window.
6.1 Each sign up to twelve (12) square feet - $28.
6.2 Each sign face between twelve (12) and fifty (50) square feet - $55.
6.3 Each addi t ional square foot of sign area over fifty (50) square feet - $1.
Section 7. - Administration, Enforcement, Penalty and Appeals
7.1 This Ordinance shal l be enforced by the Codes Enforcement Officer.
7.2 If the Codes Enforcement Officer finds that any provision of this
Ordinance is being violated, he shal l not ify by registered or cert ified mai l
Amended July 21, 2015
12
the person determined to be responsible for the violat ion, indicat ing the
nature of the violat ion and ordering the act ion necessary to correct i t .
7.3 The Town Counci l may order the removal of any sign which represents a
hazard to publ ic safety or which is found to be in such dis repair so that i t
fai ls to perform i ts funct ion. The owner of a sign ordered removed shal l
have 30 days to conform wi th this Ordinance before removal of the sign by
the Town.
7.4 When any violat ion of any provision of this Ordinance is found to exist ,
the Codes Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and directed to
inst i tute any act ions and proceeding that may be appropriate or necessary
to enforce the provision of this Ordinance.
7.5 Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance shal l be gui l ty of
a misdemeanor and on convict ion shal l be fined not more than $100.00.
Each day a violat ion is permi t ted to exist after not ificat ion const i tutes a
separate offense.
7.6 Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Codes Enforcement Officer may
appeal to the Board of Appeals wi thin 30 days. The Board of Appeals has
the authori ty to interpret the provisions of the Ordinance which are cal led
into quest ion and to waive the standards included in Sect ion 5 of this
Ordinance when a l i teral enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance
would resul t in t h e ap p l i can t ’ s ab i l i t y t o r eas o n ab l y ad v er t i s e t h ei r
business. In deciding what is reasonable advert ising, the Board shal l
consider the fol lowing: does the shape and size of the lot require
addi t ional signs, the number of businesses in a bui lding or on a lot , can
the number of overal l signs be reduced if the size of some signs are
increased, or some other unusual or unique feature of the lot or bui lding.
When an appeal is made to the Board of Appeals, the same not ificat ion
requirements to abut ters, as out l ined in Sect ion 602 of the Zoning
Ordinance, shal l apply.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Appeals or by an order
rendered by the Board of Appeals to remove a sign may appeal said decisio ns to
the Superior Court . The appeal shal l be fi led wi thin 30 days after the decision of
the Board of Appeals.
Section 8. - Val idity and Severabi l ity
Should any provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be inval id,
the decision shal l not inval idate any other provision of this Ordinance which can
Amended July 21, 2015
13
be given effect wi thout the inval id provision, and to this end the provisions of
this Ordinance are severable.
Section 9. - Minimum Requirements
The provisions of this Ordinance are minimum r equirements. Whenever the
requirements of this Ordinance are at variance wi th the requirements of any other
lawful ly adopted statute, rule, regulat ion, ordinance, deed restrict ion or
covenant , the most restrict ive or that imposing the higher standard shal l govern.
Section 10. - Ef fective Date
This Ordinance shal l become effect ive 30 days after December 6, 1983.
Section 11. - Waiver Provision
Sect ions of this Ordinance may be waived for hol idays and celebrat ions at the
discret ion of the Codes Enforcement Officer.
Amended January 3, 2012
DIRECTIONAL SIGN ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 24
ARTICLE I TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, DEFINITIONS
Section 101 Title
This Ordinance shall be known as the Directional Sign Ordinance of the Town of Freeport,
Maine.
Section 102 Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the health, safety and general welfare by (1)
providing tourists, travelers and other users of the public ways in the Town of Freeport with
information and guidance concerning public accommodations, facilities, commercial services and
points of scenic, cultural, historic, educational, recreational and religious interest; (2) reducing
visual distractions which post a hazard to drivers of motor vehicles and other users of the public
ways; and (3) preserving, enhancing and protecting the natural scenic beauty and other aesthetic
features of the town.
Section 103 Authority
This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to 30 M.R.S.A., Sections 1917 and 2151, and 23 M.R.S.A.,
Section 1922, as amended and supplemented to date.
Section 104 Definitions
104.1 Sign Sign means any structure, display, logo, device or representation which is
designed or used to advertise or call attention to any thing, person, activity or place
and is visible from any public way.
104.2 Official Business Directional Sign Official Business Directional Sign means a sign
erected and maintained in accordance with the Maine Traveler Informational
Services Act, 23 M.R.S.A., Sections 1901-1925, and this Ordinance, which identifies
and points the way to public accommodations and facilities, commercial services for
the traveling public, and points of scenic, historical, cultural, recreational,
educational and religious interest. The second line of the legend may be used to
indicate additional directional information such as the route number or street name.
104.3 Town Sign Frame Town Sign Frame means a structure or support assembly erected
by the Town of Freeport for the purpose of supporting and displaying a series of
2
international signs, public restrooms signs, trailblazing signs, signs for public
facilities and geographical area signs.
104.4 Trailblazing Sign A trailblazing sign is a Town sign which directs the traveling
public to LL Bean or an area of Town as well as to parking locations in that area. It
may include a logo design and/or words and numerals. It shall be located on a Town
Sign Frame and/or at roadway intersections as needed along the route to the
destination.
ARTICLE II REGULATIONS
Section 201 Sign Regulations
201.1 Compliance with Ordinance, Statute and Regulations No person may erect or maintain
any Official Business Directional Sign visible from a public way in the Town of
Freeport except as provided in this Ordinance. All Official Business Directional
Signs erected or maintained in the Town of Freeport shall also comply with
applicable provisions of the Maine Traveler Information Services Act 23 M.R.S.A.,
Section 1901-1925 and any regulations of the Maine Department of Transportation
promulgated thereunder, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance.
201.2 Size, Shape, Color and Materials
(a). Official Business Directional Signs shall be constructed from high density overlaid
plywood, or another material of similar or better quality, durability and
appearance, at least one half (1/2) inch thick, shall be of a standard size, twelve
(12) inches tall by forty-eight (48) inches wide, shall be consistent with the visual
and aesthetic character of the location and with signs previously approved, shall
bear the name of only one public accommodation, facility, service or point of
interest and directions pointing the way to such public accommodation, facility,
service or point of interest. Each sign shall consist of no more than two lines.
The background sign legend, if any, and border of all signs shall be reflectorized
with reflective sheeting to show the same shape and color for both day and night.
Reflective sheeting shall consist of a smooth, flat exterior film with spherical
glass lens elements embedded beneath the surface and a precoated adhesive
backing protected by a removable liner. Reflective sheeting shall meet the
requirements of Federal specifications LS-200B available for view at the office
of the Department of Transportation (DOT) in Augusta. The background color of
all signs shall be blue and shall be in accordance with highway blue color
tolerance charts PR-Color #3. All legends and borders shall be silver. The edges
and back of the signboards shall be sealed and painted brown. Specific color
requirements shall be in accordance with the latest color tolerance charts
3
published by the Federal Highway Administration and available for view at the
Office of the Maine Department of Transportation in Augusta. All lettering shall
be Helvetica medium lower-case lettering with initial upper-case. The
directional legend shall be located on the left edge when a left turn is required;
and the right edge of the sign when a right turn is required. The logo or symbol
shall be located on the opposite end of the sign from the directional arrow.
Illuminating by special interior or exterior supplemental lighting is not permitted.
Effective June 20, 2001, all new or replacement Official Business Directory
Signs must comply with the requirements of Subsection (a) of this Section 201.2.
Any Official Business Directory Sign lawfully existing on June 20, 2001, must
be replaced with an Official Business Directory Sign conforming to the
requirements of Subsection (a) of this Section 201.2 no later than January 1,
2003.
(b). Effective April 15, 2002, Official Business Directory Signs will no longer be
allowed on Town Sign Frames. Any Official Business Directory Signs existing
on Town Sign Frames on that date will be removed by the Town.
201.3 Location
(a). Official Business Directional Signs are prohibited in the following locations:
1. Village Commercial Zones, as described on the Official Zoning Map of
the Town of Freeport,
2. Mallet Drive,
3. Durham Road from 200 feet north of the intersection of Pownal Road to
200’ south of the intersection of Beech Hill Road,
4. Desert Road between U.S. Route 1 and Hunter Road,
5. Bow Street from Main Street to the easterly side of the railroad tracks,
6. U.S. Route 1 except in the following locations:
a. Intersections between the Southern Freeport Municipal Boundary and
800 feet northerly of the South Freeport Road/Route One intersection,
b. Within 150 feet on either side of the intersection of Pine Street and
US. Route One and the intersection of U.S. Route 1 and Desert Road,
on the easterly side of U.S. Route 1,
c. On the westerly side of U.S. Route One between the intersection of
Desert Road and U.S. Route 1 heading northerly for 420 feet only for
businesses located west of U.S. Route 1,
d. Within 500 feet on either side of the intersection of the Old County
Road/Stonewood Drive and U.S. Route 1.
e. On Route One, between 400 and 600 feet of the following intersections
with Route One: Prout Road, Upper Mast Landing Road and Allen
Range Road,
4
f. Signs for Town Facilities, including but not limited to the Police
Station, Schools, Library and Town Hall, may be located within the
Route One corridor at any intersection,
(b). The location of Official Business Directional Signs in areas of the Town where
such signs are permitted shall be determined by the Freeport Codes Enforcement
Officer who shall allow such signs only at intersections where travelers must
change direction from one public way to another to reach a business, service
facility or point of interest. Official Business Directional Signs shall be spaced
not less than 500 feet from every other Official Business Directional Signs
except for signs located at the Route One/Pine Street intersection where the
minimum distance shall be within 150 feet. When the number of Official
Business Directional Signs at an intersection requires it, the Codes Enforcement
Officer may allow up to five Official Business Directional Signs on the same set
of supporting posts, provided that there shall be at least three inches between
each such sign. The lowest sign shall be five feet above the surface of the rightof-
way; Signs located near pedestrian and parking areas may be required to have
a vertical clearance of seven feet. Each set of posts shall be spaced 500 feet from
any other signposts except at the Route One/Pine Street intersection where the
minimum distance shall be within 150 feet. No business, service, or point of
interest shall be permitted more than one sign at any one intersection approach.
Decisions of the Codes Enforcement Officer shall be subject to review by the
Town Council pursuant to Section 301.2 of this Ordinance.
(c). To obtain a permit for an Official Business Directional Sign, the business,
service facility, or point of interest must be located within a five mile radius of
the proposed location of the sign.
(d). Town Sign Frames may be erected and maintained by the Town of Freeport at
locations determined by order of the Town Council. Notwithstanding the
provisions of Subsection (a) of this section, Town Sign Frames may be located in
areas in which Official Business Directional Signs would otherwise be
prohibited.
201.4 Installation, Maintenance and Removal
(a). Applicants for a permit shall be responsible for providing signs that comply with
the requirements of this Ordinance. The Codes Enforcement Officer shall
annually inspect all Official Business Directional Signs.
(b). Any Official Business Directional Sign erected pursuant to this Ordinance which
is lost, stolen, defaced or deteriorated shall be replaced by the owner upon
notification by the Codes Enforcement Officer and reinstalled by the sign owner,
at the owner's expense. If the owner fails to provide a new Official Business
Directional sign within sixty (60) days, the Codes Enforcement Officer shall have
5
such sign removed pursuant to Subsection (d) of this section. If unusual
circumstances make it impractical to remove the sign in the proscribed time
period, the Codes Enforcement Officer may extend the time period.
(c). The Town of Freeport shall be responsible for removing Official Business
Directional Signs. The owners of any Official Business Directional Sign that
represents a business, service facility or point of interest no longer offering such
traveler assistance under that business name shall notify the Codes Enforcement
Officer to have such sign removed. The Codes Enforcement Officer shall have
any such sign removed, thirty (30) days after notice to the owner thereof, if he
becomes aware that traveler services are no longer available under the business
name.
(d). All Official Business Directional Signs which do not conform to this Ordinance
shall be removed by the by the order of the Codes Enforcement Officer.
ARTICLE III PERMITS, FEES, COSTS
301.1 Application Any person wishing to have an Official Business Directional Sign
erected shall make application for a permit to the Freeport Codes Enforcement Officer
on a form approved by the Codes Enforcement Officer, specifying the number of
signs and the location thereof.
301.2. Issuance of Permits, Standards The Codes Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit if
he determines that there is a need for such Official Business Directional Sign to guide
the traveling public, to avoid confusion, or to reduce or eliminate a safety risk. If the
Codes Enforcement Officer determines that there is no such need, then he shall deny
the application and forward the same to the Town Manager, who shall place the
application on the agenda for the next regular meeting of the Freeport Town Council.
The Town Council shall then determine whether or not there is a need for the sign to
guide the traveling public, to avoid confusion, or to reduce or eliminate a safety risk,
and shall grant or deny the application accordingly. In considering such applications,
the Town Manager and the Town Council shall presume that no need exists for any
sign directing the travelling public to any business, service facility or point of interest
located within the Village Commercial Zones as described on the Official Zoning
Map of the Town of Freeport or on U.S. Route 1 except as described in Section 201.3
above, and any such business, service facility or point of interest shall be ineligible to
receive a permit for an Official Business Directional Sign.
6
301.3 Permits Not Transferable Permits for Official Business Directional Signs are not
transferable. Any change in ownership of a business, service facility or point of
interest shall require a new application and a new permit.
301.4. Limitation on Number of Signs The Codes Enforcement Officer shall issue no more
permits than necessary to guide the traveling public, avoid confusion, and reduce or
eliminate a safety risk. In any event, no more than four (4) permits for Official
Business Directional Signs shall be issued for any one public accommodation,
facility, service or point of interest. All permits issued for Official Business
Directional Signs shall be counted in considering the number of permits issued. The
Codes Enforcement Officer shall have the ability to allow up to two additional signs
depending on the location of the business, facility, or point of interest. The decision
to allow additional signs shall be based upon the number of times a traveler must
change direction from one public way to another, and/or other physical characteristics.
Section 302 Fees
302.1 Permit Fees The Town of Freeport shall collect an annual fee for each permit issued
pursuant to this Ordinance. The fee for such permits and for the reinstallation of any
Official Business Directional Sign that is lost, stolen, defaced or deteriorated shall be
established annually by Order of the Town Council and shall reflect the cost incurred
by the Town to process permit applications and to inspect Official Business
Directional Signs. The appropriate fees shall be submitted with each application for a
permit or renewal of a permit under this Ordinance and shall apply to installation for
the remainder of the permit year but shall not be prorated for any fraction of a year.
302.2 Nonrefundable The annual permit fee shall be refunded only if the application for a
permit or renewal is denied.
Section 303 Renewal
303.1 Renewal Permits issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall be valid from the first day of
July through the thirtieth day of June of the year following the year of issuance, and
may be renewed by submitting a renewal application on a form approved by the
Codes Enforcement Officer on or before the expiration date of the permit. If, upon
the receipt of any renewal application, the Codes Enforcement Officer determines that
there is no longer a need for the sign or signs to guide the traveling public, to avoid
confusion, or to reduce or eliminate a safety risk, then the Codes Enforcement Officer
shall deny the renewal request and forward the same to the Town Manager for
determination by the Town Council in the manner prescribed in Section 301.2 of this
Ordinance. Any permit which is not renewed shall expire on the first day of January
of the year following the year of issuance.
7
Section 304 Costs
Applicants for permits for Official Business Directional Signs shall provide all signs authorized
by this Ordinance and shall be responsible for the cost of maintenance and reinstallation thereof.
ARTICLE IV VALIDITY AND PENALTY
Section 401 Validity and Penalty
401.1 Validity and Severability In the event that any section, subsection or portion of this
Ordinance shall be declared by any court to be invalid for any reason, such a decision
shall not affect the validity of the other sections, subsections or other portions of this
Ordinance.
401.2 Enforcement and Penalties This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Town of Freeport
Codes Enforcement Officer. Any person who erects, maintains or displays a sign in
violation of the requirements of this Ordinance commits a civil violation punishable
by a penalty of up to $100 together with the cost of removal of the sign. Each day a
sign is maintained or displayed in violation of this Ordinance constitutes a separate
violation.
A person served with a civil violation citation for violating this Ordinance may elect
to pay a fine of $50 for each violation alleged in the citation, in lieu of appearing in
court to answer the citation. Such payment must be received at the office of the Town
Clerk by the seventh day prior to the court appearance date specified in the citation.
Upon receipt of such payment by the Clerk, the Town shall cause the citation to be
dismissed.
Effective June 20, 2001
Subdivision Ordinance
Town of Freeport, Maine
August 4, 2015 – Amended 09/03/19
09/03/19 2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1 - PURPOSES…………………………………………….……...………………….………....5
ARTICLE 2 - AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION………………….……………………………...6
2.1….Authority…………………………………………………………….……………………..…...6
2.2….Administration……………………………...………………………….…………………..…...6
2.3….Amendments………………………………………………...…………….……………….…...6
2.4….Repeal of Prior Ordinance……………………...………………………….………………..….6
ARTICLE 3 - DEFINITIONS…………………………………………………….……………………..…7
3.1….Meaning of Words……..………………………………….………………………………..…..7
3.2.…Definitions……………………………………………..…………..……...…………………....7
ARTICLE 4 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES……………………………………….……………16
4.1….Administrative Procedures………………………………………………………………….....16
4.2….Development Review Fee………………………………………………………………….….16
ARTICLE 5 - PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURES……………………………………………………..17
5.1….Purpose………………………………………………………………………………………...17
5.2….Procedure……………………………………………………………………………………....17
5.3….Preapplication Conference, Contour Interval Determination, and Staff Site Inspection………17
5.4….Submission of Site Inventory Map and Site Analysis and Conceptual Sketch Plan…………..17
5.5….Submission Completeness……………………………………………………………………..18
5.6….Site Inventory Map, Site Analysis and Conceptual Sketch Plan Procedures……………….…18
ARTICLE 6 - MINOR SUBDIVISIONS………………………………………………………………….20
6.1.…General…………………………………………………………………………………………20
6.2.…Procedure………………………………………………………………………………………20
6.3….Submissions……………………………………………………………………………………21
6.4….Final Approval and Filing…………………………………………………………………….. 22
ARTICLE 7 - PRELIMINARY PLAN FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION…………………………………..23
7.1….Procedure…………………………..………………………………………………………..…23
7.2….Submissions…………………………………………………………………...……………….24
ARTICLE 8 - FINAL PLAN FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION………………..………………………..…..26
8.1….Procedure…………………………………………………………………..……………..……26
8.2….Submissions……………………………………………………………….……………...…....28
8.3….Final Approval and Filing…………………………………….. …….…………………..…….28
ARTICLE 9 - REVISIONS TO APPROVED PLANS………………………………………..……………30
9.1….Procedure……………………………………………………………………...….……………30
9.2….Submissions………………………………………………………………………..………..…30
9.3….Scope of Review……………………………………………………………………………….30
ARTICLE 10 - INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT………………………………………………...31
10.1….Inspection of Required Improvements……………………………………………………….31
09/03/19 3
10.2….Violations and Enforcement……………………………………………………….…………33
ARTICLE 11 - APPROVAL STANDARDS……………………………………………………………..34
11.1….Pollution……………………………………………….……………………………………..34
11.2….Sufficient Water……………………………….………….………………………………….35
11.3….Impact on Existing Water Supplies…………………………………………………………..37
11.4….Soil Erosion……………………………………………………………………………….….38
11.5….Traffic Conditions……………………………………………………………………………38
11.6….Sewage Disposal……………………………………………………………………………..51
11.7….Solid Waste…………………………………………………………………………………..52
11.8….Impact on Natural Beauty, Aesthetics, Historic Sites, Wildlife Habitat,
Rare Natural Areas, or Public Access to the Shoreline……………..………………………53
11.9….Conformance with Zoning Ordinance and Other Land Use Ordinances…………………….56
11.10…Financial and Technical Capacity…………………………………………………………...56
11.11…Impact on Water Quality or Shoreline………………………………………………………57
11.12…Impact on Ground Water Quality or Quantity………………………………………………58
11.13…Floodplain Management ……………………………………………………………………59
11.14…Identification of Freshwater Wetlands…………………………………………...………….60
11.15…Rivers, Streams, and Brooks………………………………………………………………...60
11.16…Storm Water Management…………………………………………………………………..61
11.17…Spaghetti Lots……………………………………………………………………………….63
11.18…Phosphorus Impacts on Great Ponds………………………………………………………..64
11.19…Impacts on Adjoining Municipalities……………………………………………………….64
ARTICLE 12 - PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES………………………………………………...……65
12.1…Types of Guarantees………………………………………………………………………….65
12.2…Contents of Guarantee………………………………………………………………..……....65
12.3…Escrow Account…………………………………………………………………………...….65
12.4…Letter of Credit……………………………………………………………………….………66
12.5…Phasing of Development………………………………………...……………………………66
12.6…Duration of Guarantee……………………………………………………………..………....66
12.7…Release of Guarantee…………………………………………………………………………66
12.8…Default…………………………………………………….………………………………….66
12.9…Improvements Guaranteed…………………………………………………………….….….66
ARTICLE 13 -WAIVERS……………………………………………………………………………….68
13.1…Waivers of Submission Requirements Authorized……………………………………….….68
13.2…Waivers of Standards Authorized……………………………………………………….…...68
13.3…Conditions…………………………………………………………………………………....68
13.4…Waivers to Be Shown on the Recording Plan………………………………………..……....68
ARTICLE 14 - CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL………………………………………………………..69
14.1…Standard Condition of Approval…………………………………………………….………69
ARTICLE 15 - APPEALS………………………………………………………………………..……......70
15.1…Administrative Appeals……………………………………………………………………….70
15.2…Appeals to Superior Court……………………………………………..………………….…..70
09/03/19 4
APPENDIX A – FOUR-STEP DESIGN PROCESS………………………...…………………………....71
APPENDIX B - SITE INVENTORY MAP AND SITE ANALYSIS AND CONCEPTUAL SKETCH
PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS………………………………….…….…………………..73
APPENDIX C - RECORDING PLAN REQUIREMENTS…………………………………...……….....75
APPENDIX D - MINOR SUBDIVISION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS………………..………...76
APPENDIX E - ADDITIONAL INFORMATION MAY BE REQUESTED…………………….……...79
APPENDIX F - PRELIMINARY PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS – MAJOR
SUBDIVISION………………………………………………………………………………………..81
APPENDIX G - COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION DOCUMENTS………………….…………………...84
APPENDIX H - FINAL MAJOR SUBDIVISION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS….…………..…..86
APPENDIX I - IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT SAMPLE……………………….…………....89
APPENDIX J – MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT FOR A STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
SYSTEM SAMPLE…………………………………………………………………………………….92
09/03/19 5
ARTICLE 1 - PURPOSES
The purposes of this subdivision ordinance are:
1.1 To provide for the expeditious, equitable, and efficient review of proposed subdivisions;
1.2 To establish standards for the application of the approval criteria of the State Subdivision Law,
found in Title 30-A M.R.S.A. §4401 et seq.;
1.3 To ensure that development in the Town of Freeport meets the goals and conforms to the
policies of the adopted Comprehensive Plan;
1.4 To ensure the comfort, convenience, safety, health, and welfare of the people of the Town of
Freeport;
1.5 To protect the environment and conserve the natural and cultural resources identified in the
adopted Comprehensive Plan as important to the community;
1.6 To promote the use of open space subdivision design to protect interconnected networks of open
space and establish substantial buffers along boundaries with existing protected land;
1.7 To ensure that an adequate level of services and facilities are available to the residents of new
subdivisions and that lots in subdivisions can support the proposed uses and structures;
1.8 To minimize the potential impacts from new subdivisions on neighboring properties and on the
municipality including, but not limited to Rural Management Areas, where rural atmosphere,
landscape and natural resources are at risk; and
1.9 To promote the development of an economically sound and stable community.
09/03/19 6
ARTICLE 2 - AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION
2.1 Authority.
A. This ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 30-A
M.R.S.A. §4403.
B. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Subdivision Ordinance of the
Town of Freeport, Maine.”
2.2 Administration.
A. The Project Review Board of the Town of Freeport, hereinafter called the Board, shall
administer this ordinance.
B. The provisions of this ordinance shall pertain to all land and buildings proposed for
subdivision within the boundaries of the Town of Freeport.
2.3 Amendments.
A. This ordinance may be amended by vote of the Town Council of the Town of Freeport.
B. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing prior to the adoption of any amendments
to this ordinance. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided at least seven days in
advance of the hearing.
2.4 Repeal of Prior Ordinance.
Upon adoption of this Ordinance, any prior Subdivision Ordinance (including any amendments)
is repealed.
09/03/19 7
ARTICLE 3 - DEFINITIONS
3.1 Meaning of Words.
Words and terms used in this ordinance shall have the meanings set forth in Section 3.2 below.
Words and terms which are not defined in Section 3.2 but are defined in the Zoning Ordinance
of the Town of Freeport, Maine shall have the meanings set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.
Words and terms which are not defined in either Section 3.2 or in the Zoning Ordinance shall
have their customary dictionary meanings. Where the definitions set forth in Section 3.2 of this
ordinance include regulations, restrictions, limitations, prohibitions, criteria, or standards, the
definitions constitute enforceable requirements of this ordinance.
3.2 Definitions.
Applicant: The person applying for subdivision approval under these regulations.
Average Daily Traffic (ADT): The average number of vehicles per day that enter or exit the
premises or travel over a specific section of road.
Average Lot Size: average lot size shall be calculated by adding up the area of all of the lots within
a subdivision and dividing by the number of lots. Open spaces and right-of-ways shall not
be included in this calculation.
Buffer Area: A part of a property or an entire property, which is not built upon and is
specifically intended to separate and thus minimize the effects of a land-use activity
(e.g., noise, dust, visibility, glare, etc.) on adjacent areas.
Capital Improvements Program (CIP): The municipality’s proposed schedule of future
projects listed in order of construction priority, together with cost estimates and the
anticipated means of financing each project.
Capital Investment Plan: The portion of the Comprehensive Plan that identifies the projects
for consideration for inclusion within the capital improvements program, together with
an estimate of the order of magnitude for the cost of each project.
Complete Application: An application shall be considered complete upon submission of the
required fee and all information required by these regulations, or by a vote of the Project
Review Board to waive the submission of required information. The Town Planner shall
issue a written statement to the applicant upon the determination that an application is
complete.
Comprehensive Plan: The Town of Freeport Comprehensive Plan as adopted by the Town
Council as amended.
09/03/19 8
Conceptual Sketch Plan: A plan showing the major features of the site and the preliminary,
generalized layout of proposed required open space, roads, lots, locations of suitable
septic sites if applicable, and other improvements. This plan shall be prepared by a
landscape architect or a professional engineer with expertise in civil/site engineering.
Engineering details of any proposed improvements are not required and will not be
accepted for review or consideration at this stage.
Conservation Area – Primary (Unbuildable land): The most severely constrained land with
regard to development and environmentally sensitive land as defined in net residential
acreage as unbuildable land.
Conservation Area – Secondary: Land within seventy five (75) feet of rivers or streams as
defined by the Department of Environmental Protection and other natural resource areas
of local importance included in the Freeport Open Space Plan dated July 20, 1999 and as
amended from time to time, but not those areas considered to be primary conservation
areas. In village open space subdivisions, the secondary conservation areas are those
areas shown on the Freeport Village Open Space Map 1 and Freeport Village Open
Space Map 2, dated August 2, 2005, and attached as addendum 2 of this Ordinance.
Freeport Village Open Space Map 1 shows the location of gullies, streams, and wetlands
of significance and a 200’ buffer along Interstate 295. Freeport Village Open Space
Map 2 identifies civic destinations and employment centers to determine if land within a
proposed subdivision could provide a connection or link between destinations or to a
trail that has a history of use by the public.
Conservation Easement: A nonpossessory interest in real property imposing limitations or
affirmative obligations on a piece of land as defined by Title 33 M.R.S.A. §476 as
amended from time to time.
Conservation Land: The portion of required open space to be set aside as part of an open space
subdivision, expanded open space subdivision, village open space subdivision or
commercial open space subdivision. For open space subdivisions, fifty percent (50%)
of the net residential acreage shall be conservation land. For expanded open space
subdivisions, sixty- five percent (65%) of the net residential acreage shall be
conservation land. For village open space subdivisions, thirty percent (30%) of the net
residential acreage shall be conservation land. For commercial open space
subdivisions, twenty percent (20%) of net residential acreage shall be conservation
land. {Amended, effective 09/03/19}
Dead-end road – road with a single common ingress and egress that connects with another major or
minor road. For the purposes of measuring the length of a dead-end road, it is the longest
continuous route of travel.
a. required turnarounds such as cul-de-sacs and hammerheads are not included in the length if
there are no driveway or road connections;
09/03/19 9
b. If a dead-end road has a “Y”, “T” or other configuration, the length is measured by adding all
of the different segments of road for the longest continuous length of road;
c. If a road in a development has more than one entrance, with a dead-end road coming off of
that road, the length of the dead-end road is from the point where the dead-end connects to
the road with more than one entrance. {Amended 06/06/17}
Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
Developed Area: Any area on which a site improvement or change is made, including
buildings, landscaping, parking areas, and streets.
Disturbed Area: All land areas that are stripped, graded, or grubbed at any time during the
site preparation for, or construction of, a project unless the areas are returned to a
condition with the same drainage patterns and vegetative cover type that existed prior to
the disturbance. Both planting conducted to restore the previous cover type and
restoration of any altered drainage patterns must occur within one (1) year of
disturbance.
Driveway: A vehicular accessway serving two (2) dwelling units or fewer.
Engineered Subsurface Wastewater Disposal System: A subsurface wastewater disposal
system designed, installed, and operated as a single unit to treat and dispose of two
thousand (2,000) gallons of wastewater or more per day or any system designed to be
capable of treating wastewater with higher BOD (Biochemical Oxygen Demand) and
total suspended solids concentrations than domestic wastewater.
Forested Wetland: A freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six (6) meters
(19 ½') tall or taller.
Freeport Village Design Standards: That document entitled “Freeport Village Design Standards”
dated August 2, 2005 and attached to this Ordinance as Attachment 1. The Freeport Village
Design Standards are part of this Ordinance. In those instances where a requirement of this
Ordinance is described by reference to the Freeport Village Design Standards, the Freeport
Village Design Standards shall modify or supersede any different or conflicting requirement
or standard of this Ordinance.
Freeport Village Overlay District (FVOD): The Freeport Village Overlay District as shown
on the “Town of Freeport, Maine, Zoning Map”, pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance of
the Town of Freeport, Maine.
Freshwater Wetland: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater
at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances
do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, and as defined by the “Corp of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual,”
09/03/19 10
January, 1987.
Frontage-Shore: The length of a lot bordering on a water body or wetland measured in a straight
line, between the intersections of the side lot lines with the shoreline. {Amended 06/06/17}
High Intensity Soil Survey: A map prepared by a Certified Soil Scientist, identifying the soil
types down to 1/8 acre at a scale equivalent to the subdivision plan submitted. The soils
shall be identified in accordance with the National Cooperative Soil Survey. The map
shall show the location of all test pits used to identify the soils, and shall be
accompanied by a log of each sample point identifying the textural classification and the
depth to seasonal high-water table or bedrock at that location. Single soil test pits and
their evaluation for suitability for subsurface wastewater disposal systems shall not be
considered to constitute high intensity soil surveys.
High Water Mark or Elevation:
Normal High Water (Tidal): The shoreline elevation at which vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. In the case where this is difficult or
impossible to determine, or where a determination by the land owner or Code
Enforcement Officer is challenged, this evaluation shall be determined by accurate
survey with reference to the 1929 National Geodetic Vertical Datum to be 4.9' above
1920 datum.
10% Exceedance High Water (Tidal): The shoreline elevation which marks the upper
limit of the typical highest tide of each year. In the case where this is difficult or
impossible to determine, or where a determination by the land owner or Code
Enforcement Officer is challenged, this elevation shall be determined by accurate survey
with reference to the 1929 National Geodetic Vertical Datum to be 7.2' above 1929
datum.
High Water Elevation (Non-tidal): That line on the shores and banks of non-tidal waters
at which either vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly
terrestrial, or where the soils are floodplain soils as categorized by the USDA-SCS
Classification System, or where the water has left a definite mark, whichever is at the
highest elevation.
In the case of wetlands adjacent to rivers, the normal high water line is the upland edge
of the wetland, and not the edge of the open water.
Impervious Area: Structures and other man-made improvements to land and materials
covering the land which substantially reduce the infiltration of water. Impervious
surfaces shall include, but are not limited to, roofs, paved areas, parking lots, and
driveways, regardless of surface material.
09/03/19 11
Initiate Construction: The completion of a portion of the improvements which represents no
less than thirty (30) percent of the costs of the proposed improvements within an
approved project. For the purposes of this ordinance, improvements shall mean roads,
sidewalks, utilities, stormwater facilities, and erosion control. If the subdivision is to
consist of individual lots to be sold or leased by the subdivider, the cost of construction
of buildings on those lots shall not be included. If the subdivision is a multifamily
development, or if the applicant proposes to construct the buildings within the
subdivision, the cost of building construction shall be included in the total costs of
proposed improvements.
Level of Service: A description of the operating conditions a driver will experience while
traveling on a particular street or highway calculated in accordance with the provisions
of the Highway Capacity Manual, published by the National Academy of Sciences,
Transportation Research Board, 1991. There are six (6) levels of service ranging from
Level of Service A, with free traffic flow and no delays, to Level of Service F, with
forced flow and congestion resulting in complete failure of the roadway.
Medium Intensity Soil Survey: A map identifying the soil types down to mapping units of
three (3) acres at a scale equivalent to the subdivision plan submitted. The soils shall be
identified in accordance with the National Cooperative Soil Survey.
Multi-Family Development: A subdivision that contains three (3) or more dwelling units on
land in common ownership, such as apartment buildings, condominiums, or mobile
home parks.
Net Residential Acreage: The area of a tract or parcel of land which, as determined by the Project
Review Board, is suitable for development or conservation land as part of a residential
subdivision. The area shall be calculated by subtracting the following from the total acreage
of the tract or parcel:
A. Portions of the tract or parcel subject to rights-of-way and easements for vehicular
traffic:
1. For multi-family developments: total acreage of the tract or parcel used for roads
and parking.
2. For any other subdivisions: total acreage used for street right-of-way.
B. Unbuildable Land (Primary conservation area). The following environmentally
sensitive land which, if disturbed, may adversely impact the ecological balances in the
environment. No construction or development shall occur on the land areas listed below
unless otherwise permitted as provided below.
1. Deer wintering areas as identified in the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife, Identification and Management of Significant Fish & Wildlife Resources
in Southern Coastal Maine, provided in digital format dated October 2003 as
amended from time to time.
09/03/19 12
2. Wetlands; Forested wetlands shall not be considered an unbuildable area (primary
conservation area), except those forested wetlands that are mapped as having very
poorly drained soils in the USDA SCS Cumberland County Soil Survey, or forested
wetlands flooded during the 100-year storm event, or areas that support breeding
habitat for vernal pool-dependent amphibian species.
3. Portions of the tract or parcel containing slopes over twenty percent (20%) which,
because of unstable soils, would be subject to erosion if development were to be
located on them.
4. Portions of the tract or parcel in the 100-year floodplain, floodway and/or coastal
high hazard area as designated on the most recently adopted Flood Insurance rate
map of the National Flood Insurance Program for the Town of Freeport.
5. Portions of the tract or parcel below high water elevation (non-tidal) and below ten
percent (10%) exceedance high water (tidal) as defined above.
6. Portions of the tract or parcel covered by surface water bodies.
Where an interpretation of the geographical boundaries of the unbuildable land is necessary,
the Planning Board shall be guided by the following standards:
1. Whether a portion of the unbuildable area could be incorporated into a minimum
sized subdivision lot in such a manner that an adequate developable area for
buildings and site improvements with conforming setbacks is retained;
2. Whether the environmentally sensitive land is adequately protected from disturbance
or degradation.
Net Residential Density: Net residential density shall mean the number of dwelling units per net
residential acre.
100-Year Flood: The highest level of flooding that, on the average, has a one percent (1%)
chance of occurring in any given year.
Project Review Board: The Project Review Board of the Town of Freeport.
Preliminary Plan: The preliminary drawings showing the proposed layout of the subdivision
to be submitted to the Project Review Board for its consideration.
Professional Engineer: A professional engineer, registered in the State of Maine.
Public Water System: A water-supply system that provides water to at least fifteen (15)
service connections or services water to at least twenty-five (25) individuals daily for at
least thirty (30) days a year.
Record Drawings: Scaled detailed drawings of the completed or encountered existing
infrastructure within a public right-of-way or easement. The plans shall be prepared and
09/03/19 13
organized in a form that is consistent with the design plans submitted for Project Review
Board review during the subdivision approval process or engineering review by the
Town Engineer. The plans shall be drawn and noted with field measurements, i.e.,
three-way ties, made by the contractor installing the infrastructure. The plans shall note
the infrastructure materials, widths, diameters, elevations, service connection locations
at the main and the right-of-way line, ledge profile, permanent reference benchmark, and
other appropriate data necessary to show the completed or encountered existing
infrastructure. The record drawing plan set shall include a copy of the signed plat.
Recording Plan: An original of the final plan, suitable for recording at the Registry of Deeds
that shows only information relevant to the transfer of an interest in the property
including property lines with dimensions, easements, wetlands, and the location of test
pits, as well as documentation of any waivers, conditions of approval, or other pertinent
notes. The recording plan shall not show other information presented on the subdivision
plans such as topography, grading, sewer and water line locations and sizes, culverts,
and building lines.
Required Open Space: The sum of the land area of conservation land and unbuildable
land (primary conservation areas) as defined in net residential acreage. This land is
within a subdivision with uses as permitted in Sec. 504A, Sec. 504.B and 504.D of
the Freeport Zoning Ordinance and which is permanently restricted from future
development. Subsurface wastewater disposal systems, or individual wells serving
units within an open space or expanded open space subdivision may be located
within the required open space if approved by the Project Review Board. {Amended,
effective 09/03/19}
Salt Marsh: Areas along coastal waters (most often along coastal bays) which support salttolerant
species, and where at average high tide during the growing season, the soil is
regularly inundated by tidal waters. The predominant species is salt marsh cordgrass
(Spartina alterniflora). More open areas often support widgeon grass, eelgrass, and Sago
pondweed.
Salt Meadow: Areas which support salt-tolerant plant species bordering the landward side of
salt marshes or open coastal water, where the soil is saturated during the growing season
but which is rarely inundated by tidal water. Indigenous plant species include salt
meadow cordgrass (Spartina patens) and black rush; common three-square occurs in
fresher areas.
Sight Distance: The length of an unobstructed view from a particular access point to the
farthest visible point of reference on a roadway, measured as described in Section
11.5.C.2.b of the Ordinance.
Site Inventory and Analysis: Inventory maps, renderings, and supporting data describing the
site proposed to be subdivided and analyzing the opportunities and constraints for open
space preservation, subdivision, and development. The inventory and analysis are
09/03/19 14
submitted for initial review prior to submitting a formal application for subdivision
approval.
Storm Water Best Management Practices (BMP’s): Methods, techniques, designs, practices,
and other means to control the quality and quantity of storm water that are approved by
the Maine Department of Environmental Protection. Storm water BMP’s are identified
in “Storm Water Management in Maine: Best Management Practices” which is
published periodically by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
Story: that portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper
surface of the floor or roof next above. A story is measured as the vertical distance from
top to top of two successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces and, for the topmost
story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists or, where there is not
a ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters. {Amended, effective 09/03/19}
Street: For the purposes of this Ordinance and for determining minimum road frontage
requirements, a street is considered to be any public way maintained by public authority,
except a limited access highway, or a private road fifty (50) feet in width, or a private
road shown on a recordable plan, approved by the Project Review Board. Approval of a
private road or minimum road frontage requirements shall in no way be construed to
imply acceptance by the Town of Freeport for purposes of maintenance, improvements,
or other Town services.
Subdivision: The division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more lots within any five
(5-) year period, that begins after September 23, 1971, as defined by Title 30A §4401,
et. seq. as amended from time to time, except that a lot of forty (40) acres or more shall
be counted as a lot.
Subdivision – Commercial Open Space: a higher-density residential development in a
Commercial Districts that permits higher density residential units with reduced road
frontage, setbacks and lot sizes, and that maintains open space. The area of the required
open space shall be equal or exceed the sum of the unbuildable land (primary
conservation areas) as defined by net residential acreage plus twenty percent (20%) of the
net residential acreage. The required open space must meet the standards of Section
504.D of this Ordinance. {Amended, effective 09/03/19}
Subdivision – Open Space: A residential development design that permits reduced lot sizes,
road frontage, and setbacks, and that maintains required open space. The area of the
required open space shall equal or exceed the sum of the unbuildable land (primary
conservation areas) as defined by net residential acreage plus fifty percent (50%) of the
net residential acreage.
Subdivision – Expanded Open Space: A residential development design that permits reduced
lots sizes, road frontage, and setbacks, and that maintains required open space. The area
09/03/19 15
of the required open space shall equal or exceed the sum of the unbuildable land
(primary conservation areas) as defined by net residential acreage plus sixty-five percent
(65%) of the net residential acreage.
Subdivision – Large Lot: A residential development design that requires lot sizes be at least
double the minimum lot size of the district in which the subdivision is located. The net
residential density of a large lot subdivision shall be fifty percent (50%) less than an
open space subdivision. A note on the plan and a deed restriction forbidding further
subdivision of these lots unless the appropriate density requirement for a large lot
subdivision can be met must be provided.
Subdivision – Village Open Space: A residential development design that permits reduced lot
sizes, road frontage, and setbacks, and that maintains open space within the Freeport
Village Overlay District. The area of the required village open space shall equal or
exceed the sum of the unbuildable land (primary conservation areas) as defined by net
residential acreage plus thirty percent (30%) of the net residential acreage. The required
village open space may be met with either land, a fee in lieu of land, or a combination of
both land and a fee in lieu of land as further described in Section 504B of this
Ordinance.
Subdivision, Major: Any subdivision containing 11 or more lots or 16 or more units that are
connected to the public water and sewer system, or six (6) or more lots or dwelling units
that are not connected to the public water and sewer system.
Subdivision, Minor: Any subdivision containing 10 or fewer lots or 15 or fewer units that are
connected to the public water and sewer system, or five (5) or fewer lots or dwelling
units for lots or units that are not connected to the public water and sewer system.
Town Engineer: Any registered professional engineer hired or retained by the Town, either as
staff or on a consulting basis.
Town Planner: The staff person responsible for the direction of the Planning Department,
his/her designee, or other person designated by the Town Manager to be responsible for
development review.
Tract or Parcel of Land: As defined by 30-A M.R.S.A. §4401, as such may be amended from
time to time.
Zoning Ordinance: The Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Freeport, Maine, as such may be
amended from time to time.
09/03/19 16
ARTICLE 4 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
4.1 Administrative Procedures.
To establish an orderly, equitable, and expeditious procedure for reviewing subdivisions and to
avoid unnecessary delays in processing applications for subdivision review, the Project Review
Board shall adopt procedures governing the handling of application submissions including the
establishment of a submittal deadline for being placed upon the Board’s agenda. The Town
Planner shall prepare a written agenda for each regularly scheduled meeting. The agenda shall
be prepared in advance of the meeting, distributed to the Board members and any applicants
appearing on the agenda, and posted at the municipal offices. Except for good cause shown and
as otherwise permitted by law, the Board shall take no action on any application not appearing
on the Board’s written agenda.
4.2 Development Review Fee.
The Town may use contracted staff such as the Town Engineer or Town Attorney or outside
consultants to review those aspects of a subdivision proposal that are outside of the expertise of
Town staff. The cost of this outside review shall be borne by the applicant. To cover the cost
of this outside review, an applicant shall deposit a development review fee with the Planning
Department at the time of the submission of a minor subdivision application or at the time of the
submission of the preliminary application and the final application for a major subdivision. The
Town shall use this fee to pay for outside review services. The Planning Department shall
maintain a project account for each subdivision showing the amounts of the deposits and the
charges incurred for review of the subdivision proposal. The initial deposit shall be the full
estimated cost for the review by all consultants. If the project account is drawn down to twentyfive
percent (25%) or less of the amount originally deposited, the Planning Department shall
notify the applicant and require that an additional twenty-five dollars ($25) per lot or dwelling
unit (whichever is greater) be deposited by the applicant. The Department shall continue to
notify the applicant and require an additional twenty-five dollars ($25) per lot or dwelling unit
be deposited as necessary whenever the balance of the account is drawn down by twenty-five
percent (25%) or less of the amount originally deposited. Any balance in the account remaining
after a decision on the final plan application by the Board, shall be returned to the applicant.
Payment of this fee may not be waived. Further, payment of the fee shall be deemed a cost of
review and shall not be contingent on plan approval.
09/03/19 17
ARTICLE 5 - PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURES {Amended 06/06/17}
5.1 Purpose.
The purpose of the preapplication process is for the applicant to present general information
regarding the proposed subdivision to the staff and Board and receive the staff’s and Board’s
comments prior to the expenditure of substantial sums of money on surveying and engineering
by the applicant.
5.2 Procedure.
The preapplication phase consists of the following four activities:
A. A preapplication conference
B. Staff site inspection (optional)
C. The submission and review by the Board of a Site Inventory Map and Site Analysis and
Conceptual Sketch Plan
D. The classification of the project as a Minor or Major Subdivision
5.3 Preapplication Conference, and Staff Site Inspection.
All applicants for subdivision review shall schedule a preapplication conference with the Town
Planner prior to scheduling a meeting with the Project Review Board. The purpose of this
activity is to familiarize the applicant with the Town’s procedures and requirements and the
Four-Step Design Process (see Appendix A), and to familiarize the Town’s representatives with
the nature of the project.
As part of the meeting, the Town representative(s) and the applicant may visit the proposed site.
At this meeting, the applicant shall be prepared to discuss his/her plans for the development in a
general nature.
Such review shall not cause the plan to be a pending application or proceeding under Title 1
M.R.S.A. §302. No decisions relative to the plan, other than the determination of the required
contour interval, shall be made at this meeting.
5.4 Submission of combined Site Inventory Map, Site Analysis and Conceptual Sketch Plan.
After the preapplication conference, the applicant shall submit a combined Site Inventory
Map, Site Analysis and Conceptual Sketch Plan to the Town Planner.
09/03/19 18
5.5 Submission Completeness.
Upon receipt of the combined Site Inventory Map, Site Analysis and Conceptual Sketch
Plan, the Town Planner shall give the applicant a dated receipt. Within ten (10) days of
the receipt of a site inventory and analysis submission, the Town Planner shall review the
material and determine whether the submission is complete. If the submission is
determined to be incomplete, the Planner shall notify the applicant in writing of this
finding, shall specify the additional material required to make the submission complete,
and shall advise the applicant that the application will not be considered by the Board until
the additional information is submitted. These steps shall be repeated until the application
is found to be complete. Appeals shall lie from the decision of the Town Planner to the
Freeport Project Review Board. When the submission is determined to be complete, the
Town Planner shall place the item on the agenda for review by the Project Review Board,
and distribute copies of the submission to the Town Engineer, Code Enforcement Officer,
Public Works Director, Police Chief, and Fire Chief.
5.6 Site Inventory, Analysis and Conceptual Sketch Plan Procedures.
The site inventory and analysis phase is intended to provide the applicant, the Project
Review Board, and the staff with a better understanding of the site and the opportunities
and constraints imposed on its use by both the natural and built environments. It is
anticipated that this analysis will result in a subdivision plan that reflects the conditions of
the site; those areas most suitable for conservation and open space will be preserved to the
maximum extent possible, those areas most suitable for the proposed use will be utilized.
Therefore, the submission requirements provide that the applicant submit basic
information about the site. In addition, an analysis of that information, and a conceptual
sketch plan prepared by a landscape architect or a professional engineer with expertise in
civil/site engineering shall also be submitted.
The combined Site Inventory Map, Site Analysis and Conceptual Sketch Plan and a fully
executed and signed copy of the Project Review Board application (on form provided by
the Town) along with the appropriate application fee shall be submitted to the Town
Planner. The Town Planner shall schedule the review by the Project Review Board at the
next available meeting. The submission must contain, at a minimum, the required
information included in Appendix B. The Project Review Board may waive this
requirement or reduce the amount of information required for the revision of previously
approved plans and for Minor Subdivisions, upon a finding that the analysis provided by
this process is not necessary due to the scale of the project and the absence of any
significant natural resources or development constraints on the site. Requests for waivers
from a submission requirement must be submitted in writing by the applicant. Unless
waived by the Board, this review must be completed prior to the preparation and
submission of a subdivision application and supporting documentation. The Board shall
review the combined Site Inventory Map, Site Analysis and Conceptual Sketch Plan with
09/03/19 19
the applicant and shall authorize the submission of the formal application when the site
analysis phase is complete.
The Town Planner shall notify all property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the
property to be subdivided of the pending application and the date, time, and place of the
meeting at which the Project Review Board will review the Site Inventory Map, Site
Analysis and Conceptual Sketch Plan.
The Town Planner shall prepare a vertical aerial photograph enlarged to a scale not less
detailed than 1 inch = 400 feet, to show the relationship of the proposed subdivision to
adjacent properties. The aerial photograph shall include property boundaries in the area,
locations and names of existing streets, boundaries and designations of zoning districts,
mapped wetlands, public land, and land protected under conservation easements.
Within 45 days of the first Project Review Board meeting at which the combined site
inventory, site analysis and conceptual site plan application is discussed or within another
time limit as may be otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board and the applicant, the
Board shall complete a finding of fact that the appropriate areas have been determined for
development and for conservation or open space.
The Project Review Board may schedule an on-site inspection of the site to review the
existing conditions, field verify the information submitted, and investigate the
development proposal. If a review is pending during a period when there is snow cover,
the deadline by which the Project Review Board shall take final action on the site
inventory and analysis may be extended, which extension shall not exceed thirty (30) days
after the Board is able to conduct an on-site inspection.
The Board shall review the submission to determine if the information provides a clear
understanding of the site and identifies opportunities and constraints that help determine
how it should be used, areas that are appropriate for conservation areas, and areas that are
appropriate for development. The Board shall also consider any input received from
members of the staff. The outcome of the review process shall be the identification by the
Board of the issues and constraints that must be addressed in the formal subdivision
application and the classification by the Board of the project as a Major or Minor
Subdivision (which classification may later be revised if the scope of the project changes).
The Board shall also act on any requests for waivers at this time, except that the Board
may postpone action on a request for a waiver if the Board has determined that additional
information is needed. Review of the Site Inventory Map, Site Analysis and Conceptual
Plan shall be considered complete upon a finding by the Project Review Board that the
appropriate areas have been determined for development and for conservation or open
space.
09/03/19 20
ARTICLE 6 - MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
6.1 General.
An application for a Minor Subdivision shall be reviewed in accordance with the following
procedures. In addition, the Project Review Board may require that a Minor Subdivision
comply with some or all of the submission requirements for a Major Subdivision. The
additional information may be required when the Project Review Board finds it necessary to
decide if the criteria for approval from Title 30-A M.R.S.A §4404, or the standards of Article 11
of these regulations have been met.
6.2 Procedure.
A. After the Project Review Board has completed its review of the Site Inventory Map and
Site Analysis and Conceptual Sketch Plan, the applicant shall submit revised plans as
outlined in Appendix D of this Ordinance to the Planning Department. Failure to submit
the application within six (6) months may require resubmission of the inventory and
analysis to the Board. The final plan shall reflect the opportunities and constraints
identified in the Site Inventory and Analysis and address any issues identified by the
Project Review Board in the site inventory and analysis and conceptual plan phase.
B. Upon receipt of an application, the Planning Department shall issue the applicant a dated
receipt for the application.
C. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of the final submission, the Town Planner shall
determine whether the submission is complete. If the submission is not complete, the
Town Planner shall notify the applicant of the specific additional material needed to
complete the submission and that the submission will not be considered by the Board until
the additional information is provided. Appeals shall lie from the decision of the Town
Planner to the Freeport Project Review Board.
D. When the submission is determined to be complete, the Town Planner shall:
1. Schedule a public hearing for the next available scheduled meeting of the Project
Review Board for which the appropriate notification can be given. Prior to the
hearing, the Board shall publish a notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing in
a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least two (2) times. The
date of the first publication shall be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. A
copy of the notice shall be mailed to the applicant.
2. Distribute the application to the Town Engineer, Code Enforcement Officer, Public
Works Director, Police Chief, and Fire Chief for their review and comments.
09/03/19 21
3. Notify all owners of property within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed
subdivision in writing that an application for subdivision approval has been
submitted, specifying the location of the proposed subdivision including a general
description of the project, and advising the abutters of the date, time, and location of
the meeting at which the application will be considered by the Board. Property
owners within five hundred (500) feet of the property shall be notified in writing of
all subsequent Project Review Board meetings at which the application is reviewed.
4. Notify the clerk and the Project Review Board of the neighboring municipality if any
portion of the subdivision abuts or crosses the municipal boundary.
E. The applicant, or his/her duly authorized representative, shall attend the meetings of the
Board to present the final plan. Failure to attend the meeting to present the final plan shall
result in a delay of the Board’s consideration of the plan until the next meeting that the
applicant attends.
F. Within forty-five (45) days from the public hearing or within another time limit as may be
otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board and the applicant, the Board shall make
findings of fact, and conclusions relative to the criteria contained in Title 30-A M.R.S.A
§4404 and the standards of Article 11. If the Board finds that all the criteria of the Statute
and the standards of Article 11 have been met, the Board shall approve the final plan. If
the Board finds that any of the criteria of the statute or the standards of Article 11 have not
been met, the Board shall either deny the application or approve the application with
conditions to ensure all of the criteria and standards will be met by the subdivision. The
Board shall issue a written notice of its decision to the applicant, including findings,
conclusions, and any reasons for denial or conditions of approval.
6.3 Submissions.
The final plan application for a Minor Subdivision shall consist of the following items:
A. The required development review fees.
B. The Final Subdivision Plan, three (3) 24” x 36” copies and eight (8) 11” x 17” copies
containing the information outlined in Appendix D, Recording Plan (See Appendix C),
and supporting documentation consisting of one or more maps or drawings drawn to a
scale of not more detailed than 1 inch = 100 feet and supporting documentation bound
in a single report shall be submitted for final review. Plans shall be no larger than 24 by
36 inches in size.
Prior to the meeting at which action on the plan is anticipated to be taken, the applicant
shall submit two (2) reproducible, stable-based transparencies of the recording plan, one
to be recorded at the Registry of Deeds, the other to be filed at the municipal office. The
reproducible transparencies shall be embossed and printed with the seal of the individual
responsible for preparation of the plan.
09/03/19 22
6.4 Final Approval and Filing.
A. No plan shall be approved by the Board if the applicant(s) or any other entity in which
the applicant(s) or the principals or controlling shareholders of the applicant have a
substantial interest is in violation of the provisions of a previously approved plan within
the municipality.
B. Upon findings of fact and determination that all standards in Title 30-A M.R.S.A §4404,
and in this Ordinance have been met, and upon voting to approve the subdivision, the
Board shall sign the recording plan. One copy of the signed recording plan shall be
retained by the Board as part of its permanent records. One copy of the signed plan shall
be forwarded to the Tax Assessor. One copy of the signed plan shall be forwarded to the
Code Enforcement Officer. Any subdivision not recorded in the Registry of Deeds
within ninety (90) days of the date upon which the plan is signed by the Board shall
become null and void.
C. The applicant shall provide the Town with a computer disc in a format compatible with
the Assessor’s records containing the information shown on the recording plan.
D. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any final plan after
approval has been given by the Board and endorsed in writing on the plan, unless the
revised final plan is first submitted and the Board approves any modifications, except in
accordance with Article 10. The Board shall make findings that the revised plan meets
the criteria of Title 30-A M.R.S.A §4404, and the standards of these regulations. In the
event that a Plan is recorded without complying with this requirement, it shall be
considered null and void, and the Board shall institute proceedings to have the plan
stricken from the records of the Registry of Deeds.
E. The approval by the Board of a subdivision plan shall not be deemed to constitute or be
evidence of any acceptance by the municipality of any street, easement, or other open
space shown on such plan. When a park, playground, or other recreation area shall have
been shown on the plan to be dedicated to the municipality, approval of the plan shall
not constitute an acceptance by the municipality of such areas. The Board shall require
the plan to contain appropriate notes to this effect. The Board may also require the filing
of a written agreement between the applicant and the municipal officers covering future
deed and title dedication, and provision for the cost of grading, development, equipment,
and maintenance of any such dedicated area.
F. Failure to initiate construction of the subdivision within two (2) years of the date of
approval and signing of the plan shall render the plan null and void unless the applicant
has requested in writing and received an extension and has provided for the continuation
of any performance guarantees for the period of the extension prior to the expiration of
the two (2) year period. Upon determining that a subdivision’s approval has expired
under this paragraph, the Board shall have a notice placed in the Registry of Deeds to
that effect.
09/03/19 23
ARTICLE 7 - PRELIMINARY PLAN FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION
7.1 Procedure.
A. After the Project Review Board has completed its review of the Site Inventory Map and
Site Analysis and Conceptual Sketch Plan, the applicant shall submit an application for
approval of the preliminary plan for a Major Subdivision to the Planning Department.
Failure to submit an application within six (6) months after the Project Review Board
has completed its review of the Site Inventory Map and Site Analysis and Conceptual
Sketch Plan, or a substantial change to the plan such as a major relocation of a road(s) or
lots or the previously unforeseen need for a waiver may require re-submission of the Site
Inventory Map and Site Analysis and Conceptual Sketch Plan to the Board. The
preliminary plan shall reflect the opportunities and constraints identified in the Site
Inventory and Analysis and address any issues identified by the Project Review Board in
the site inventory and analysis phase.
B. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of the preliminary plan submission, the Town Planner
shall determine whether the submission is complete. If the submission is not complete,
the Town Planner shall notify the applicant of the specific additional material needed to
complete the submission and that the submission will not be considered by the Board
until the additional information is provided. Appeals shall lie from the decision of the
Town Planner to the Freeport Project Review Board.
C. When the submission is determined to be complete, the Town Planner shall:
1. Schedule a public hearing for the next regularly scheduled workshop meeting of
the Project Review Board for which the appropriate notification can be given. The
Board shall publish a notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least two (2) times. The
date of the first publication shall be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. A
copy of the notice shall be mailed to the applicant.
2. Distribute the application to the Town Engineer, Code Enforcement Officer, Public
Works Director, Police Chief, and Fire Chief for their review and comment.
3. Property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed subdivision shall
be notified in writing of all Project Review Board meetings at which the
application is reviewed.
4. Notify the clerk and the Project Review Board of the neighboring municipality if
any portion of the subdivision abuts or crosses the municipal boundary.
D. The applicant, or his/her duly authorized representative, shall attend the meetings of the
Board to present the preliminary plan. Failure to attend the meeting to present the plan
09/03/19 24
shall result in a delay of the Board’s consideration of the plan until the next meeting
which the applicant attends.
E. Within forty-five (45) days from the public hearing or within another time limit as may
be otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board and the applicant, the Board shall make
findings of fact on the application, and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
preliminary plan application. The Board shall specify in writing its findings of facts and
reasons for any conditions or denial.
F. When granting approval of a preliminary plan, the Board shall state the conditions of
such approval, if any, with respect to:
1. The specific changes which it will require in the final plan;
2. The preservation of conservation areas;
3. The character and extent of the required improvements for which waivers may
have been requested and which the Board finds may be waived without jeopardy
to the public health, safety, and general welfare; and
4. The construction items for which cost estimates will be required as prerequisite
to the approval of the final plan.
G. Approval of a preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of the final plan or intent to
approve the final plan, but rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the
design of the preliminary plan as a guide to the preparation of the final plan. The final
plan shall be submitted for approval by the Board upon fulfillment of the requirements
of these regulations and the conditions of preliminary approval, if any. Prior to the
approval of the final plan, the Board may require that additional information be
submitted and changes in the plan be made as a result of further study of the proposed
subdivision or as a result of new information received.
7.2 Submissions.
The preliminary plan application shall consist of the following items:
A. The required development review fees.
B. Ten (10) copies of Site Analysis and Conceptual Sketch Plan reflecting if any new or
updated information developed since the inventory and analysis phase.
C. Three (3) 24” x 36” copies and eight (8) 11’ x 17’ copies of a Preliminary Plan and
supporting documentation as listed in Appendix F, and also Appendix E if required by
the Project Review Board:
09/03/19 25
The Board may require that information as listed in Appendix E be submitted where
necessary to determine whether the preliminary plan is likely to result in a final plan that
meets the criteria of Title 30-A M.R.S.A §4404.
D. If the proposal includes any commonly owned open space or other land, facilities, or
improvements (such as roads) that are proposed to be owned in common by the residents
of the subdivision, three (3) copies of draft Community Association Documents and a
Conservation Ownership and Management Plan which include the information listed on
Appendix G. The Project Review Board may find that additional information is
necessary due to unusual or special circumstances.
09/03/19 26
ARTICLE 8 - FINAL PLAN FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION
8.1 Procedure.
A. Within six (6) months after the approval of the preliminary plan, the applicant shall
submit a submission for approval of the final plan to the Planning Department. If the
submission for the final plan is not submitted within six (6) months after preliminary
plan approval, the Board may require re-submission of the preliminary plan, except as
stipulated below. The final plan shall approximate the layout shown on the preliminary
plan and shall incorporate any changes required by the Board.
If an applicant cannot submit the final plan within six (6) months, the applicant may
request an extension. Such a request for an extension to the filing deadline shall be
submitted, in writing, to the Town Planner prior to the expiration of the filing period. In
considering the request for an extension, the Board shall make findings that the applicant
has made due progress in preparation of the final plan and in pursuing approval of the
plans before other agencies, and that municipal ordinances or regulations which may
impact on the proposed development have not been amended.
B. Prior to submittal of the final plan submission, the following approvals shall be obtained
in writing, where applicable:
1. Maine Department of Environmental Protection (MeDEP), under a) the Site
Location of Development Act, or b) Natural Resources Protection Act, or other
permits as may be required by the MeDEP.
2. Maine Department of Transportation, if a highway access or traffic movement
permit is required.
3. Maine Department of Human Services, if the applicant proposes to provide a
community water system.
4. Aqua Maine, if the applicant proposes to use either of the public water systems.
5. Freeport Sewer District if the applicant proposes to use the public sewer system.
6. Maine Department of Human Services, or other qualified professional, if an
engineered subsurface wastewater disposal system(s) is to be utilized.
7. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, if a permit under Section 404 of the Clean Water
Act is required.
8. Maine Historic Preservation Commission that the property does not include any
historic, prehistoric, or archeological features of importance.
09/03/19 27
C. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of the final plan submission, the Town Planner shall
determine whether the submission is complete. If the submission is not complete, the
Town Planner shall notify the applicant of the specific additional material needed to
complete the submission and that the submission will not be considered by the Board
until the additional information is provided.
D. Once the Town Planner has determined that the submission is complete, the Town
Planner shall:
1. Place the item on the agenda for the next meeting of the Project Review Board
for which the appropriate notification can be given.
2. Distribute the application to the Town Engineer, Code Enforcement Officer,
Public Works Director, Police Chief, and Fire Chief for their review and
comment.
3. Property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed subdivision shall
be notified in writing of all Project Review Board meetings at which the
application is reviewed.
4. Notify the clerk and the Project Review Board of the neighboring municipality if
any portion of the subdivision abuts or crosses the municipal boundary.
F. The applicant, or his/her duly authorized representative, shall attend the meetings of the
Board to present the final plan. Failure to attend the meeting to present the final plan
shall result in a delay of the Board’s consideration of the plan until the next meeting
which the applicant attends.
G. At the initial meeting on the final plan, the Board shall determine whether to hold a
public hearing on the final plan application.
H. If the Board decides to hold a public hearing, it shall hold the hearing within thirty (30)
days, notify the applicant, publish a notice of the date, time and place of the hearing in a
newspaper of local circulation at least two (2) times, and notify abutters of the hearing.
The date of the first publication shall be at least seven (7) days before the hearing.
I. Within forty-five (45) days from the public hearing or, if no hearing is held, within sixty
(60) days of the Town Planner’s determination that the submission is complete, or
within another time limit as may be otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board and the
applicant, or at the initial meeting for final plan review, the Board shall make findings of
fact, and conclusions relative to the criteria for approval contained in Title 30-A
M.R.S.A §4404 and the standards of these regulations. If the Board finds that all the
criteria of the statute and the standards of these regulations have been met, they shall
approve the final plan. If the Board finds that any of the criteria of the statute or the
standards of these regulations have not been met, the Board shall either deny the
09/03/19 28
application or approve the application with conditions to ensure all of the standards will
be met by the subdivision. The Board shall issue a written notice of its decision to the
applicant, including findings, conclusions, and any reasons for denial or conditions of
approval.
8.2 Submissions.
The final plan submission shall consist of the items:
A. Outstanding development review fees.
B. A letter of good standing from a lending institution demonstrating that the applicant has
the financial capacity to complete the project.
C. Three (3) 24” x 36” copies and eight (8) 11” x 17” copies of the Final Subdivision Plan
(Appendix H), Recording Plan (Appendix C) and supporting documentation consisting
of one or more maps or drawings drawn to a scale of not more detailed than 1 inch = 100
feet and supporting documentation bound in a single report.
D. Two (2) reproducible, stable-based transparency copies of the recording plan, one to be
recorded at the Registry of Deeds, the other to be filed at the municipal office. The
reproducible transparencies shall be embossed and printed with the seal of the individual
responsible for preparation of the plan.
8.3 Final Approval and Filing.
A. No plan shall be approved by the Board if the applicant(s) or any other entity in which
the applicant(s) or the principals or shareholders of the applicant have a substantial
interest is in violation of the provisions of a previously approved Subdivision or Site
Plan within the municipality.
B. Upon findings of fact and determination that all standards in Title 30-A M.R.S.A §4404,
and these regulations have been met, and upon voting to approve the subdivision, the
Board shall sign the final plan. One copy of the signed plan shall be retained by the
Board as part of its permanent records. One copy of the signed plan shall be forwarded
to the Tax Assessor. One copy of the signed plan shall be forwarded to the Code
Enforcement Officer. Any subdivision not recorded in the Registry of Deeds within
ninety (90) days of the date upon which the plan is signed by the Board shall become
null and void.
C. At the time the Board grants final plan approval, it may permit the Plan to be divided
into two (2) or more sections subject to any conditions the Board deems necessary in
order to ensure the orderly development of the plan.
D. The applicant shall provide the Town with a computer disc in a format compatible with
09/03/19 29
the Assessor’s records containing the information shown on the recording plan.
E. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any final plan after
approval has been given by the Board and endorsed in writing on the plan, unless the
revised final plan is first submitted and the Board approves any modifications, except in
accordance with Article 10. The Board shall make findings that the revised plan meets
the criteria of Title 30-A M.R.S.A §4404, and the standards of these regulations. In the
event that a plan is recorded without complying with this requirement, it shall be
considered null and void, and the Board shall institute proceedings to have the plan
stricken from the records of the Registry of Deeds.
F. The approval by the Board of a subdivision plan shall not be deemed to constitute or be
evidence of any acceptance by the municipality of any street, easement, or other open
space shown on such plan. When a park, playground, or other recreation area shall have
been shown on the plan to be dedicated to the municipality, approval of the plan shall
not constitute an acceptance by the municipality of such areas. The Board shall require
the plan to contain appropriate notes to this effect. The Board may also require the filing
of a written agreement between the applicant and the municipal officers covering future
deed and title dedication, and provision for the cost of grading, development, equipment,
and maintenance of any such dedicated area.
G. Unless otherwise specified by the Project Review Board in connection with an approved
subdivision plan, failure to initiate construction of the subdivision within two (2) years
of the date of approval and signing of the plan shall render the plan null and void unless
the applicant has requested in writing and received an extension and has provided for the
continuation of any performance guarantees for the period of the extension prior to the
expiration of the two (2) year period. A phased subdivision plan may be approved by
the Board for no more than two years per phase. Upon determining that a subdivision’s
approval has expired under this paragraph, the Board shall have a notice placed in the
Registry of Deeds to that effect.
09/03/19 30
ARTICLE 9 - REVISIONS TO APPROVED PLANS
9.1 Procedure.
An application for a revision to a previously approved plan shall be submitted to the Town
Planner. The Town Planner shall review the application and determine the procedure to be used
in reviewing the application. Minor changes that do not alter lot lines or the essential nature of
the proposal or affect the approval criteria may be approved by the Town Planner by written
endorsement of the changes on the approved plan. If the Town Planner determines that the
revision requires approval of the Project Review Board, the Town Planner shall place the
application on the agenda of the Board in accordance with the procedures of this Ordinance as
appropriate. If the revision involves only modifications of the approved plan, without the
creation of additional lots or dwelling units, the procedures for a Minor Subdivision shall be
followed. If the application involves the creation of additional lots or dwelling units, the Town
Planner shall determine if the procedures for a Minor or Major Subdivision shall be followed
based upon the scale of the amendment.
9.2 Submissions.
The applicant shall submit eight (8) 11” x 17” copies of the approved plan as well as three (3)
24” x 36” copies and eight (8) 11” x 17” copies of the proposed revisions. The application shall
also include the appropriate supporting information to allow the Board to make a determination
that the proposed revisions meet the standards of this Ordinance and the criteria of 30-A
M.R.S.A. §4404, as such may be amended from time to time. The revised plan shall indicate
that it is the revision of a previously approved and recorded plan and shall show the original
name of the subdivision and the book and page or cabinet and sheet on which the original plan
is recorded at the Registry of Deeds.
9.3 Scope of Review.
The Board’s scope of review shall be limited to those portions of the plan which are proposed to
be changed and the impacts and effects of such changes.
09/03/19 31
ARTICLE 10 - INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
10.1 Inspection of Required Improvements.
A. Prior to the recording of the approved plan in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds
and at least five (5) days prior to commencing construction of required improvements,
the subdivider or builder shall:
1. Notify the Town Engineer in writing of the time when (s)he proposes to
commence construction of such improvements, so that the Engineer can schedule
a preconstruction meeting and arrange for inspections to assure that all municipal
specifications, requirements, and conditions of approval are met during the
construction of required improvements, and to assure the satisfactory completion
of improvements and utilities required by the Board.
2. Deposit with the Town an inspection fee in the amount of two percent (2%) of
the estimated costs of the required improvements. If, upon satisfactory
completion of construction and cleanup, there are funds remaining, the surplus
shall be refunded to the subdivider or builder as appropriate.
B. No construction of site improvements, including clearing and grubbing, shall be started
until a preconstruction meeting is held. The Town Engineer shall hold the
preconstruction meeting with the applicant and his/her contractor to review the
construction process, conditions of approval, and procedures for inspection of any
improvements. This meeting shall include the Town’s inspecting engineer, Public
Works Director, and road foreman.
C. The Town Engineer or other engineer hired by the Town shall inspect any road
construction and other improvements at appropriate points in the construction. At a
minimum, an inspection shall be conducted at the following times:
1. Upon completion of the clearing and grubbing
2. Upon completion of the excavation of the roadway
3. During the installation of drainage improvements and structures
4. Upon installation of the road subbase
5. Prior to the installation of any paving or other improvements
6. During the paving of the road
7. Upon the completion of the improvements
09/03/19 32
8. Following loaming and seeding and cleanup
9. Upon receipt of a written request for the acceptance of the road as a public street
by the Town
D. If the road or other improvements are constructed in phases, each phase shall be
inspected separately.
At the close of each construction season, the Town shall, at the expense of the
subdivider, have the site inspected by the inspecting engineer.
E. If the inspecting engineer finds upon inspection of the improvements that any of the
required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the plans and
specifications filed by the subdivider, the inspecting engineer shall so report in writing
to the Town Manager, Town Planner, Project Review Board, Codes Enforcement
Officer and the applicant/subdivider and contractor. The Town Manager shall take any
steps necessary to assure compliance with the approved plans.
F. If at any time it appears necessary or desirable to modify the required improvements
before or during the construction of the required improvements, the inspecting engineer
is authorized to approve minor modifications due to unforeseen circumstances such as
encountering hidden outcrops of bedrock, natural springs, etc. The inspecting engineer
shall issue any approval under this section in writing and shall transmit a copy of the
approval to the Town Planner. Revised plans documenting the changes shall be filed
with the Planning Department and endorsed by the Town Planner. For major
modifications, the applicant shall obtain approval from the Board to modify the plans in
accordance with Article 9. Major modifications requiring Project Review Board
approval include, but are not limited to, changes such as the relocation of rights-of-way,
revisions to property boundaries, or changes of grade by more than one percent (1%).
G. Prior to the sale of any lot, the applicant shall provide the Town Planner with a letter
from a Registered Land Surveyor, stating that all monumentation shown on the plan has
been installed.
H. Upon completion of the construction of a public street and prior to any vote by the Town
Council to accept a proposed public way, a written certification signed by the inspecting
engineer shall be submitted to the Town Manager certifying that the proposed public
way meets or exceeds the design and construction requirements of these regulations. If
there are any underground utilities, the servicing utility shall certify in writing that they
have been installed in a manner acceptable to the utility. The subdivider shall submit
record drawings to the Town Planner and the Town Engineer prior to the Town’s
acceptance of any street.
I. The applicant/subdivider shall be required to maintain all improvements, provide for
09/03/19 33
snow removal on streets and sidewalks, and pay for any street lighting until acceptance
of the improvements by the municipality or control is placed with a lot owners’
association. The subdivider shall file a performance guarantee with the Town Planner
upon completion of the public improvements in an amount and form acceptable to the
Town Manager assuring that this obligation shall be met. The performance guarantee
shall remain in force as long as the subdivider retains this maintenance responsibility.
10.2 Violations and Enforcement.
A. No plan of a division of land within the municipality which would constitute a
subdivision shall be recorded in the Registry of Deeds until a final plan has been
approved by the Project Review Board in accordance with these regulations.
B. A person shall not convey, offer, or agree to convey any land in a subdivision which has
not been approved by the Board and recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
C. The applicant shall not sell, lease, or otherwise convey any land in an approved
subdivision which is not shown on the plan as a separate lot.
D. No public utility, water district, sanitary district, or any utility company of any kind shall
serve any lot in a subdivision for which a final plan has not been approved by the Board.
E. Development of a subdivision without Project Review Board approval or in violation of
any terms or conditions of Project Review Board approval shall be a violation of this
Ordinance. Development includes, but is not limited to, grading or construction of
roads, grading of land or lots, or construction of buildings.
F. Violations of any provisions of this Ordinance shall be punished in accordance with the
provisions of Title 30-A M.R.S.A §4452, and as otherwise provided by law.
G. This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Town of Freeport Code Enforcement Officer in
the same manner as the Town of Freeport Zoning Ordinance. Appeals shall lie from the
decision of the Codes Enforcement Officer to the Board of Appeals and from the Board
of Appeals to the Superior Court according to the provisions of the Maine revised
statutes.
09/03/19 34
ARTICLE 11 - APPROVAL STANDARDS
The State Subdivision Law establishes criteria to be used in reviewing applications for the approval of a
subdivision. Title 30-A M.R.S.A §4404 provides that the Project Review Board shall consider these
criteria in the review of a subdivision and find that the proposal meets these criteria. The performance
standards in this article are intended to clarify and expand upon the criteria for approval found within
the subdivision statute. In reviewing a proposed subdivision, the Board shall review the application for
conformance with the State standards and the following performance standards and make findings that
each standard has been met prior to the approval of a final plan. Compliance with the design guidelines
of this section shall be considered to be evidence of meeting the appropriate performance standards.
Proposed subdivisions not in compliance with the design guidelines may be considered, but the
applicant shall provide clear and convincing evidence that the proposed design will meet the statutory
criteria for approval, and the performance standards. In all instances, the burden of proof shall be upon
the applicant to present adequate information to indicate the statutory criteria for approval and
performance standards have been or will be met.
11.1 Pollution.
A. State Standard
Pollution. The proposed subdivision will not result in undue water or air pollution. In making
the determination, the Board shall at least consider:
1. The elevation of the land above sea level and its relation to the flood plains;
2. The nature of soils and subsoils and their ability to adequately support waste
disposal;
3. The slope of the land an its effect on effluents;
4. The availability of streams for disposal of effluents; and
5. The applicable state and local health and water resources rules and regulations.
B. Performance Standards
1. The proposed subdivision shall not discharge wastewater to a water body without a
license from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
2. Discharges of storm water shall be treated to remove oil, grease, and sediment prior
to discharge into surface water bodies.
09/03/19 35
11.2 Sufficient Water.
A. State Standard
Sufficient water. The proposed subdivision has sufficient water available for the reasonably
foreseeable needs of the subdivision.
B. Performance Standards
1. Water Supply.
a. When practical, any Major or Minor Subdivision shall make provisions for
connection to the public water system if the Aqua Maine or South Freeport
Water District indicates that it can provide water service.
b. When a subdivision will be served by the public water system, the complete
supply system within the subdivision, including fire hydrants, shall be installed at
the expense of the applicant. The size and location of mains, gate valves,
hydrants, and service connections shall be reviewed and approved in writing by
the servicing water utility and the Fire Chief. The system shall be designed by a
professional engineer registered in the State of Maine.
c. When a proposed subdivision will not be served by the public water system,
water supply shall be from individual wells or a private community water
system.
1) Individual wells shall be sited and constructed to prevent infiltration of
surface water and contamination from subsurface wastewater disposal
systems and other sources of potential contamination.
2) Lot design shall permit placement of wells, subsurface wastewater
disposal areas, and where required, reserve sites for subsurface
wastewater disposal areas in compliance with the Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules, the Well Drillers and Pump Installers Rules,
and the Freeport Building Code Ordinance.
3) If a central water supply system is provided by the applicant, the location
and protection of the source and the design, construction, and operation
of the system shall conform to the standards of the Maine Rules Relating
to Drinking Water (10-144A C.M.R. 231).
4) In areas where the Project Review Board determines, based upon the
written recommendation of the Fire Chief or his/her designee, that a
reliable water supply for fire fighting purposes is not available within
one-half mile of the site, the subdivider shall be responsible for providing
09/03/19 36
adequate fire protection water supply. Subdivisions shall provide
adequate fire protection water supply in accordance with NFPA 1231.
Acceptable methods include, but are not limited to, fire ponds with an
approved dry hydrant, other water sources with an approved dry hydrant,
participation in the town’s plans to reclaim existing fire ponds, or
approved residential sprinkler systems in each principal building. An
easement shall be granted to the Town for access to and maintenance of
dry hydrants or reservoirs where necessary.
5) The construction of water lines shall include the construction of laterals
to the property line of each lot created.
6) Open space subdivisions may place independent water supply systems in
the open space.
2. Water Quality.
Water supplies shall meet the primary drinking water standards contained in the Maine
Rules Relating to Drinking Water. If existing water quality contains contaminants in
excess of the secondary drinking water standards in the Maine Rules Relating to
Drinking Water, that fact shall be disclosed in a note on the plan to be recorded in the
Registry of Deeds.
C. Design Guidelines
1. Well Construction.
a. Dug wells shall not be constructed within one hundred (100) feet of the edge of the
pavement of any street, if located downhill from the street, or within fifty (50) feet
of the edge of the pavement of any street, if located uphill of the street. This
restriction shall be included as a note on the plan and included in deed restrictions
for the affected lots.
b. Within one (1) year of the date of purchase, each lot owner shall be guaranteed by
the subdivider access to a supply of potable water of at least three hundred and
fifty (350) gallons/day, or the purchase price shall be refunded.
2. Fire Protection.
a. If fire hydrants connected to a public water supply system are provided, they shall
be located in accordance with the standards of the Fire Department and each
location shall be approved in writing by the Fire Chief or his/her designee.
b. Where fire ponds are built for fire protection, a minimum storage capacity of ten
thousand (10,000) gallons plus additional storage of two thousand (2,000) gallons
09/03/19 37
per lot or principal building or such other amount as required by the Fire Chief
shall be provided. The Project Review Board may approve an alternate storage
capacity based on the fire flow calculation of NFPA 1231 and as approved by the
Fire Chief. Where fire ponds are proposed for water storage, the capacity of the
pond shall be calculated based on the lowest projected water level less an
equivalent of three (3) feet of ice. A detailed plan of the required pond, dry
hydrant, piping, and/or access road shall be submitted as part of the application.
The Town Engineer and Fire Chief shall approve the design of all storage facilities.
c. Hydrants or other provisions for fire protection water supply shall meet the
specifications of the Fire Department and NFPA 1231. The design of hydrants
shall be approved by the Fire Chief or his/her designee. The minimum pipe size
connecting dry hydrants to ponds or underground storage shall be eight (8) inches.
d. Where a dry hydrant or other water source is not within the right-of-way of a
proposed or existing public street, an easement shall be provided to the Town for
access to, maintenance, and use of the dry hydrant or reservoir. A suitable
accessway to the hydrant or other water source shall be constructed by the
applicant. It shall be built to standards approved by the Town Engineer and the
Fire Chief. Once the hydrant is constructed and the easement accepted by the
Town, the Town shall be responsible for the maintenance of the accessway and
hydrant.
e. The applicant shall be responsible for the maintenance of the fire protection water
supply for a period of one (1) year following its installation and shall be
responsible for any improvements determined to be necessary by the Fire Chief
during this period to provide the required storage capacity and flows.
f. Individual sprinkler systems shall meet the specifications of the Fire Department
and NFPA 1231.
11.3 Impact on Existing Water Supplies.
A. State Standard
Municipal water supply. The proposed subdivision will not cause an unreasonable burden on
an existing water supply, if one is to be used.
B. Performance Standards
A proposed subdivision shall not generate a demand on the source, treatment facilities, or
distribution system of the Aqua Maine or the South Freeport Water District beyond the capacity
of those system components, considering improvements that are planned to be in place prior to
occupancy of the subdivision. The applicant shall be responsible for paying the costs of
09/03/19 38
improvements to the supplier’s system as necessary to alleviate any deficiencies or expand the
capacity of the system needed to service the subdivision.
11.4 Soil Erosion.
A. State Standard
Erosion. The proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable sedimentation or a reduction in
the land’s capacity to hold water so that a dangerous or unhealthy condition results.
B. Performance Standards
1. The proposed subdivision shall prevent soil erosion from entering water bodies,
wetlands, and adjacent properties.
2. The procedures outlined in the erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be
implemented during the site preparation, construction, and clean-up stages.
3. Topsoil shall be considered part of the subdivision and shall not be removed from the
site except for surplus topsoil from roads, parking areas, and building excavations unless
the removal has received site plan approval in accordance with the extraction provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance.
11.5 Traffic Conditions.
A. State Standards
Traffic. The proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable highway or public road
congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to the use of the highways or public roads existing
or proposed.
B. Performance Standards
1. At a minimum, provision shall be made for vehicular access to the subdivision and
circulation within the subdivision in such a manner as to:
a. Safeguard against hazards to traffic and pedestrians on existing streets and within
the subdivision;
b. Avoid traffic congestion on any street; and
c. Provide safe and convenient circulation on adjacent public streets and within the
subdivision.
2. More specifically, access and circulation shall also conform to the following standards:
09/03/19 39
a. The street providing access to the subdivision and neighboring streets and the first
intersection(s), or an intersection within two thousand (2,000) feet of the street
providing access to the subdivision, whichever is less, which can be expected to
carry traffic generated by the subdivision shall have the capacity or be suitably
improved to accommodate that traffic and avoid unreasonable congestion.
Intersections on major access routes to the site which are functioning at a Level of
Service C (see definition) or better prior to the development will function at a
minimum of Level of Service C after development. If any intersection is
functioning at a Level of Service D or lower prior to the development, the project
will not reduce the current level of service. (See Freeport Comprehensive
Transportation Study 2005, for a levels of service at major intersections)
The Project Review Board may approve a subdivision not meeting this
requirement if the applicant demonstrates that:
1) A public agency has committed funds to construct improvements necessary
to bring or maintain the level of service at this standard, or
2) The applicant will assume the financial responsibility for the improvements
necessary to maintain or bring the level of service to this standard and will
assure the completion of the improvements with a financial guarantee
acceptable to the Town.
b. All new road construction shall be subject to a Pavement Maintenance Impact fee
and the amount of the fee shall be established by order of the Town Council.
c. Where necessary to safeguard against hazards to traffic and pedestrians and/or to
avoid traffic congestion, provision shall be made for turning lanes, traffic
directional islands, frontage roads, sidewalks, bicycle ways, and traffic controls
within existing public streets consistent with accepted highway design standards.
d. Accessways to subdivisions shall be designed to avoid queuing of entering
vehicles on any street. Left-lane storage capacity maybe provided as needed to
meet anticipated demand. A study or analysis to determine the need for a left-turn
storage lane may be done.
e. Where site conditions allow, provision shall be made for the extension of streets to
connect with nearby streets and to provide access to adjoining lots of similar
existing or potential use. Such interconnected streets shall be designed to
discourage use by through traffic.
3. Streets shall be named in accordance with the Freeport Street Numbering Ordinance as
amended from time to time. The developer shall either install street name, traffic safety,
09/03/19 40
and control signs meeting Town specifications or reimburse the Town for the costs of
their installation. Street lighting shall be installed by the developer as approved by the
Board.
4. Following street construction, the developer or contractor shall conduct a thorough
clean-up of stumps and other debris from the entire street right-of-way. If on-site
disposal of the stumps and debris is proposed, the site shall be indicated on the plan, and
be suitably covered with fill and topsoil, limed, fertilized, and seeded and identified on
the record drawings.
C. Design Guidelines
1. Standards for Public Streets.
Any street intended to be accepted as by the Town Council as a public street shall
conform to the standards of Chapter 26, Street Acceptance Ordinance of the Freeport
Municipal Code.
2. Standards for Private Roads.
Private roads shall conform to the following standards:
a. Access Control.
Where a lot has frontage on two (2) or more streets, the access to the lot shall be
provided across the frontage and to the street where there is lesser potential for
traffic congestion and for hazards to traffic and pedestrians. This restriction shall
appear as a note on the plan and as a deed restriction for the affected lot.
b. Sight Distances.
Streets and other accesses shall be located and designed in profile and grading to
provide adequate sight distance measured in each direction. Sight distances shall
be measured from the driver’s seat of a vehicle standing on that portion of the exit
with the front of the vehicle a minimum of ten (10) feet behind the curb line or
edge of shoulder, with the height of the eye 3.5 feet, to the top of an object 4.25
feet above the pavement. A minimum sight distance of ten (10) feet for each mile
per hour of the posted speed limit shall be provided. The Project Review Board
may require a more or less stringent standard for sight distances depending on the
condition of the road, the volume of traffic on a road or other circumstances unique
to the property. A more or less stringent standard may be allowed or required only
if recommended by a traffic engineer or other qualified professional.
c. Vertical Alignment.
09/03/19 41
Accesses shall be designed to prevent surface water from draining across the
intersection. Accesses shall slope upward or downward from the gutter line at a
maximum slope of three percent (3%) for at least seventy-five (75) feet. The
maximum grade over the entire length shall not exceed ten percent (10%).
Accesses shall be flat enough to prevent the dragging of any vehicle undercarriage.
d. Access Layout and Design.
The layout and design of the intersection of a proposed street or other access with
an existing or proposed public street shall be appropriate for the anticipated use
and traffic volume. Any access with a peak hour traffic volume of more than one
hundred and fifty (150) passenger car equivalent trips shall be designed based on a
site specific traffic analysis prepared by a traffic engineer.
e. Access Location and Spacing.
1) Minimum Corner Clearance.
Corner clearance shall be measured from the point of tangency of the corner
to the point of tangency of the access. Unsignalized intersections shall
provide fifty (50) feet of corner clearance; signalized intersections shall
provide one hundred and fifty (150) feet of corner clearance.
2) Access Spacing.
Accesses and street intersections shall be separated from adjacent accesses;
streets, by at least one hundred (100) feet from other residential access and
street intersections, and two hundred (200) feet from other commercial
accesses and intersections. All access and street intersections shall be at least
ten (10) feet from a property line.
f. Number of Accesses.
The maximum number of accesses shall conform to Section 512 of the Freeport
Zoning Ordinance.
g. Curb Requirements.
All accesses entering a curbed street shall be curbed with materials matching the
street curbing to a point recommended by the Freeport Public Works Director.
Sloped curbing is required around all raised channelization islands or medians.
h. Street Design and Construction Standards.
09/03/19 42
1) Where the applicant proposes improvements within existing public streets,
the proposed design and construction details shall be approved in writing by
the Town Engineer or the Maine Department of Transportation, as
appropriate.
2) The following notes shall appear on the recorded plan:
(a) “The Town of Freeport shall not be responsible for the maintenance,
repair, plowing, or similar services for the private road(s) shown on this
plan.”
(b) “Any private road shown on this plan shall not be accepted as a public
street by the Town of Freeport unless the way complies with the
standards for public streets included in Chapter 26, Street Acceptance
Ordinance of the Freeport Municipal Code.”
i. Street Design Standards.
1) These design guidelines shall control the roadway, shoulders, curbs,
sidewalks, drainage systems, culverts, and other appurtenances associated
with the private road, and shall be met unless the applicant can provide clear
and convincing evidence that an alternate design is good engineering practice
and will meet the performance standards of Article 11.5.
2) Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where
their control is placed with the municipality.
3) Adjacent to areas zoned and designed for commercial use, or where a change
of zoning to a zone which permits commercial uses is contemplated by the
municipality, the street right-of-way and/or pavement width shall be
increased on each side by one-half of the amount necessary to bring the road
into conformance with the standards for commercial streets in these
regulations.
4) Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow street (not meeting the rightof-
way width requirements of the standards for streets in these regulations),
or when the comprehensive plan indicates plans for realignment or widening
of a road that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the
plan shall indicate reserved areas for widening or realigning the road marked
“Reserved for Road Realignment (Widening) Purposes.” Land reserved for
such purposes may not be included in computing lot area or setback
requirements of the zoning ordinance. When such widening or realignment
is included in the municipality’s capital investment plan, the reserve area
shall not be included in any lot.
5) Any subdivision except Commercial Open Space Subdivisions, containing
09/03/19 43
more than fifteen (15) dwelling units or lots, whichever is less, shall have at
least two (2) street connections with existing public streets, streets shown on
an Official Map, or streets on an approved subdivision plan for which
performance guarantees have been filed and accepted. In Village Open
Space Subdivisions this section may be met by reserving right-of-way for
future connections and offering the right-of-way to the town for acceptance
as a public way. {Amended, effective 09/03/19}
6) To the extent possible, the centerline of the roadway shall be the centerline of
the right-of-way.
7) Where street lengths exceed one thousand (1,000) feet between intersections
with other streets, the Board may require a utility/pedestrian easement, at
least twenty (20) feet in width, to provide for underground utility crossings
and/or a pedestrian pathway of at least five (5) feet in width, constructed in
accordance with design standards in this section. Maintenance obligations of
the easement shall be included in the written description of the easement.
8) Dead-End Streets. {Amended, effective 09/03/19}
In addition to the design standards in Table 11.5-1, dead-end streets shall be
constructed to provide a cul-de-sac turnaround or other turnaround approved
by the Director of Public Works. Where a turning circle is used, it shall meet
the following requirements for radii:
Property line: eighty-five (85) feet
Outer edge of pavement: seventy-five (75) feet
Inner edge of pavement: fifty (50) feet
The Project Review Board may require larger radii for turning circles on a
commercial street. The island in the circle shall be landscaped in a manner
requiring low maintenance. Where the turning circle is in a wooded area
prior to development, a stand of trees shall be maintained within the center of
the circle if possible. The Board shall require the reservation of a twenty-
(20-) foot easement in line with the street to provide continuation of
pedestrian traffic or utilities to the next street. The Board may also require
the reservation of a fifty- (50-) foot easement in line with the street to provide
continuation of the road where future subdivision is possible. If a
hammerhead or T-turnaround is approved, no driveways shall enter onto the
turnaround. In all subdivisions except Commercial Open Space
Subdivisions, a dead-end street shall be limited to a maximum of fifteen (15)
dwelling units (not including corner lots that gain their access from another
street). The length of a dead-end shall not exceed two thousand five hundred
(2,500) feet.
09/03/19 44
1. The Project Review Board may allow more than 15 lots provided the net
residential density allows the additional lots and subject to the following
limitations:
(a) If the parcel is greater than 80 acres of undeveloped land, three
(3) additional lots are allowed. In calculating whether a lot has
more than 80 undeveloped acres, 2.5 acres shall be deducted from
the total acreage for every existing dwelling unit(s) on the
property; and/or
(b) If access to trails for the general public and/or parking is
provided in any one of the following ways:
i. one (1) additional lot is allowed for every one-half mile of
trail easement over an existing trail. A trail easement shall be
at least twenty (20) feet wide and shall be in locations that
avoid wetlands, stream crossing or other environmentally
sensitive areas. Any trail easement proposed in a wetland,
stream crossing or other environmentally sensitive area shall
not be included in calculating the length of an easement to be
eligible for an additional lot. To be eligible for additional
lot(s), the trail must have a tread width of at least eighteen
inches (18”) and a cleared area (this includes scrub and shrub
vegetation and trees less than four inches in diameter) of at
least three feet (3’) on both sides of the tread, and a cleared
height of at least eight feet (8’). Additionally, any erosion on
existing trails must be corrected including the reason for the
erosion and all stream crossings must be above the flood area
and in good repair. Existing trails not meeting these standards
must be brought up to that standard for the full length of the
trail. The trail must have access to a public road, a private
road that allows the public the right to use the road, or another
well-established trail system. If new trails are required to
meet this standard, see subsection ii below. Before any
development is eligible for additional lot(s) under this
subsection, to have maximum input, the Project Review Board
is authorized request a recommendation from a public, private
or non-profit entity that owns conservation land in the area to
determine if the easement is in an appropriate location for a
connection to another trail system either existing or possible
in the future, if any improvements to the trail(s) are necessary,
or if the trail easement provides a public benefit. Any
required easement must be accepted by the Freeport Town
Council or other entity that can accept easements for public
use and recorded in the Cumberland County Registry of
Deeds before any additional lots allowed pursuant to this
09/03/19 45
Section i are offered for sale; and/or
ii. One (1) additional lot is allowed for every one-quarter mile of
trail that is built by the applicant as either a connection to an
existing trail system, as a relocation or reconstruction of an
existing system, or as a new system. The constructed trail
must have a tread width of at least eighteen inches (18)” and a
cleared area (this includes scrub and shrub vegetation and
trees less than four inches in diameter) of at least three feet
(3’) on both sides of the tread, and a cleared height of at least
eight feet (8’). A new trail must include a trail easement that is
at least twenty feet wide (20’) and shall be in locations that
avoid wetlands, stream crossing or other environmentally
sensitive areas. Any trail easement proposed in a wetland,
stream crossing or other environmentally sensitive area shall
not be included in calculating the length of a trail that is
eligible for an additional lot(s). The trail must have access to
a public road, a private road that allows the public the right to
use the road, or another well-established trail system. Before
any trail system is eligible for additional lot(s), to have
maximum input, the Project Review Board is authorized
request a recommendation from a public, private or non-profit
entity that own conservation land in the area to determine if
the easement is in an appropriate location for a connection to
another trail system either existing or possible in the future,
and/or if the trail easement provides a public benefit. Any
required easement must be accepted by the Freeport Town
Council or other entity that can accept easements for public
use and recorded in the Cumberland County Registry of
Deeds and all trail construction must be completed according
to the plans before any additional lots allowable pursuant to
this section ii are offered for sale. The cost of constructing the
trails shall be included in the performance guarantee for the
subdivision, and/or
iii. One (1) additional lot is allowed for trail construction and trail
easement that provides access to tidal areas or other water
body regardless of length in addition to allowable lots as a
result of subsections i and/or ii above, and/or
iv. One (1) additional lot is allowed for the construction of at
least three parking spaces for a trail or trail system. The
parking spaces must meet the standards of Section 514.7.b
(parking areas for open spaces). The cost of constructing the
parking spaces shall be included in the performance guarantee
09/03/19 46
for the subdivision. All parking space construction must be
completed according to the plan before any additional lots
allowable as a result of this subsection iv are offered for sale
and/or
v. No more than four (4) additional lots may be allowed for any
subdivision because of these Sections 11.5.C.8.b.i – iv.
vi. Any trails or parking areas that are proposed for public use
pursuant to these Sections 11.5.C.8.b.i-iv must include a
mechanism for stewardship and maintenance.
2. The Project Review Board may allow a road longer than 2,500 feet, but
in no case any longer than 3,500 feet, if:
a. The shape or configuration of the parcel makes a longer dead end
road necessary for the preservation of open space or
environmentally sensitive areas.
b. Dead-end roads longer than 2,500 shall have a pavement width of
20 feet with four foot shoulders for the entire length of the road.
9) Sidewalks.
In the Freeport Village Overlay District, sidewalks shall be provided as
described in the Freeport Village Design Standards.
Sidewalks are required if connection to an existing sidewalk is feasible. The
Project Review Board may permit sidewalks on one side of the street or may
waive the requirement for sidewalks if the Board finds that there are adequate
alternative provisions for pedestrians outside of the roadway or the right-ofway
or that the scale of the project makes sidewalks unnecessary on one or
both sides.
(a) Sidewalk construction shall be in conformance with the Sidewalk
Specifications of the Freeport Policy Manual,
(b) The Project Review Board may approve the use of alternative
materials for sidewalk construction with the approval of the Director
of Public Works. The applicant shall be responsible for demonstrating
that the alternative material is an acceptable equivalent.
10) Bicycle lanes and Trails.
In the Freeport Village Overlay District, bicycle lanes and trails shall be
09/03/19 47
provided as described in the Freeport Village Design Standards.
11) Curbs shall be installed wherever needed to control storm water drainage or
vehicle movement. The specified traveled way width shall be measured
between the curbs.
* Sidewalks required if connection to existing sidewalk is feasible.
** Maximum grade may be exceeded for a length of 100 feet or less.
*** Roadway crown is per foot of lane width.
**** Street intersection angles shall be as close to 90° as feasible but no less than the listed
angle.
Table 11.5-1 Street Design Guidelines
Description Private Roaddead-
end
Private Road -
all others
Minimum Right-of-Way Width 50 ft. 50 ft.
Minimum Traveled Way
(Pavement) Width
18 ft. 22 ft.
Sidewalk Width* 4 ft. 5 ft.
Minimum Grade if curbing is used 1 1%
Maximum Grade** 8% 8%
Minimum Centerline Radius 190 ft. 285 ft.
- with superelevation
- without superelevation
Roadway Crown*** ¼”/ft. ¼”/ft.
Minimum width of Shoulders (gravel or paved) 2’ 2’
Minimum angle of street intersections**** 60º 60º
Maximum grade within 75 ft. of intersection 3% 3%
Minimum curb radii at intersections 15 ft. 20 ft.
Minimum pavement radii at intersections
Design Speed – mph
20 ft.
25
30 ft.
35
09/03/19 48
j. Street Construction Standards.
Private roads shall be constructed according to the performance standards of the
Maine Department of Transportation. The Project Review Board may waive or
modify these standards with the approval of the Director of Public Works if it finds
that the alternative will be equivalent.
1) The minimum thickness of material after reaching ninety-five percent
(95%) of modified Proctor maximum density shall meet the specifications
in Table 11.5-2.
Table 11.5-2 Minimum Pavement Materials Thicknesses
Private Road Private Road
dead-end all others
Aggregate Subbase Course 12" 15"
(Max. sized stone 6")
Crushed Aggregate Base Course 3" 4"
Hot Bituminous Pavement
Total Thickness 3" 3"
Surface Course 1" 1"
(MeDOT 403.210 Superpave
Mix 3/8” [9.5mm])
Base Course 2" 2"
(MeDOT 403.207 Superpave
Mix ¾” [19mm])
2) Bases and Pavement.
(a) Bases/Subbase.
i. The Aggregate Subbase Course shall be sand or gravel of hard
durable particles free from vegetative matter, lumps, or balls of
clay and other deleterious substances. The gradation of the part
that passes a three-inch (3") square mesh sieve shall meet the
grading requirements of Table 11.5-3.
Aggregate for the subbase shall contain no particles of rock
09/03/19 49
exceeding six (6) inches in any dimension.
ii.
An Aggregate Base Course shall be placed on top of the
subbase course. The Aggregate Base Course shall be screened or
crushed gravel of hard durable particles free from vegetative
matter, lumps, or balls of clay and other deleterious substances.
The gradation of the part that passes a three-inch (3") square mesh
sieve shall meet the grading requirements of Table 11.5-4.
Aggregate for the base shall contain no particles of rock
exceeding two (2) inches in any dimension.
Table 11.5-4 Base Course Grading Requirements
Sieve Designation
Percentage by Weight Passing
Square Mesh Sieves
3/8 inch 45-70%
1/4 inch 30-55%
No. 50 0-20%
No. 200 0-5%
(b) Pavement Joints.
Where pavement joins an existing pavement, the existing pavement
shall be cut along a smooth line to form a neat, even, vertical joint.
(c) Pavements.
i. Minimum standards for the base layer of pavement shall be the
Maine Department of Transportation Specification 403.207 for
Superpave mix 3/4" (18mm). The pavement may be placed
when the air temperature in the shade at the paving location is
35°F or higher and the surface to be paved is not frozen or
unreasonably wet.
ii. Minimum standards for the surface layer of pavement shall be
Table 11.5-3 Aggregate Subbase Grading Requirements
Sieve Designation
Percentage by Weight Passing
Square Mesh Sieves
1/4 inch 25-70%
No. 40 0-30%
No. 200 0-7%
09/03/19 50
the Maine Department of Transportation Specification 403.210
for Superpave mix 3/8". The pavement may be placed when the
air temperature in the shade at the paving location is 50°F or
higher.
(d) Gravel Surfaces.
Private ways in the RR 1 & 2 and the RP 2 Districts that are less than
seven hundred (700) feet in length may have gravel surfaces provided
the road grade is less than four percent (4%), and the road doesn’t
cross any streams. Surface gravel shall be placed on top of the
aggregate subbase and shall have no stones larger than two (2) inches
in size and meet the grading requirements of Table 11.5-5.
Table 11.5-5 Surface Gravel Grading Requirements
Percentage by Weight Passing
Sieve Designation Square Mesh Sieves
2 inches 95-100%
½ inches 30-65%
No. 200 7-12%
k. Utilities.
Utilities serving subdivisions shall be installed underground. The Board may
approve overhead utilities when the applicant provides evidence that the increased
costs of underground utilities will raise the costs of the housing beyond the market
in that location. When utilities are installed underground, the subdivider shall
install appropriate signs indicating the location of such utilities.
l. Monuments.
1) Stone or precast reinforced concrete monuments shall be set at all street
intersections and points of curvature, but no further than seven hundred and
fifty (750) feet apart along all street lines.
2) Stone or precast reinforced concrete monuments shall be set at all corners and
angle points of the subdivision boundaries where the interior angle of the
subdivision boundaries is one hundred and thirty-five (135) degrees or less.
3) Stone or precast reinforced concrete monuments shall be a minimum of four
(4) inches square at the top and four (4) feet in length, and set in the ground at
final grade level. If site conditions prohibit the installation of a four- (4-) foot
monument, the Town Engineer may approve alternative provisions for
permanent monumentation. After they are set, a drill hole one-half inch deep
09/03/19 51
shall locate the point or points described above.
4) All other subdivision boundary corners and angle points, as well as all lot
boundary corners and angle points shall be marked by suitable
monumentation, as required by the Maine Board of Registration of Land
Surveyors.
11.6 Sewage Disposal.
A. State Standard
Sewage disposal. The proposed subdivision will provide for adequate sewage waste disposal
and will not cause an unreasonable burden on municipal services if they are utilized.
B. Performance Standards
1. Public System.
a. When practical, any Major or Minor Subdivision shall make provisions for
connection to the public sewer system if the Freeport Sewer District indicates
that it can provide sewer service.
b. The Freeport Sewer District shall certify that providing service to the proposed
subdivision is within the capacity of the system’s existing collection and
treatment system or improvements planned to be complete prior to the
construction of the subdivision.
c. All components of the sanitary sewerage system must be designed by a
professional engineer registered in the State of Maine. The Sewer District shall
review and approve the construction drawings for the sewerage system. The size
and location of laterals, collectors, manholes, and pump stations shall be
reviewed and approved in writing by the District. All components of the system
shall be tested for full compliance with the design specifications and construction
practices established by the District.
d. The construction of sewer lines shall include the construction of laterals to the
property line of each lot created.
e. Upstream sewage flows shall be accommodated by an adequately sized system
through the proposed subdivision for existing conditions and potential
development in the upstream area or areas tributary to the proposed
development.
2. Private Systems.
09/03/19 52
a. The applicant shall submit evidence of site suitability for subsurface sewage
disposal prepared by a Maine Licensed Site Evaluator in full compliance with the
requirements of the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
1) The site evaluator shall certify in writing that all test pits which meet the
requirements for a new system represent an area large enough for a
disposal area on soils which meet the Disposal Rules.
2) A second site with suitable soils shall be shown as a reserve area for
future replacement of the disposal area if the limiting factor has been
identified as being within eighteen (18) inches of the surface, and if all of
the following conditions are met: if the lot is less than one acre in size or
is located in a subdivision that has a net residential density of more than
one unit per acre; and if the lot is located outside of the existing and
likely future service area of the public water system; and if the lot
includes a natural resource such as, but not limited to, being located over
a mapped sand and gravel aquifer, or being in a shoreland area, or being
within one hundred (100) horizontal feet of a high value wetland. The
reserve area shall be shown on the plan and restricted so as not to be built
upon.
3) In no instance shall a disposal area be on a site which requires a New
System Variance from the Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules. The
Board may waive this standard only in instances where no other
reasonable alternative exists. In determining the granting of a waiver, the
Board may require the applicant to submit a list of alternatives prepared
by a Licensed Site Evaluator.
b. In open space subdivisions, individual subsurface wastewater disposal systems
may be located within the required open space provided that an appropriate
easement granting the lot owner this right is created and the location and
easement are approved by the Project Review Board. In approving such
easements, the Project Review Board may require that reasonable standards be
established to assure that the natural resource value of the required open space
will not be reduced.
11.7 Solid Waste.
A. State Standard
Municipal solid waste disposal. The proposed subdivision will not cause an unreasonable
burden on the municipality’s ability to dispose of solid waste, if municipal services are to be
utilized.
B. Performance Standards
09/03/19 53
The Project Review Board shall require the applicant to make arrangements for the disposal of
the solid waste in accordance with the Freeport Solid Waste Control and Solid Waste Flow
Control Ordinances. The alternate arrangements shall be at a disposal facility which is in
compliance with its license.
11.8 Impact on Natural Beauty, Aesthetics, Historic Sites, Wildlife Habitat, Rare Natural
Areas, or Public Access to the Shoreline.
A. State Standard
Aesthetic, cultural, and natural values. The proposed subdivision will not have an undue
adverse effect on the scenic or natural beauty of the area, aesthetics, historic sites, significant
wildlife habitat identified by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or the
municipality, rare and irreplaceable natural areas, or any public rights for physical or visual
access to the shoreline.
B. Performance Standards
If the subdivision is designed as an open space subdivision or a village open space subdivision
in conformance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, the plan shall provide for the
conservation of the highest value resources on the site. All subdivisions shall conform to the
following:
1. Preservation of Natural Beauty and Aesthetics.
a. The plan shall, by notes on the final plan and deed restrictions, limit the clearing of
trees to those areas designated on the plan.
b. The subdivision shall be designed to minimize the visibility of buildings from
existing public roads to the extent possible.
2. Retention of Open Spaces and Natural, Historic, or Archeological Features.
a. If any portion of the subdivision is located within an area designated as a unique
natural area by the comprehensive plan, or a significant village open space
identified on the Village Open Space Map 1 or could provide a trail connection or
link to or between civic destinations or the employment destination as shown on
Village Open Space Map 2 the plan shall indicate appropriate measures for the
preservation of the values which qualify the site for such designation.
b. If any portion of the subdivision is designated as a site of historic, prehistoric, or
archeological importance by the comprehensive plan or the Maine Historic
Preservation Commission, appropriate measures for the protection of the historic,
prehistoric, or archeological resources shall be included in the plan.
09/03/19 54
3. Protection of Significant Wildlife Habitat.
If any portion of a proposed subdivision lies within areas identified and mapped by the
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (in digital format dated October 2003, as
amended from time to time), the applicant shall demonstrate that there shall be minimal
impacts on the habitat and species it supports. The plan shall provide for protection of
the identified resource in a manner acceptable to the Maine Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife or in accordance with the recommendations of a wildlife biologist
with demonstrated experience with the wildlife resource being impacted and approved
by the Board. In the latter situation, the report prepared by the wildlife biologist shall
assess the potential impact of the subdivision on the significant habitat and adjacent
areas that are important to the maintenance of the affected species and shall describe
appropriate mitigation measures to ensure that the subdivision will have minimal
impacts on the habitat and the species it supports. These areas include:
a. Habitat for species appearing on the official state or federal lists of endangered or
threatened species;
b. High and moderate value waterfowl habitats, including nesting and feeding areas;
or
c. A high or moderate value deer wintering area.
4. Shoreline Access.
Any existing public rights of access to the shoreline of a water body shall be maintained
by means of easements or rights-of-way, or should be included in the required open
space with provisions made for continued public access.
C. Design Guidelines
1. Preservation of Natural Beauty and Aesthetics.
a. Subdivisions within the Rural Residential Districts shall maintain any existing
vegetated buffer along existing roads. The buffer may be broken only for
driveways and streets.
b. Where practical the subdivision shall be designed to encourage locating
buildings within forested areas and to discourage locating buildings in open
fields visible from existing public roads.
2. Retention of Natural or Historic Features.
Proposed subdivisions which include or are adjacent to buildings, sites, or districts on
09/03/19 55
the National Register of Historic Places or which the comprehensive plan has identified
as being of historical significance shall be designed in such a manner as to minimize the
impacts on the historic features. When the historic features to be protected include
buildings, the placement and the architectural design of new structures in the subdivision
shall be compatible with the historic structures. The Board shall seek the advice of the
Maine Historic Preservation Commission in reviewing such plans.
3. Protection of Significant Wildlife Habitat and Important Habitat Areas.
The following guidelines are designed to protect the significant wildlife resources
identified in the municipality. The Board recognizes that wildlife management must
take into account many site-specific variables. Applicants proposing to subdivide land
within identified wildlife resources must consult with the Maine Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife or a qualified wildlife biologist and provide their written
comments to the Board. The guidelines of this section shall apply to only those
subdivisions which include significant wildlife habitat or resources identified in Section
11.8.B.3.
a. Protection of Habitat of Endangered or Threatened Species.
1) The habitat of species appearing on the official state or federal lists of
endangered or threatened species shall be maintained in the required open
space.
2) Deed restrictions and notes on the plan shall reflect standards from the
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife for removal of vegetation
within two hundred and fifty (250) feet of the habitat for species
appearing on the list of endangered or threatened species unless the
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife has approved cutting of
vegetation in writing.
b. Protection of Waterfowl Habitat.
1) There shall be no cutting of vegetation within the strip of land extending
seventy-five (75) feet inland from the normal high-water mark of high
and moderate value waterfowl habitats, including nesting and feeding
areas.
2) This restriction shall appear as a note on the plan and as a deed restriction
to the affected lots.
c. Protection of Deer Wintering Areas.
The report prepared by a wildlife biologist, selected or approved by the Board,
shall include a management plan for deer wintering areas.
09/03/19 56
d. Protection of Shoreland Areas.
1) All areas subject to Shoreland Zoning shall comply with the relevant
standards.
2) These restrictions shall appear as notes on the plan and as deed
restrictions to the affected lots.
e. If the proposed subdivision includes other important wildlife habitat as identified
by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or the comprehensive plan,
the restrictions on activities in and around these areas shall be reviewed by the
Department or a qualified wildlife biologist, and their comments presented in
writing to the Board.
11.9 Conformance with Zoning Ordinance and Other Land Use Ordinances.
A. State Standard
Conformity with local ordinances and plans. The proposed subdivision conforms with a duly
adopted subdivision ordinance, zoning ordinance, floodplain ordinance, the comprehensive
plan, and other ordinances included in the municipal code as appropriate. In making this
determination, the municipal reviewing authority may interpret these ordinances and plans.
B. Performance Standards
The proposed subdivision shall meet all applicable performance standards or design criteria
from this Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance, the Floodplain Management Ordinance, and all
other applicable land use regulations. If there is a conflict between the requirements of this
ordinance and any other ordinance or between the requirements of other ordinances, the more
stringent requirement shall apply.
C. Design Guidelines
For lots in large lot subdivisions, and other lots greater than twice the minimum lot size,
deed restrictions and notes on the plan shall either prohibit future divisions of the lots or
specify that any future division shall constitute a revision to the plan and shall require
approval from the Board based upon the criteria of the subdivision statute at the time of
the revision, the standards of the Town’s Subdivision Ordinance then in effect, and any
conditions placed on the original approval.
11.10 Financial and Technical Capacity.
A. State Standard
09/03/19 57
Financial and technical capacity. The subdivider has adequate financial and technical
capacity to meet the standards of this section.
B. Performance Standards
1. Financial Capacity.
The applicant shall have adequate financial resources to construct the proposed
improvements and meet the criteria of the statute and the standards of these regulations.
When the applicant proposes to construct the buildings as well as the subdivision
improvements, the applicant shall have adequate financial resources to construct the
total development. In making the above determinations, the Board shall consider the
proposed time frame for construction and the effects of inflation.
2. Technical Ability.
a. The applicant shall retain qualified contractors and consultants to supervise,
construct, and inspect the required improvements in the proposed subdivision.
b. In determining the applicant’s technical ability, the Board shall consider the
applicant’s previous experience, the experience and training of the applicant’s
consultants and contractors, and the existence of violations of previous approvals
involving the applicant, consultants, contractors, or other agents of the applicant.
11.11 Impact on Water Quality or Shoreline.
A. State Standard
Surface waters; outstanding river segments. Whenever situated entirely or partially within
the watershed of any pond or lake or within two hundred and fifty (250) feet of any wetland,
great pond, or river as defined in Title 38, Chapter 3, Subchapter I, Article 2-B¹, the proposed
subdivision will not adversely affect the quality of that body of water or unreasonably affect the
shoreline of that body of water.
1. To avoid circumventing the intent of this provision, whenever a proposed subdivision
adjoins a shoreland strip narrower than two hundred and fifty (250) feet which is not
lotted, the proposed subdivision shall be reviewed as if lot lines extended to the shore.
2. The frontage and setback provisions of this paragraph do not apply either within areas
zoned as general development or its equivalent under shoreland zoning as defined in
Title 38, Chapter 3, Subchapter I, Article 2-B¹, or within areas designated by ordinance
as densely developed. The determination of which areas are densely developed must be
based on a finding that existing development met the definitional requirements of
Section 4401, Subsection 1, on September 23, 1983.
09/03/19 58
B. Performance Standards
The application shall demonstrate that the cutting or removal of vegetation along water bodies
will not increase water temperature, or result in shoreline erosion or sedimentation of water
bodies. It shall also demonstrate compliance with the shoreland zoning performance standards
where applicable.
C. Design Guidelines
These restrictions shall appear as notes on the plan and as deed restrictions to the
affected lots.
11.12 Impact on Ground Water Quality or Quantity.
A. State Standard
Ground water. The proposed subdivision will not, alone or in conjunction with existing
activities, adversely affect the quality or quantity of ground water.
B. Performance Standards
1. Ground Water Quality.
a. No subdivision shall increase any contaminant concentration in the ground water
to more than one-half of the Primary Drinking Water Standards. No subdivision
shall increase any contaminant concentration in the ground water to more than
the Secondary Drinking Water Standards.
b. If ground water contains contaminants in excess of the primary standards, and
the subdivision is to be served by on-site ground water supplies, the applicant
shall demonstrate how water quality will be improved or treated.
c. If ground water contains contaminants in excess of the secondary standards, the
subdivision shall not cause the concentration of the parameters in question to
exceed one hundred and fifty percent (150%) of the ambient concentration.
d. When a hydrogeologic assessment is submitted, the assessment shall contain at
least the following information:
1) A map showing the basic soils types.
2) The depth to the water table at representative points throughout the
subdivision.
09/03/19 59
3) Drainage conditions throughout the subdivision.
4) Data on the existing ground water quality, either from test wells in the
subdivision or from existing wells on neighboring properties.
5) An analysis and evaluation of the effect of the subdivision on ground
water resources. In the case of residential developments, the evaluation
shall, at a minimum, include a projection of post-development nitratenitrogen
concentrations at any wells within the subdivision, or at the
subdivision boundaries; or at a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet from
potential contamination sources, whichever is a shortest distance.
6) A map showing the location of any subsurface wastewater disposal
systems and drinking water wells within the subdivision and within two
hundred (200) feet of the subdivision boundaries.
e. Projections of ground water quality shall be based on the assumption of drought
conditions (assuming sixty percent (60%) of annual average precipitation).
f. Subsurface wastewater disposal systems and drinking water wells shall be
constructed as shown on the map submitted with the assessment. If construction
standards for drinking water wells or other measures to reduce ground water
contamination and protect drinking water supplies are recommended in the
assessment, those standards shall be included as a note on the final plan, and as
restrictions in the deeds to the affected lots.
2. Ground Water Quantity.
Ground water withdrawals by a proposed subdivision utilizing a community well shall
not lower the water table beyond the boundaries of the subdivision as allowed by
Section 523.B Groundwater Protection of the Freeport Zoning Ordinance.
11.13 Floodplain Management.
A. State Standard
Flood areas. Based on the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Flood Boundary and
Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps, and information presented by the applicant
whether the subdivision is in a flood-prone area. If the subdivision, or any part of it, is in such
an area, the subdivider shall determine the 100-year flood elevation and flood hazard boundaries
within the subdivision. The proposed subdivision plan must include a condition of plan
approval requiring that principal structures in the subdivision will be constructed with their
lowest floor, including the basement, at least one foot above the 100-year flood elevation.
B. Performance Standards
09/03/19 60
When any part of a subdivision is located in a special flood hazard area as identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency:
1. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
2. All building shall be in accordance with the Freeport Floodplain Ordinance as amended
from time to time.
3. If restrictions are necessary, they shall be included in any deed, lease, purchase and sale
agreement, or document transferring or expressing an intent to transfer any interest in
real estate or structure, including but not limited to a time-share interest. The statement
shall clearly state that the municipality will enforce the construction requirements and
that fact shall also be included in the deed or any other document previously described.
11.14 Identification of Freshwater Wetlands.
A. State Standard
Freshwater wetlands. All freshwater wetlands within the proposed subdivision have been
identified on any maps submitted as part of the application, regardless of the size of these
wetlands. Any mapping of freshwater wetlands may be done with the help of the local soil and
water conservation district.
B. Performance Standards
Freshwater wetlands, including forested wetlands, shall be identified and mapped in accordance
with the 1987 Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual, published by the United States
Army Corps of Engineers.
11.15 Rivers, Streams, and Brooks.
A. State Standard
River, stream or brook. Any river, stream or brook within or abutting the proposed
subdivision has been identified on any maps submitted as part of the application. For purposes
of this section, “river, stream or brook” has the same meaning as in Title 38, Section 480-B,
Subsection 9.
B. Performance Standards
The final subdivision plan shall show all rivers, streams, and brooks that are located within the
subdivision or abut the subdivision.
09/03/19 61
11.16 Storm Water Management.
A. State Standard
Storm water. The proposed subdivision will provide for adequate storm water management.
B. Performance Standards
1. Adequate provision shall be made for the management of the quantity and quality of all
storm water generated within the subdivision, and any drained ground water through a
management system using practices equivalent to those described in the Storm Water
Management for Maine: Best Management Practices, published by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection, 1995. In the Freeport Village Overlay District
the standards may be met on-site or off-site; where off-site facilities are used, the
applicant must submit documentation that the off-site facilities will be dedicated to
providing stormwater management for the subdivision by easement, covenant, or other
appropriate legal instrument. The storm water management system shall be designed to
meet the following standards:
a. Quantity.
1) Peak discharge rates shall be limited to the predevelopment levels for the
two- (2-) year, ten- (10-) year, and twenty-five- (25-) year frequency,
twenty-four (24-) hour duration storm unless storm water from the
subdivision will drain directly into the Atlantic Ocean or other large water
body approved by the Town Engineer as having adequate capacity to
absorb the increased runoff without adverse impacts.
2) Storm water management provisions shall use storm water BMP’s that
provide for the infiltration of surface runoff into the ground and that
minimize the total volume of runoff from the site.
b. Quality.
1) The quality of stormwater flows offsite shall be addressed. Storm water
best management practices (BMP’s) appropriate for the site and type of
activity must be used to meet the standards specified in this section.
Preference shall be given to the use of nonstructural BMP’s where
feasible. Retention of the first one-half inch of runoff from a storm event
for twenty-four (24) hours may be required.
2. Where necessary to achieve the above standards, there shall be provided easements or
09/03/19 62
drainage rights-of-way with swales, culverts, catch basins, or other means of channeling
surface water within the subdivision and over other properties. Whenever elements of
the storm drainage system are not within the right-of-way of a public street and the
facilities will not be offered to the Town for acceptance as public facilities, perpetual
easements not less than thirty (30) feet in width, conforming substantially with the lines
of existing natural drainage, shall be provided to the municipality allowing maintenance
and improvement of the system. If there are elements of the storm water system serving
more than one lot that require future maintenance to remain effective that are located
outside of the right-of-way of a proposed public street, the Project Review Board may
require that the applicant offer to give these to the Town with a condition of approval
that the Town be permitted to assess the lot owners on a pro rata basis for the costs of
the future maintenance of these storm water facilities. A note relative to this condition
of approval shall appear on the approved plan and an indication of the condition of
approval shall be placed in the deed of each lot subject to the condition. When an offer
of dedication is required by the Project Review Board, the applicant shall be responsible
for the maintenance of these storm water facilities until they are accepted by the Town.
c. In addition to any other applicable requirements of this Ordinance and the Freeport
Subdivision Ordinance, any development which would require a stormwater
management permit from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
under 38 M.R.S.A. 420-D shall comply with the rules adopted by DEP under 38
M.R.S.A. 420-D(1), as the same may be amended from time to time, and the applicant
shall document such compliance to the Freeport Project Review Board. Where the
standards or other provisions of such stormwater rules conflict with municipal
ordinances, the stricter (more protective) standard shall apply.
d. Subdivisions requiring stormwater management facilities shall enter into a Maintenance
Agreement with the Town. A sample of this agreement is attached as Appendix J of this
Ordinance.
C. Design Guidelines
1. The design of best management practices shall be substantially equivalent to those
described in the Storm Water Management for Maine: Best Management Practices,
published by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, 1995.
2. The minimum pipe size for any storm drainage pipe shall be fifteen (15) inches for
driveway entrances and eighteen (18) inches for cross culverts. The minimum pipe size
between drainage structures and at inlets and outfalls shall be fifteen (15) inches.
Maximum trench width at the pipe crown shall be the outside diameter of the pipe plus
two (2) feet. Pipe shall be bedded in a fine granular material reaching a minimum of six
(6) inches below the bottom of the pipe and extending to six (6) inches above the top of
the pipe. The material shall contain no stones larger than three (3) inches, lumps of clay,
or organic matter.
09/03/19 63
3. Catch basins shall be installed where necessary and when located within a street shall be
located at the curb line.
4. Storm Drainage Construction Standards.
a. Materials.
1) Storm drainage pipes shall conform to the requirements of Maine
Department of Transportation materials specifications Section 706 for
non-metallic pipe and Section 707 for metallic pipe. Bituminous-coated
steel pipes shall not be used.
2) Where the storm drainage pipe is to be covered by ten (10) feet or more
of fill material, pipe material with a fifty-(50-)year life shall be used.
These materials include concrete pipe, polymer coated galvanized
corrugated steel pipe, polyvinyl-chloride (PVC) pipe, plastic
polyethylene pipe, and corrugated aluminum alloy pipe.
b. Manholes shall be provided at all changes in vertical or horizontal alignment and
at all junctions. On straight runs, manholes shall be placed at a maximum of four
hundred (400) foot intervals.
5. Upon completion, each catch basin or manhole shall be cleaned of all accumulation of
silt, debris, or foreign matter and shall be kept clean until final acceptance.
11.17 Spaghetti Lots.
A. State Standard
Spaghetti lots prohibited. If any lots in the proposed subdivision have shore frontage on a
river, stream, brook, great pond, or coastal wetland as these features are defined in Title 38,
Section 480-B, none of the lots created within the subdivision have a lot depth to shore frontage
ratio greater than five (5) to one (1).
B. Performance Standards
Any lot that has shore frontage on a river, stream, brook, or great pond as defined by Title 38
M.R.S.A. §480-B, shall not have a lot depth to shore frontage ratio greater than five (5) to one
(1). (See definition of frontage – shore in Article 3.2)
09/03/19 64
11.18 Phosphorus Impacts on Great Ponds.
A. State Standard
Lake phosphorus concentration. The long-term cumulative effects of the proposed
subdivision will not unreasonably increase a great pond’s phosphorus concentration during the
construction phase and life of the proposed subdivision.
11.19 Impacts on Adjoining Municipalities.
A. State Standard
Impact on adjoining municipality. For any proposed subdivision that crosses municipal
boundaries, the proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable traffic congestion or unsafe
conditions with respect to the use of existing public ways in an adjoining municipality in which
part of the subdivision is located.
B. Performance Standards
If the subdivision is located in two (2) or more municipalities, the applicant shall demonstrate
that the project will meet the standards of 11.5 relating to traffic conditions for all roads
impacted by the subdivision regardless of in which municipality the impacted roads are located.
09/03/19 65
ARTICLE 12 - PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES
12.1 Types of Guarantees.
With submittal of the application for final plan approval, the applicant shall provide one of the
following performance guarantees for an amount adequate to cover the total construction costs
of all required improvements, taking into account the time span of the construction schedule and
the inflation rate for construction costs:
A. An escrow account funded by cash or a certified check payable to the Town of Freeport
and governed by an escrow agreement in a form reviewed by the Town Attorney and
acceptable by the Town Manager.
B. An irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution in a form reviewed by the
Town Attorney and acceptable by the Town Manager.
C. Any other performance guarantee reviewed by the Town Attorney as to form and
specifically approved by the Freeport Town Council, provided that, in the opinion of the
Town Council, such performance guarantees provides security substantially equivalent
to an escrow account or an irrevocable letter of credit.
The conditions and amount of the performance guarantee shall be determined by the
Project Review Board with the advice of the Town Engineer, Public Works Director,
municipal officers, and/or Town Attorney.
12.2 Contents of Guarantee.
The performance guarantee shall be based on a construction schedule, including cost estimates
for each major phase of construction, taking into account inflation, and provisions for
inspections of each phase of construction. The performance guarantee instrument must specify
a date after which the applicant will be in default and the Town shall have access to the funds to
finish construction. The performance guarantee may, in the discretion of the Town, provide for
partial releases of the performance guarantee amount as specific portions of the required
improvements are completed.
12.3 Escrow Account.
A cash payment for the establishment of an escrow account shall be made by either a certified
check payable to the Town of Freeport or direct deposit into a bank account opened in the name
of the Town of Freeport as escrow agent. Any interest earned on the escrowed funds shall be
retained by the Town.
09/03/19 66
12.4 Letter of Credit.
An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other lending institution shall be in substantially
the form of Appendix I to this Ordinance.
12.5 Phasing of Development.
The Board may approve plans to develop a Major Subdivision in separate and distinct phases.
This may be accomplished by limiting final approval to those lots abutting that section of the
proposed subdivision street which is covered by a performance guarantee. When development
is phased, road construction shall commence from an existing public way. Final approval of
lots in subsequent phases shall be given only upon satisfactory completion of all requirements
pertaining to previous phases.
12.6 Duration of Guarantee.
The performance guarantee shall remain in force for the entire period during which
development of the subdivision occurs (or in the case of default, while the Town pursues its
remedies for default) until the guarantee is released by the Town in accordance with 12.7. If the
time frame for constructing the improvements covered by the guarantee is extended, the
performance guarantee shall also be extended.
12.7 Release of Guarantee.
Prior to the release of any part of the performance guarantee, the Town Planner shall determine
to his/her satisfaction that the proposed improvements meet or exceed the design and
construction requirements for that portion or phase of the subdivision for which the release is
requested. The decision of the Town Planner shall be based upon the report of the Town
Engineer or other engineer retained by the Town, and any other agencies and departments who
may be involved.
12.8 Default.
If, upon inspection, the Town Engineer finds that any of the required improvements have not
been constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications filed as part of the application,
or have not been completed within any time limit for completion established by the Project
Review Board, he or she shall so report in writing to the Director of Public Works, Town
Planner, Town Manager, and the applicant or builder. The Town Manager shall take any steps
necessary to preserve the Town’s rights.
12.9 Improvements Guaranteed.
Performance guarantees shall be tendered for all improvements required to meet the standards
of these regulations and for the construction of the streets, monumentation, utilities, storm water
management facilities, public sewage collection or disposal facilities, public water systems,
09/03/19 67
pedestrian and bicycle trails, landscaping in open spaces, and erosion and sedimentation control
measures, all as determined by the Project Review Board.
09/03/19 68
ARTICLE 13 -WAIVERS
13.1 Waivers of Submission Requirements Authorized.
Where the Project Review Board determines there are special circumstances relating to a
particular parcel proposed to be subdivided, it may waive portions of the submission
requirements, except any submission requirements as to which the Ordinance specifically
prohibits waiver. For a waiver to be granted, the applicant must demonstrate that the Project
Review Board can evaluate the proposed subdivision under the standards of 30-A M.R.S.A.
§4404 and of this Ordinance without the information contained in the submissions for which the
applicant requests a waiver.
13.2 Waivers of Standards Authorized.
Where the Project Review Board makes written findings of fact that, due to special
circumstances of a particular parcel proposed to be subdivided, the provision of certain required
improvements is not required to provide for the public health, safety, or welfare, or is
inappropriate because of inadequate or nonexistent connecting facilities adjacent to or in
proximity of the proposed subdivision, where the Project Review Board makes written findings
of fact that, due to special circumstances of a particular parcel proposed to be subdivided,
compliance with certain of the standards of 30-A M.R.S.A. §4404 or of this Ordinance is not
required, the Board may waive such requirement or standard, subject to appropriate conditions,
provided the waivers do not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the Freeport
Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Ordinance, or this Ordinance, and provided that the public
health, safety, and welfare will not be compromised by the waiver.
13.3 Conditions.
Waivers may only be granted in accordance with Sections 13.1 and 13.2. When granting
waivers, the Board may set conditions so that the purposes of these regulations are met.
13.4 Waivers to Be Shown on the Recording Plan.
When the Project Review Board grants a waiver from any of the improvements required by this
Ordinance or from any of the standards of 30-A M.R.S.A §4404 or this Ordinance, the
recording plan, to be recorded at the Registry of Deeds, shall indicate the waivers granted and
the date on which they were granted.
09/03/19 69
ARTICLE 14 – CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL
14.1 Standard Condition of Approval
The following note shall appear on the recording plat of every plan:
“The property shown on this plan may be developed and used only as depicted on this
approved plan. All elements and features of the plan and all representations made by the
applicant concerning the development and use of the property which appear in the record of
the Project Review Board approval are conditions of approval. No change from the
conditions of approval is permitted unless an amended plan is submitted and approved under
the provisions of this Ordinance governing revisions to approved plans.”
09/03/19 70
ARTICLE 15 – APPEALS
15.1 Administrative Appeals
a. Any person who has participated in the review process before the Project Review Board
and can demonstrate particularized injury may appeal the final decision of the Project
Review Board on a subdivision application to the Board of Appeals within 30 days after
the Project Review Board has issued its written decision. The appeal must be in writing
and must be accompanied by a filing fee which shall be established by the Town
Council
b. The Board of Appeals shall consider the appeal at a meeting held within 60 days of
receipt of the written request for an appeal. The Board of Appeals shall publish the
time, date, and place of the meeting in a newspaper of area-wide circulation a minimum
of 7 days prior to the meeting. Written notice of the meeting shall be sent to all owners
of property within 200 feet from the property which is the subject of the appeal a
minimum of 10 days prior to the meeting. The meeting is a public proceeding as
defined by law.
c. The Board of Appeals shall not conduct a de novo hearing, but shall review the record of
the proceeding before the Project Review Board. If the Board of Appeals finds the
Project Review Board record to be insufficient, the Board of Appeals may remand the
matter to the Project Review Board for findings and conclusions or for further
proceedings, findings and conclusions.
d. The Board of Appeals may allow persons to present their positions orally or in writing,
based on the record of the proceedings before the Project Review Board. The Board of
Appeals shall not receive new evidence, including testimony or exhibits, which is not
part of the record of the proceedings before the Project Review Board.
e. The Board of Appeals may reverse the decision of the Project Review Board, in whole
or in part, only upon a finding that the decision is contrary to the provisions of this
Ordinance or that the decision is unsupported by substantial evidence in the record.
f. The decision of the Board of Appeals shall be in writing and shall contain findings and
conclusions that clearly state, on all relevant factual and legal issues, the action taken by
the Board and the reasons for such action. The Board of Appeals shall adopt its written
decision within 21 days of the meeting, unless the Board makes a finding that it is
unable to do so, or unless an extension has been agreed upon amongst the parties.
15.2 Appeals to Superior Court.
Appeals of decisions of the Board of Appeals under this Ordinance shall be to Superior Court
according to the provisions of the Maine Rule of Civil Procedure 80B.
09/03/19 71
APPENDIX A
Four-Step Design Process
This process is intended to allow the developer the full potential of the legally allowable number
of lots, while at the same time preserving valuable open space for the Town of Freeport. The
Ordinance requires that a landscape architect or a professional engineer experienced in Civil/site
engineering proposes a Site Analysis and Conceptual Sketch Plan on behalf of the applicant using
the process outlined below.
Step 1: Delineation of Conservation Lands (does not apply to large lot subdivisions)
A. Calculate the net residential density of the development by determining the net
residential acreage of a tract or parcel. The net residential density formula for an open
space, expanded open space, large lot subdivision, village open space subdivision or
commercial open space subdivision is provided in the district regulation section of the
Zoning Ordinance for the zoning district in which a tract or parcel is located. For all
other subdivisions, the net residential density is calculated by dividing the net residential
acreage by the minimum lot size (or minimum land area for two-family and multiple
family dwellings) in the district in which the tract or parcel is located. {Amended, effective
09/03/19}
B. Calculate the area of required open space (conservation land plus unbuildable land as
defined in net residential acreage) in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance
and of the Zoning Ordinance.
C. Designate proposed location of open space(s) on the Site Analysis and Conceptual
Sketch Plan, using the Comprehensive Plan (dated October 1994) and the Open Space
and Public Access Plan (dated July 1999), identifying Primary Conservation Areas, and
areas of significant natural resource or community value. Consider Secondary
Conservation Areas, prioritizing natural and cultural resources on the tract from highest
to least suitability for inclusion in the proposed required open space. Primary
conservation areas within individual building lots should be avoided; however, the
Project Review Board may approve a lot that contains a primary conservation area if
there is provision for protecting that portion of the lot from being developed.
D. Indicate the proposed open space using as a basis practical considerations related to the
tract’s configuration, its context to resource areas on neighboring properties, the
priorities listed above for identifying open space areas, and the applicant’s subdivision
objectives.
Step 2: Location of House Sites
Potential house sites shall be tentatively located using the proposed open space as a base, as
09/03/19 72
well as other relevant data from the Site Analysis Map, such as topography and soils. House
sites should generally be located not closer than one hundred (100) feet from Primary
Conservation Areas and fifty (50) feet from Secondary Conservation Areas, taking into
consideration the potential negative impacts of residential development on such areas, as well as
the potential positive benefits of such locations to provide attractive views and visual settings
for residences.
Step 3: Alignment of Streets
Upon designating the house sites, a street plan shall be designed to provide vehicular access to
each house and bearing a logical relationship to topographic conditions. Impacts of the street
plan on proposed conservation lands shall be minimized, particularly with respect to crossing
environmentally sensitive areas such as wetlands and traversing slopes exceeding twenty
percent (20%). Street connections shall generally be encouraged to minimize the number of
new cul-de-sacs and to facilitate access to and from homes in different parts of the tract (and
adjoining parcels).
Step 4: Drawing in the Lot Lines
Upon completion of the preceding three (3) steps, lot lines shall be drawn as required to
delineate the boundaries of individual residential lots. Wherever possible, lot lines shall be
perpendicular to the street. If a lot on one side of the road fails to meet the minimum
requirements for lot size, it may not be combined with a lot on the other side of the road to meet
the minimum lot size.
Applicants shall submit a plan which is the end result of this process, but may be asked by the
Project Review Board to submit four (4) separate sketch maps indicating the findings of each
step of the design process. In deciding whether it is necessary to submit separate sketch maps
for each of the steps listed above, the Board shall consider the size of the parcel or if a
significant amount of environmentally sensitive areas are on the site.
09/03/19 73
APPENDIX B {Amended 06/06/17}
Site Inventory Map, Site Analysis and Conceptual Sketch Plan Submission Requirements
The submission must contain, at a minimum, the following information:
A. A completed application form (on forms provided by the Town).
B. Twelve (12) copies of an accurate scale combined Site Inventory Map, Site Analysis and
Conceptual Plan of the parcel at a scale of not more detailed than 1" = 50 feet, showing
as a minimum:
1. The proposed name of the development, north arrow, date, and scale.
2. The boundaries of the parcel based upon a standard boundary survey prepared by
a registered land surveyor and giving the bearings and distances of all property
lines.
3. The topography of the site at a contour interval of either 2 or 5 feet depending on
the nature of the use and character of the site as determined by the Town Planner.
4. The major natural features of the site, including wetlands, vernal pools, streams,
ponds, floodplains, groundwater aquifers, significant wildlife habitats, or other
important natural features.
5. The soils on the site through a class C medium intensity soil survey.
6. Vegetative cover conditions on the property according to general cover type.
7. Ridgelines and watershed boundaries.
8. Geologic formations including rock outcrops, cliffs, etc., based upon published
data or more detailed on-site analysis.
9. Existing buildings, structures, or other improvements on the site including
streets, driveways, stone walls, etc. (if none, so state).
10. Locations of all historically or archaeologically significant building or sites.
11. Existing restrictions or easements on the site (if none, so state).
12. The location and size of existing utilities or improvements servicing the site (if
none, so state).
09/03/19 74
13. Any potential sources of fire protection water supply within one-half mile of the
site including public water mains, existing fire ponds, or possible sources of
water supply.
14. Acceptable septic system location for each lot or unit if applicable.
C. Twelve (12) copies of a detailed narrative describing the existing conditions of the site,
the required open space potential of the site, the proposed development, and the
constraints and opportunities created by the site. This submission should include a
narrative description of the existing road system that will provide access to the project
and any issues related to traffic capacity, safety, sight distances, or other traffic
considerations, together with any preliminary studies done relative to the site including
wetland delineations, traffic studies, market studies, or other information that will help
the Board understand the project.
D. The Site Inventory, Site Analysis and Conceptual Sketch Plan should highlight the
opportunities and constraints of the site. This plan shall be prepared by a landscape
architect or a professional engineer with expertise in civil/site engineering and should
enable the Project Review Board to determine: which areas are well suited for proposed
use and which are unsuitable; where the property is unsuitable for on-site sewage
disposal if public sewerage is not available; primary and secondary conservation areas;
which areas have potential open space value (scenic areas, aquifers, streambed corridors,
wildlife habitat, natural drainage courses, farmland, significant forest stands, and land
abutting existing public open spaces, etc.); and which areas may be subject to off-site
conflicts or concerns (noise, lighting, traffic, etc.). In addition, this plan shall show a
conceptual rendering of the layout of lots and roads in accordance with the Four-Step
Design Process described in Appendix A. For greater clarity, the Project Review Board
may request that the Site Analysis and Conceptual Sketch be presented in two (2)
separate plans.
E. Written requests for any waivers from the Minor Subdivision or preliminary Major
Subdivision submission requirements or development standards of Article 12.
09/03/19 75
APPENDIX C
Recording Plan Requirements
The Recording Plan shall show only the information relevant to the transfer of an interest in the
property including:
1. The proposed name of the subdivision or identifying title, the name of the municipality,
and the assessor’s map and lot number.
2. The names and addresses of the record owner, applicant, and individual or company who
prepared the plan, and adjoining property owners.
3. The date the plan was prepared, north point, and graphic map scale.
4. The zoning district in which the proposed subdivision is located and the location of any
zoning boundaries affecting the subdivision.
5. A standard boundary survey of the parcel, giving complete descriptive data by bearings
and distances, made and certified by a registered land surveyor. The corners of the
parcel shall be located on the ground and marked by monuments. The plan shall indicate
the type of monument found or to be set at each lot corner.
6. The layout of lots, existing and proposed easements, streets including the location,
names, and present widths of existing streets, and required open spaces. The plan shall
contain sufficient data to allow the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot
line, and boundary line to be readily determined and be reproduced upon the ground.
These lines shall be tied to reference points previously established.
7. The location of wetlands and vernal pools.
8. The location of all soil test pits including an indication of which pits are suitable for the
installation of a subsurface wastewater disposal system.
The recording plan shall also include space for the approval of the Project Review Board including a
signature block, a record of any waivers granted from the submission requirements or approval
standards, any conditions of approval imposed by the Project Review Board, the net residential acreage
calculation, and any other pertinent notes or information. The recording plan shall not include
information on topography, grading, site improvements, water and sewer facilities, drainage
improvements, and the like. This information should be contained in the Subdivision Plan and related
documentation.
09/03/19 76
APPENDIX D
Minor Subdivision Submission Requirements
The Subdivision Plan and supporting documentation shall include at least the following information:
1. A copy of the most recently recorded deed for the parcel. A copy of all deed
restrictions, easements, rights-of-way, or other encumbrances currently affecting the
property.
2. The information shown on the recording plan.
3. Verification of right, title, or interest in the property.
4. A copy of any deed restrictions intended to cover all or part of the lots or dwellings in
the subdivision.
5. The number of acres within the proposed subdivision, location of property lines, existing
buildings, vegetative cover type, and other essential existing physical features. On
wooded sites, the plan shall indicate the area where clearing for lawns and structures
shall be permitted and/or any restrictions to be placed on clearing existing vegetation.
6. The location of all rivers, streams, and brooks within or adjacent to the proposed
subdivision.
7. If any portion of the subdivision is in a flood-prone area, the boundaries of any flood
hazard areas and the 100-year flood elevation, as depicted on the municipality’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map, shall be delineated on the plan.
8. Areas within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision which have been identified as high
or moderate value wildlife habitat by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife or within the Comprehensive Plan. If any portion of the subdivision is located
within an area designated as a critical natural area by the Comprehensive Plan or the
Maine Natural Areas Program, the plan shall indicate appropriate measures for the
preservation of the values which qualify the site for such designation.
9. Contour lines at the interval specified by the Town Engineer, showing elevations in
relation to mean sea level.
10. The location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water mains, culverts, and
drainage ways on or adjacent to the property to be subdivided.
11. An indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the subdivision.
09/03/19 77
a. When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by connection to the public sewer, a
written statement from the Freeport Sewer District, stating that the District has the
capacity to collect and treat the wastewater, shall be provided.
b. When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by subsurface wastewater disposal
systems, test pit analyses, prepared by a Licensed Site Evaluator, shall be
provided. A test pit log and a map at the same scale as the subdivision plan
showing the location of all test pits dug on the site shall be submitted.
12. An indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the subdivision.
a. When water is to be supplied by public water supply, a written statement from the
Maine Consumers Water Company or the South Freeport Water District shall be
submitted, indicating that there is adequate supply and pressure for the subdivision
and that the supplier approves the plans for extensions where necessary. Where
the supplier’s supply line is to be extended, a written statement from the Fire
Chief, stating approval of the location of fire hydrants, if any, and a written
statement from the supplier approving the design of the extension shall be
submitted.
b. When water is to be supplied by private wells, evidence of adequate ground water
supply and quality shall be submitted by a well driller or a hydrogeologist familiar
with the area.
13. The width and location of any streets, public improvements, or required open space
shown upon the official map and the Comprehensive Plan, if any, within the subdivision.
14. If a street will be constructed, applicants shall submit to the Board, as part of the final
plan, detailed construction drawings showing a plan view, profile, and typical crosssection
of the proposed public and private streets and existing streets within three
hundred (300) feet of any proposed intersections. The plan view shall be at a scale of
one inch equals no more than fifty (50) feet. The vertical scale of the profile shall be
one inch equals no more than five (5) feet. The plans shall include the following
information:
a. Date, scale, and north arrow, indicating magnetic or true north.
b. Intersections of the proposed street with existing streets.
c. Roadway and right-of-way limits including edge of pavement, edge of shoulder,
sidewalks, and curbs.
d. Kind, size, location, material, profile, and cross-section of all existing and
proposed drainage structures and their location with respect to existing natural
09/03/19 78
waterways and proposed drainage ways.
e. Complete curve data for all horizontal and vertical curves.
f. Turning radii at all intersections.
g. Centerline gradients.
h. Size, type, and locations of all existing and proposed overhead and underground
utilities including, but not limited to, water, sewer, electricity, telephone, lighting,
and cable television.
15. If a private street is constructed, a road maintenance agreement shall be submitted
outlining maintenance and financial responsibilities of lot owners using the road. The
road maintenance agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the Town Attorney.
16. The location of any open space to be preserved and a description of proposed
improvements and its management.
17. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such
dedication. Written offers to convey title to the municipality of all public open spaces
shown on the plan, and copies of agreements or other documents showing the manner in
which open spaces to be retained by the applicant or lot owners are to be maintained,
shall be submitted. If open space or other land is to be offered to the municipality,
written evidence that the municipal officers are satisfied with the legal sufficiency of the
written offer to convey title shall be included.
18. The location and method of disposal for land clearing and construction debris.
09/03/19 79
APPENDIX E
Additional Information May Be Requested – Major and Minor Subdivisions
The Board may require additional information including, but not limited to, the following, to be
submitted where it finds it necessary in order to determine whether the criteria of Title 30-A
M.R.S.A §4404 are met:
1. A high intensity soil survey by a Certified Soil Scientist.
2. A hydrogeologic assessment prepared by a Certified Geologist or Registered Professional
Engineer, experienced in hydrogeology. The Board may require a hydrogeologic
assessment when the subdivision is not served by public sewer and,
a. Any part of the subdivision is located over a mapped sand and gravel aquifer, or
b. The subdivision has an average density of more than one dwelling unit per one
hundred thousand (100,000) square feet, or
c. In other cases where site considerations or development design indicate greater
potential of adverse impacts on ground water quality, such as extensive areas of
shallow to bedrock soils, cluster developments in which the average density is less
than one dwelling unit per one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet but the
density of the developed portion is in excess of one dwelling unit per eighty
thousand (80,000) square feet, or the use of shared or common subsurface
wastewater disposal systems.
The hydrogeologic assessment shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of
Section 11.12.A.1.
3. An estimate of the amount and type of vehicular traffic to be generated on a daily basis
and at peak hours. Trip generation rates used shall be taken from Trip Generation
Manual, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, 1997. Trip generation
rates from other sources may be used if the applicant demonstrates that these sources
better reflect local conditions.
4. A traffic-impact analysis. The Board may require an analysis for projects involving forty
(40) or more parking spaces or projected to generate more than four hundred (400) vehicle
trips per day based upon the ITE Trip Generation Manual. The traffic-impact analysis
shall be prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer with experience in traffic
engineering. The analysis shall indicate the expected average daily vehicular trips, peakhour
volumes, access conditions at the site, distribution of traffic, types of vehicles
expected, effect upon the level of service of the street giving access to the site and
neighboring streets which may be affected, and recommended improvements to maintain
09/03/19 80
the desired level of service on the affected streets.
5. A storm water management plan, prepared by a registered professional engineer in
accordance with the Storm Water Management for Maine: Best Management Practices,
published by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, 1995.
6. An erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared in accordance with the Maine Erosion
and Sedimentation Control Handbook for Construction: Best Management Practices,
published by the Cumberland County Soil and Water Conservation District and the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection, March 1991, and approved by the Cumberland
County Soil and Water Conservation District.
09/03/19 81
APPENDIX F
Preliminary Plan Submission Requirements for Major Subdivisions
1. Proposed name of the subdivision and the name of the municipality in which it is located,
plus the assessor’s map and lot numbers.
2. The names and addresses of the record owner, applicant, and individual or company who
prepared the plan, and adjoining property owners.
3. The date the plan was prepared, north point, and graphic map scale.
4. The zoning district in which the proposed subdivision is located, and the location of any
zoning boundaries affecting the subdivision.
5. Verification of right, title, or interest in the property.
6. A copy of the most recently recorded deed for the parcel. A copy of all deed restrictions,
easements, rights-of-way, or other encumbrances currently affecting the property.
7. A copy of any deed restrictions intended to cover all or part of the lots or dwellings in the
subdivision.
8. A standard boundary survey of the parcel, giving complete descriptive data by bearings
and distances, made and certified by a registered land surveyor. The corners of the parcel
shall be located on the ground and marked by monuments.
9. Historic resources and significant natural features, including topography, areas of steep
slope, wetlands, vernal pools, 100-year floodplains, swales, rock outcroppings, vegetation,
existing utilities, and other site features, as indicated on the Site Analysis Map.
10. Existing and approximate proposed lot lines, lot areas, any existing easements, and rightsof-
way. The boundaries of conservation lands shall be indicated.
11. Approximate location, alignment, width, and tentative names of all existing and proposed
streets and street rights-of-way, including all street extensions or spurs that are reasonably
necessary to provide adequate street connections and facilities to adjoining development
or undeveloped areas.
12. Approximate location of proposed swales, drainage easements, and storm water and other
management facilities.
13. Where public sewage service is to be provided, the conceptual layout of proposed sewage
systems, including but not limited to, the tentative locations of sewer mains, together with
09/03/19 82
a written statement from the Freeport Sewer District stating that it has the capacity to
collect and treat the sewage generated.
14. Where public water service is to be provided, the conceptual layout of proposed water
distribution facilities including water mains, fire hydrants, storage tanks, and, where
appropriate, wells or other water sources, together with a written statement from the utility
providing the service indicating that there is adequate supply and pressure for the
subdivision and that the supplier approves the plans for extensions where necessary.
Where the supplier’s supply line is to be extended, a written statement from the Fire Chief,
stating approval of the location of fire hydrants, if any, and a written statement from the
supplier approving the design of the extension shall be submitted. When water is to be
supplied by private wells, evidence of adequate ground water supply and quality shall be
submitted by a well driller or a hydrogeologist familiar with the area.
15. Location of all soil tests pits as may be required under this ordinance, including all failed
test sites or pits, as well as those approved. All approved sites shall be clearly
distinguished from unapproved sites.
16. Limit-of-disturbance line (must be exact in relation to the retention of existing trees
proposed to be saved).
17. Approximate location and dimensions of proposed playgrounds, public buildings, public
areas, and parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public or private open
space.
18. If land to be subdivided lies partly in or abuts another municipality, the applicant shall
submit information concerning the location and conceptual design of streets, layout, and
size of lots and provisions of public improvements on land subject to applicant's control
within the adjoining municipalities. The design of public improvements shall provide for
a smooth, practical transition where specifications vary between municipalities. Evidence
of approval of this information by appropriate officials of the adjoining municipalities also
shall be submitted.
19. Where installation of the improvements is proposed to be done in phases, the applicant
shall submit with the Conceptual Preliminary Plan a delineation of the proposed sections
and a schedule of deadlines within which applications for final approval of each section is
intended to be filed.
20. Typical street cross-section drawing(s) for all proposed streets shall be shown, including
details relating to thickness, crowning, and construction materials.
21. The exact locations of existing utility easements and approximate locations of proposed
utility easements.
09/03/19 83
22. Approximate locations of existing vegetation to be retained.
09/03/19 84
APPENDIX G
Community Association Documents and Conservation Ownership and Management Plan
Submission Requirements
1. A description of all lands and facilities to be owned by the Community Association. This
description shall include a map of the proposal, highlighting the precise location of those
lands and facilities.
2. Statements setting forth the powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Community
Association, including the services to be provided.
3. A Declaration of Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions, giving perpetual easement to
the lands and facilities owned by the Community Association. The Declaration shall be a
legal document that also provides for automatic Association membership for all owners in
the subdivision or land development and shall describe the mechanism by which owners
participate in the Association, including voting, elections, and meetings. Furthermore, it
shall give power to the Association to own and maintain the common property and to
make and enforce rules.
4. Statements prescribing the process by which Community Association decisions are
reached and setting forth the authority to act.
5. Statements requiring each owner within the subdivision or land development to become a
member of the Community Association. Statements setting cross covenants or contractual
terms binding each owner to all other owners for mutual benefit and enforcement.
6. Requirements for all owners to provide a pro rata share of the cost of the operations of the
Community Association.
7. A process of collection and enforcement to obtain funds from owners who fail to comply.
8. A process for transition of control of the Community Association from the developer to
the unit owners.
9. Statements describing how the lands and facilities of the Community Association will be
insured, including limit of liability.
10. Provisions for the dissolution of the Community Association, in the event the Association
should become enviable.
11. The boundaries, acreage, and proposed ownership of all proposed conservation areas and
provisions for the management of open space detailing the entities responsible for
maintaining various elements of the property and describing management objectives and
09/03/19 85
techniques for each part of the property.
09/03/19 86
APPENDIX H
The Final Major Subdivision Plan Submission Requirements shall include at least the following
information:
1. The information shown on the recording plan.
2. If different from those submitted with the preliminary plan, a copy of any proposed deed
restrictions intended to cover all or part of the lots or dwellings in the subdivision.
3. The number of acres within the proposed subdivision, location of property lines, existing
buildings, watercourses, and other essential existing physical features.
4. The boundaries of any flood hazard areas and the 100-year flood elevation as depicted on
the municipality’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, shall be delineated on the plan.
5. An indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the subdivision. When sewage
disposal is to be accomplished by connection to the public sewerage system, a written
statement from the Freeport Sewerage District shall be submitted indicating the district
has reviewed and approved the sewerage design.
6. An indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the subdivision. When
water is to be supplied by Aqua Maine or the South Freeport Water District, a written
statement from the supplier shall be submitted indicating the supplier has reviewed and
approved the water system design, together with a written statement from the Fire Chief
approving all hydrant locations or other fire protection measures deemed necessary.
7. The location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water mains, culverts, and
drainage ways on or adjacent to the property to be subdivided.
8. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such
dedication. Written offers to convey title to the municipality of all public ways and open
spaces shown on the plan, and copies of agreements or other documents showing the
manner in which open spaces to be retained by the developer or lot owners are to be
maintained shall be submitted. If proposed streets and/or open spaces or other land is to
be offered to the municipality, written evidence that the Municipal Officers are satisfied
with the legal sufficiency of the written offer to convey title shall be included.
9. Street plans shall include detailed construction drawings showing a plan view, profile,
and typical cross-section of the proposed public and private streets and existing streets
within three hundred (300) feet of any proposed intersections. The plan view shall be at a
scale of one inch equals no more than fifty (50) feet. The vertical scale of the profile
shall be one inch equals no more than five (5) feet. The plans shall include the following
information:
09/03/19 87
a. Date, scale, and north arrow, indicating magnetic or true north.
b. Intersections of the proposed street with existing streets.
c. Roadway and right-of-way limits, including edge of pavement, edge of shoulder,
sidewalks, and curbs.
d. Kind, size, location, material, profile, and cross-section of all existing and
proposed drainage structures and their location with respect to existing natural
waterways and proposed drainage ways.
e. Complete curve data for all horizontal and vertical curves.
f. Turning radii at all intersections.
g. Centerline gradients.
h. Size, type, and locations of all existing and proposed overhead and underground
utilities including, but not limited to, water, sewer, electricity, telephone, lighting,
and cable television.
10. If a private street is constructed, a road maintenance agreement shall be submitted
outlining maintenance and financial responsibilities of lot owners using the road. The
road maintenance agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the Town Attorney.
11. A storm water management plan, prepared by a registered professional engineer in
accordance with the Storm Water Management for Maine: Best Management Practices,
published by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, 1995. The Board may
not waive submission of the storm water management plan unless the subdivision is not
in the watershed of a great pond, the proposed subdivision will not involve grading which
changes drainage patterns, and the addition of impervious surfaces such as roofs and
driveways is less than five percent (5%) of the area of the subdivision.
12. An erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared in accordance with the Maine
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Handbook for Construction: Best Management
Practices, published by the Cumberland County Soil and Water Conservation District
and the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, March 1991. The Board may
waive submission of the erosion and sedimentation control plan if: 1) The project will not
involve grading which changes drainage patterns, and 2) The addition of impervious
surfaces such as roofs and driveways is less than five percent (5%) of the area of the
subdivision.
13. The width and location of any streets or public improvements or open space shown upon
09/03/19 88
the official map and the Comprehensive Plan, if any, within the subdivision.
14. A list of construction items, with cost estimates, that will be completed by the applicant
prior to the sale of lots, and evidence that the applicant has financial commitments or
resources to cover these costs.
15. The location and method of disposal for land clearing and construction debris.
09/03/19 89
APPENDIX I
(Bank Letterhead)
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT
Date
Letter of Credit No.
Town of Freeport
30 Main Street
Freeport, Maine 04032-1209
Gentlemen:
We, [Name of Bank](the “Bank”), hereby open our Irrevocable Letter of Credit in favor of the Town of
Freeport (the “Town”) in the original amount of _______________________($) for the account of [Developer]
(such amount is herein called the “Stated Amount”).
We hereby irrevocably authorize you to draw on us in accordance with the terms and conditions
hereinafter set forth, by a sight draft in the aggregate amount not exceeding the Stated Amount. Partial drawings
under this Letter of Credit are permitted.
Subject to the foregoing and the further provisions of this Letter of Credit, a demand for payment may be
made by you by presentation of your sight draft, accompanied by your certificate in the form of Annex A hereto
to the effect that [state conditions secured by Letter of Credit: for example, “Developer has failed to complete
construction of subdivision road prior to required completion date.”]
A sight draft under this Letter of Credit must bear on its fact the clause:
“Drawn under Letter of Credit Number _________”
The demand for payment hereunder shall not exceed the Stated Amount.
Demand for payment under this Letter of Credit may be made prior to expiration at any time during the
Bank’s business hours at its office at [Bank address] on a day on which you and the Bank’s office are open for
the purpose of conducting commercial banking business (a “Business Day”). Any demand for payment and all
other communications tot he Bank relation to this Letter of Credit shall be in writing and addressed and
presented to [Bank officer], as its office at [Bank address] and shall make specific reference to this Letter of
Credit by number. If demand for payment is made by you hereunder before 4:00 P.M., prevailing time, on a
Business Day and provided that such demand for payment conforms to the terms and conditions hereof, payment
shall be made to you of the amount demanded, in immediately available funds not later than 10:00 A.M.,
prevailing time, on the next succeeding Business Day.
09/03/19 90
This Letter of Credit, including the attached Annex A., sets forth in full the terms of our undertaking and
this undertaking shall not in any way be amended or amplified by reference to any document, instrument, or
agreement referred to herein (except the Uniform Customs defined below) or to which this Letter of Credit
relates and, in any such reference, shall not be deemed to incorporate herein by reference any document,
instrument or agreement.
This Letter of Credit is not transferable.
Except as otherwise expressly stated herein, this Letter of Credit is subject to the Uniform Customs and
Practice for Documentary Credits (1993 Revision), International Chamber of Commerce Publication Number
500, and any subsequent revisions thereof approved by the International Chamber of Commerce (the “Uniform
Customs”). As to matters not governed by the Uniform Customs and as to the obligations of the Bank upon
presentation of a sight draft by the Town, this Letter of Credit shall be governed by and construed in accordance
with the laws of the State of Maine.
This Letter of Credit shall expire on the Bank’s close of business at its office in [Bank address] on the
earlier to occur of:
(a) 4:00 P.M., Prevailing Time, on [at least 30 days after deadline for completion of improvements]
or, if that date is not a Business Day, on the first Business Day after that date; or
(b) the date on which we receive a certificate from the Town that no amounts are due [under stated
conditions.]
Very truly yours,
Bank
By: __________________________
Title
09/03/19 91
ANNEX A
(To Letter of Credit Number ________)
Certificate of the Town of Freeport
[Bank]
Attention: [Bank]
Re: Irrevocable Letter of Credit Number _______________
Gentlemen:
The undersigned, being duly authorized officer of the Town of Freeport, hereby certifies to [Bank] as
follows:
A. The amount of $ _________ is due and payable to the Town of Freeport because [state
conditions in default].
B. The undersigned is making demand for payment under the Letter of Credit identified above in
the amount of $ ___________.
IN WITNESS WHEREROF, the undersigned, a duly authorized officer of the Town of Freeport, has
executed and delivered this Certificate this _____day of ______________ 200 ___.
TOWN OF FREEPORT
By: _____________________
Its
Duly Authorized
03/21/06 92
APPENDIX J
Maintenance Agreement for a
Storm Water Management System
This agreement is made this _________ day of ______________________ 20____by and between
___________________________________ and the Town of Freeport, Maine.
The project name is ________________________________________.
The location is: ________________________________________, Freeport, Maine.
The project’s Tax Map and Lot Numbers are Tax Map ___________, Lot_____________.
The project is shown on a plan entitled “_________________________________________” dated
____________, most recently revised ____________, approved by the Freeport Project Review Board
on ____________, and recorded in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds in Plan Book
____________, Page ____________.
WHEREAS, the approval of the project includes a stormwater maintenance system which requires
periodic maintenance; and
WHEREAS, in consideration of the approval of the project the Town of Freeport requires that periodic
maintenance be performed on the stormwater management system;
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual benefits accruing from the approval of the project
by the Town and the agreement of ___________________________ to maintain the stormwater
management system, the parties hereby agree as follows:
1. _________________________, for itself, and its successors and assigns, agrees to the following:
a) To inspect, maintain, and clean the storm water management system, including, to the extent
they exist, parking areas, catch basins, drainage swales, pipes and related structures, at least
annually, to prevent the build up and storage of sediment in the system;
b) To repair any deficiencies noted during the annual inspection;
c) To provide a summary report on the inspection, maintenance, and repair activities performed
annually to the Freeport Town Engineer;
d) To allow access by Town personnel for inspecting the storm water management system for
conformance with these requirements.
03/21/06 93
e) To create a homeowner’s association for the purpose of maintaining the stormwater
management system.
2. Upon creation of the homeowner’s association, the association shall become responsible for
compliance with the terms of this maintenance agreement.
3. This agreement shall constitute a covenant running with the land, and ____________________ shall
reference this agreement in all deeds to lots and/or units within the development.
WITNESS:
____________________________________ By: ________________________________
Its ______________________________
TOWN OF FREEPORT, MAINE
WITNESS:
____________________________________ By: ________________________________
Its _____________________________
STATE OF MAINE
CUMBERLAND COUNTY, ss: ______________________, 20
Personally appeared the above-named __________________________________, the
_________________________ of ________________________________, and acknowledged the foregoing
Declaration to be his/her free act and deed in his/her said capacity.
Before me,
____________________________________
Notary Public / Attorney at Law
____________________________________
Print Name
STATE OF MAINE
CUMBERLAND COUNTY, ss: ______________________, 20
Personally appeared the above-named __________________________________, the
_________________________ of ________________________________, and acknowledged the foregoing
Declaration to be his/her free act and deed in his/her said capacity.
Before me,
____________________________________
Notary Public / Attorney at Law
____________________________________
Print Name
Amended, 08/02/05
CHAPTER 26
STREET ACCEPTANCE ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I - TITLE, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
Section l0l Title
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Street Acceptance and Standards
Ordinance of the Town of Freeport, Maine.
Section l02 Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish standards for public street design and related
drainage needs and procedures for acceptance of streets by the legislative body of the Town.
Section l03 Definitions
Easement: The right to use or restrict the use of land of another for or to specified purposes.
Performance Guarantee: A monetary pledge conditional upon the faithful performance for
completion of proposed public improvements by a private developer supported by a guaranteed
Letter of Credit payable to the Town from a recognized banking institution, an escrow account
payable to the Town, or a Performance Bond delivered to the Town Treasurer and issued by a
commercial surety qualified to do business in the State of Maine.
Street: A publicly dedicated way accepted or proposed to be accepted by the Town Council.
Street Classifications:
1. Arterial Street - a major way that carries traffic through and between communities.
2. Collector Street - a way that carries traffic between Arterial Streets and Minor
Streets, including a way having the potential of servicing more than forty (40) units
of residential development.
3. Minor Street - a way that carries local traffic from abutting residences or small
businesses and having the potential of servicing no more than forty (40) units of
residential development.
Amended, 08/02/05
ARTICLE II - ACCEPTANCE PROCEDURES
Section 201 General
No street shall be laid out and accepted as a public street by the Town of Freeport, Maine, except
in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. All other ordinances, or parts thereof, in
conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
Section 202 Petition for Street Acceptance
A street constructed on private lands by the owner(s) thereof and not dedicated for public travel
prior to September 1, l981, shall be laid out and accepted as a public street by the Town Council
only upon the following conditions:
1. The owner(s) shall give the Town a Warranty Deed to the property within the
boundaries at the time of its acceptance by the Town.
2. A plan of said street shall be recorded by the owner in the Cumberland County
Registry of Deeds at the time of its acceptance.
3. A petition for the laying out and acceptance of said street shall be submitted to the
Town Council upon a form prescribed by the Road Commissioner. Said petition shall
be accompanied by plans, profiles, typical cross-section and any related easements of
said street, on reproducible mylar, as follows:
a. An "as-built" plan drawn to scale of either 40 feet to 1 inch or 20 feet to 1 inch
and be on one or more sheets not exceeding 36 inches by 48 inches in size.
Said plan shall show:
(1) Magnetic and true north;
(2) All horizontal street alignment data, including any curve data, center
line stationing, magnetic bearings of center line tangents, plus any
additional data necessary to physically locate said street in the field;
(3) Right-of-way width(s);
(4) Front and side lot lines of abutting properties together with lengths of
front lot lines;
(5) Location of existing buildings;
(6) Location of street line monuments and property irons;
Amended, 08/02/05
(7) Location of natural drainage courses plus all existing storm drainage
systems, including any laterals installed for connection to building
foundation and/or floor drains;
(8) Location of all underground and overhead utilities, including sanitary
sewer and building laterals, electrical, telephone, cable TV, water
mains, services and hydrants, and poles or street lights;
(9) Location of sidewalks, edges of pavement and driveways;
(10) Easements showing necessary metes and bounds for location in the
field;
(11) Name of street and subdivision, if any, in which it is located;
(12) The seal of a Maine Registered Land Surveyor or Maine
Professional Engineer and certification that the plans reflect an "asbuilt"
condition.
b. A profile of said street drawn to the same horizontal scale as the plan and a
vertical scale of 4 feet to 1 inch. The profile may be incorporated on the plan
sheets.
Said profile shall show:
(1) "As-built" profile of the sidelines and center line;
(2) Finished grade elevations at least every 50 feet, except at least every
25 feet in vertical curves;
(3) Center line stationing;
(4) Street grades, in terms of percent, and all vertical curve data;
(5) All buildings abutting said street with sill elevations;
(6) Profiles of all storm drain systems, including pipe sizes and materials,
pipe slope and the location and inverts of all catch basins and
manholes;
(7) Existing ground lines prior to construction along the side lines and
center lines;
(8) The seal of a Maine Registered Land Surveyor or Maine Professional
Engineer and certification that the plans reflect an "as-built"
condition.
Amended, 08/02/05
c. A typical cross-section of said street drawn to a horizontal scale of 5 feet to 1
inch, and a vertical scale of 1 foot to 1 inch.
Said cross-section to show:
(1) Roadway construction elements and thicknesses above subgrade;
(2) Widths and locations of traveled ways, esplanades, sidewalks and
utilities;
(3) Typical roadway cross-slopes;
(4) Street line and center line locations.
d. The location and size of any proposed water mains and hydrants to be in
accordance with the Water Main Extension Policy of the Town of Freeport.
Section 203 Acceptance of Street Required By The Public Interest
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other Section thereof, the Town may at any time lay out
and accept any street of said Town whenever the general public interest so requires. The cost of
said street may be borne by said Town.
Section 204 No Street To Be Accepted Until After Report By The Road Commissioner
No street shall be laid out and accepted by the Town Council until the Road Commissioner or his
designee shall have made a careful investigation thereof, and shall have reported to the Town
Council their recommendations with respect thereto.
Amended, 08/02/05
ARTICLE III - DESIGN STANDARDS
Section 301 General
All streets designated for public use shall be designed and constructed to meet the standards
contained herein.
Section 302 Subdivision Approval of Streets
All streets in the subdivision shall be constructed to meet the standards contained herein
according to their classification as recommended by the Road Commissioner and determined by
the Project Review Board, except subdivisions in the Freeport Village Overlay District as
depicted on the Town of Freeport, Maine, Zoning Map, which shall meet the standards of the
Freeport Village Design Standards, Addendum 1 to the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of
Freeport, Maine. Before the Project Review Board grants approval of the final plan for a
subdivision, the subdivider shall, in an amount set by the Municipal Treasurer with the approval
of the Chairman of the Town Council, file with the Municipal Treasurer a Performance
Guarantee to cover the full costs of road construction.
Section 303 Design Standards For Streets
Arterial Collector Minor
Street Street Street
1. Minimum Right-of-Way Width 80' 60' 50'
2. Minimum Width of Pavement 44' 36' 24
3. Minimum Grade (Curbed Section) .5% .5% .5%
4. Maximum Grade 5% 6% 10%
5. Maximum Grade at Street Intersection 2% within 50 ft. of intersection
6. Minimum Angle of Street Intersection 60 60 60
7. Width of Shoulders (Without Curb) 8' 8' 6'
8. Curbing Vertical Vertical Vertical/
Sloped
9. Minimum Center-Line Radius on Curves 800' 250' 200'
10. Minimum Tangent Length Between
Reverse Curves 300' 200' 150'
11. Roadway Crown 1/4"/ft. l/4"/ft. 1/4"/ft.
12. Minimum Distance Between Street
Intersections:
Same Sides 400' 400' 400'
Opposite Sides 300' 250' 200'
13. Design Speed M.P.H. 45 30 25
Amended, 08/02/05
14. Road Base (Minimum-See Section 304) 24" 22" 21"
Aggregate Sub-Base Course-Gravel 18" 18" 18"
Aggregate Base Course-Crushed 6" 4" 3"
15. Bituminous Paving
(Minimum-See Section 304) 3" 3" 2 1/2"
16. Sidewalks:
Width (Minimum Where Required) 8' 6' 5'
Aggregate Base Course - Crushed 8" 8" 8"
Surface-Hot Bituminous Pavement 2" 2" 2"
17. Dead-End or Cul-de-Sac Streets
Width (Right-of-Way) N.A. N.A. 60'
Length, Not to Exceed
Radii of Turn Around at
Enclosed End: N.A. N.A. l200'
Property Line (Minimum) N.A. N.A. 60'
Outer Edge of Pavement (Minimum) N.A. N.A. 50'
Inner Edge of Pavement (Minimum) N.A. N.A. 30'
18. Curb Radii at Intersections 90 Deg. 30' 20' 15'
60 to 90 Degree Intersections 30' 30' 30'
90 to l20 Degree Intersections 50' 40' 30'
19. Minimum Property Line Radii at
Intersections 20' 10' 10'
Section 304 Pavement Design
Street pavements shall be designed to have adequate capacity to support the frequency and
loadings appropriate for the intended use and to provide adequate protection for frost susceptible
subgrades.
The subdivider shall employ a qualified engineer to investigate and determine the types and
classifications of the subgrade soils. Supporting computations for pavement standards for
construction shall be submitted for review by the Road Commissioner or his designee. If,
during construction, subsurface soils vary from original classifications, the pavement design
shall be modified to meet the new classification. Revised pavement design shall be submitted to
the
Road Commissioner or his designee for review. The subbase and base requirements set forth in
Section 303, Design Standards for Streets, shall be considered a minimum for clay, silt, till or
ledge subgrades. The bituminous pavement thickness shall be considered the minimum for
all streets.
Section 305 Roadway Construction and Materials Standards
Roadway construction materials shall conform to current standard specifications of the Maine
Department of Transportation.
Amended, 08/02/05
Section 306 Construction of Arterial Streets
If a proposed subdivision is presented containing more than one-hundred fifty (150) units of
development, or if additional adjacent land owned by the developer or others is available for
expansion to a subdivision of more than one-hundred fifty (150) units, the Project Review Board
may, at their discretion, require the primary access to be constructed to meet the requirements for
arterial street construction as presented herein.
Section 307 Continuation of Existing Streets
Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, as determined by the Road
Commissioner, but in no case shall they be extended at less than the original width.
Section 308 Cul-de-Sacs
Use of a hammerhead or T shaped turn-around may be permitted as an alternative to a circular
cul-de-sac. In the case of a hammerhead turn-around, the width shall be at least 30 feet wide and
60 feet long (measured from the center line of the abutting street) and shall be located at least 50
feet from the end of the traveled way. Dead end streets shall meet the minimum requirements of
minor streets, except dead end streets over 600 feet in length shall have a minimum pavement
width of 32 feet throughout.
Section 309 Street Names
Street names shall be proposed by the developer and approved by the Project Review Board.
Streets that are continuations of existing streets shall be given the name of the existing street.
Names of new streets shall not duplicate or closely approximate those of existing streets.
Section 310 Vertical Clearance
Vertical clearance above the paved surface shall be a minimum of 18 feet.
Section 311 Storm Drainage Design Standards
1. An adequate piped storm drainage system including appurtenances such as catch basins and
manholes shall be provided for proper drainage of storm water collected in streets and areas
tributary to the street system. Discharge of the collected storm drainage shall be by piped
system or ditches, approved by the Project Review Board upon report of the Road
Commissioner or his designee. Appropriate conveyances for outlets to drainage systems
must be provided.
Amended, 08/02/05
2. Design Standards
a. All storm water systems within the subdivision shall be designed to accommodate
peak flows of a ten-year frequency storm based on rainfall data from weather
bureau records of the Portland Weather Service. Flows shall be computed by the
rational method with design computations being submitted for approval.
b. Upstream drainage shall be accommodated by an adequately sized system
through the proposed subdivision for existing conditions and future potential
development in the upstream drainage area or areas tributary to the proposed
subdivision, as determined by the Project Review Board.
c. Existing downstream drainage facilities shall be studied to determine the effect of
the proposed subdivision's drainage. The developer shall demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Project Review Board that the storm drainage from the
proposed subdivision will not cause flows in excess of the capacity of existing
storm drainage systems, downstream from the proposed subdivision.
d. Three-hundred feet (300') shall be considered as the maximum length for carrying
open storm water in a street gutter prior to intake at a catch basin. No storm water
will be permitted to drain across a street or across an intersection.
e. Design standards for drainage systems shall be approved by the Project Review
Board. Minimum pipe size for any storm drainage pipe shall be l2 inches.
f. Where open ditches, channels, streams, or natural drainage courses are used,
either to collect or discharge storm water, adequately sized perpetual easements
shall be provided. Minimum width shall be 30 feet. Approval of the Project
Review Board shall be required for any open storm drainage system.
g. Where subsurface soils are of the nature requiring an underdrainage system,
underdrains shall be installed and discharged in a positive manner.
h. House foundation drains may be connected to the storm drainage system upon
approval by and under the direction of the Road Commissioner. The Town shall
not be liable for damages caused by or through house foundation drains.
Amended, 08/02/05
ARTICLE IV - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
Section 401 Grading
1. Preparation of sub-base: All streets shall be graded to their full width by the subdivider so
that pavements and sidewalks can be constructed on parallel profiles. Due to special
topographical conditions, deviation from the above will be allowed only with special
approval of the Road Commissioner.
a. Clearing - Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area shall be cleared of all
stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable material and all trees not intended for
preservation.
b. Cuts - Tree stumps and other organic materials shall be removed to a depth of 2 feet
below subgrade. Rock and boulders when encountered shall be scarified to subgrade.
c. Fill - All materials used in construction of embankments shall be of the qualify to
meet Maine Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for embankment
construction. Excess materials including organic materials, soft clays, wet and noncompactable
materials, shall be removed from the street site. The fill shall be spread
in layers not to exceed 12 inches loose measure and then thoroughly compacted. The
filling of utility trenches and other confined
places shall be mechanically tamped.
d. Side Slopes - All side slopes abutting residentially developed lots shall not have a
slope steeper than 4 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical and all other slopes shall not be
steeper than 3 feet horizontal and 1 foot vertical.
Section 402 Bases and Pavements
The appropriate sections of the Bases and Pavements Divisions (300 and 400) of the Maine
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications currently in effect at the date of
construction shall be applicable to this Section except as follows:
Bases
1. The aggregate subbase course-gravel shall not contain particles of rock exceeding 4
inches in any dimension;
2. The aggregate base course-crushed gravel shall not contain particles of rock that will
not pass the 2 inches square sieve.
Amended, 08/02/05
Pavements
1. Grading for the surface course of Hot Bituminous Pavement (Grading C-1) shall be as
follows:
% By Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves
Sieve Designation Grading C-1
1/2" 100
3/8" 75-100
No. 4 50- 85
No. 8 35- 70
No. 16 23- 57
No. 30 15- 44
No. 50 10- 30
No. 100 6- 22
No. 200 3- 8
2. Grading for the base course of Hot Bituminous Pavement shall meet the requirements
for binder, Grading B.
3. Where pavement placed joins an existing pavement, the existing pavement shall be
cut along a smooth line and to a neat, even, vertical joint. Broken or raveled edges
will not be permitted, nor deviation from grade.
Section 403 Curbing
Section 609 of the Maine Department of Transportation Standard Specification shall be
applicable to this Section except as follows:
1. Curbing shall be limited to Type 1 (Granite) and Type 3 (Bituminous Concrete);
2. Curbing shall be limited to Granite Stone Curbing (Type 1) for Arterial or Collector Streets;
3. Bituminous Concrete Curbing (Type 3) with a minimum reveal of 6 inches shall be allowed
for Minor Streets. However, Type 1 curbing shall be required for radius at all intersections.
Section 404 Storm Drains
1. Hot Bituminous Pavement (Grading C-1) shall be as specified in Section 402. Paving
material shall be placed in two 1 inch layers.
2. The Aggregate Base Course shall be crushed gravel as specified in Section 402.
3. All driveway aprons shall be paved with 2 inches of hot bituminous concrete pavement (2-1
inch layers of Grading "C-1") over the base and subbase material specified for the street.
Amended, 08/02/05
Driveway aprons shall be considered to extend from the gutter line or edge of street
pavement to 1 foot beyond the back edge of the sidewalk. In the event no sidewalk exists,
paving shall
extend to the street line.
Section 405 Storm Drains
1. The following materials are specified for storm drain construction:
a. Reinforced Concrete Pipe - Reinforced Concrete Pipe shall meet the requirements of
ASTM Designation C-76. Pipe classes shall be as required to meet soil and traffic
loads with a factor of safety of 1.2 on the .01 in crack strength with a class B bedding.
Joints shall be of the rubber gasket type meeting ASTM Designation C 443-70 or of
an approved preformed plastic jointing material.
b. Asbestos Cement Pipe - Asbestos Cement Pipe shall meet the requirements of ASTM
C-428. Pipe classes shall be as required to meet soil and traffic loads with a factor of
safety of 1.5 on the crushing strength. Joints may be of the rubber gasket type
meeting the requirements of ASTM Designation D-1869-63, or may be of the
preformed plastic sleeve type.
c. Corrugated Metal Pipe - Corrugated Metal Pipe shall be bituminous coated meeting
the basic requirements of AASHTO Designation M-190 and M-36. Pipe gauge shall
be as required to meet soil and traffic loads with a deflection of not more than 5%.
Joints shall be by bolted bands with a minimum of 5 corrugations.
d. Underdrain Pipe - Underdrain Pipe may be of perforated asbestos cement or
perforated bituminous coated corrugated metal meeting similar requirements to that
of standard drain pipe.
e. Manholes - Manholes shall be of precast concrete section construction designed to
withstand H-20 traffic loadings. Precast sections shall meet the requirements of
ASTM Designation C-478. Cones shall be truncated. Bases may be cast-in-place
concrete, 3,000 psi, 28-day strength, or may be precast concrete. Castings shall be of
grey cast iron conforming to ASTM Designation A-48 for Class 30 grey iron. Brick
inverts shall be shaped to the crown of the pipe for sizes up to l8 inches, and to spring
line for larger pipes.
f. Catch Basins - Catch Basins shall be of precast concrete construction designed to
withstand H-20 traffic loadings. Castings shall be square cast iron as required for
the particular inlet condition with the gratings perpendicular to the curb line.
Castings shall be constructed of Class 30 grey iron in accordance with ASTM
Designation A-48.
Amended, 08/02/05
Section 406 General Requirement
1. Trenching - All trenching shall be accomplished in accordance with all appropriate state and
federal safety requirements.
2. Maximum trench width at the pipe crown shall be the outside diameter of the pipe plus 2
feet.
3. Pipe shall be bedded in a granular material with a minimum depth of 6 inches below the
bottom of the pipe and extending to 6 inches above the top of the pipe.
4. Drain alignment shall be straight in both horizontal and vertical alignment.
5. Manholes shall be provided at all changes in vertical or horizontal alignment, and at all
functions. On straight runs, manholes shall be placed at a maximum of 400 foot intervals.
6. Combined manhole-catch basins may be allowed with the approval of the Road
Commissioner or his designee.
7. All drain outlets shall terminate in an end wall of concrete construction or shall be riprapped
to prevent erosion. Facilities for energy dissipation shall be provided.
8. Underdrains shall be laid with perforations down. Backfull material shall be in accordance
with Section 703.22 of the Maine Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for
Type B Underdrain Backfill Material.
Section 407 Monuments
Monuments shall be either granite or concrete, a minimum of 4 inches in diameter or square, and
at least 3 feet long with a flat top. Monuments shall be set at all street corners, at all points
where the street line intersects the exterior of the subdivision and at angle points and points of
curve on each street. The top of the monument shall have an indented cross to properly identify
the location and shall be set flush with the finished grade.
Section 408 Review by Superintendent of Public Works
All streets dedicated for public use within a subdivision approved by the Project Review Board
shall be constructed according to road specifications described herein as overseen by the
Superintendent of Public Works or his designee.
Section 409 Appeals Process
Amended, 08/02/05
Any provision of this Ordinance can be waived by the Freeport Town Council upon the
recommendation of the Freeport Project Review Board.
CHAPTER 27
Non-Storm Water Discharge Ordinance
TOWN OF FREEPORT
Section 27-101 Purpose/Objectives.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Non-Storm Water Discharge Ordinance (the
“Ordinance”) is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the
Town of Freeport through the regulation of Non-Storm Water Discharges to the
Municipality’s Storm Drainage System as required by federal and State law. This
Ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction of Pollutants into the
Town’s Storm Drainage System in order to comply with requirements of the federal
Clean Water Act and State law.
B. Objectives. The objectives of this Ordinance are:
1. To prohibit un-permitted or un-allowed Non-Storm Water Discharges to the
Storm Drainage System; and
2. To set forth the legal authority and procedures to carry out all inspection,
monitoring and enforcement activities necessary to ensure compliance with this
Ordinance.
Section 27-102 Definitions.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the terms listed below are defined as follows:
A. Clean Water Act. “Clean Water Act” means the federal Water Pollution Control Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., also known as the “Clean Water Act”), and any subsequent
amendments thereto.
B. Discharge. “Discharge” means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emptying,
dumping, disposing or other addition of Pollutants to “waters of the State.”
C. Direct Discharge.“Direct discharge” or “point source” means any discernible,
confined and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel,
tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal
feeding operation or vessel or other floating craft, from which Pollutants are or may be
discharged.
D. Enforcement Authority. “Enforcement Authority” means the person(s) or
department authorized under Section 4 of this Ordinance to administer and enforce this
Ordinance.
Adopted December 21, 2004
2
E. Exempt Person or Discharge. “Exempt Person or Discharge” means any Person who
is subject to a Multi-Sector General Permit for Industrial Activities, a General Permit for
Construction Activity, a General Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater from the Maine
Department of Transportation and the Maine Turnpike Authority Municipal Separate
Storm Sewer Systems, or a General Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater from State or
Federally Owned Authority Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System Facilities; and any
Non-Storm Water Discharge permitted under a NPDES permit, waiver, or waste
discharge license or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority
of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) or the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection (“DEP”).
F. Industrial Activity. “Industrial Activity” means activity or activities subject to
NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14).
G. Municipality. “Municipality” means the Town of Freeport.
H. Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, or MS4. “Municipal Separate Storm
Sewer System” or “MS4,” means conveyances for storm water, including, but not limited
to, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
human-made channels or storm drains (other than publicly owned treatment works and
combined sewers) owned or operated by any municipality, sewer or sewage district, fire
district, State agency or Federal agency or other public entity that discharges directly to
surface waters of the State.
I. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water
Discharge Permit. “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm
Water Discharge Permit” means a permit issued by the EPA or by the DEP that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
J. Non-Storm Water Discharge. “Non-Storm Water Discharge” means any Discharge to
an MS4 that is not composed entirely of Storm Water.
K. Person. “Person” means any individual, firm, corporation, municipality, quasimunicipal
corporation, State agency or Federal agency or other legal entity which creates,
initiates, originates or maintains a Discharge of Storm Water or a Non-Storm Water
Discharge.
L. Pollutant. “Pollutant” means dredged spoil, solid waste, junk, incinerator residue,
sewage, refuse, effluent, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemicals, biological or
radiological materials, oil, petroleum products or by-products, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, dirt and industrial, municipal, domestic, commercial or
agricultural wastes of any kind.
M. Premises. “Premises” means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land,
whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips,
Adopted December 21, 2004
3
located within the Municipality from which Discharges into the Storm Drainage System
are or may be created, initiated, originated or maintained.
N. Regulated Small MS4. “Regulated Small MS4” means any Small MS4 regulated by
the State of Maine “General Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater from Small
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems” dated June 3, 2003 (“General Permit”),
including all those located partially or entirely within an Urbanized Area (UA) and those
additional Small MS4s located outside a UA that as of the issuance of the General Permit
have been designated by the DEP as Regulated Small MS4s.
O. Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, or Small MS4. “Small Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer System”, or “Small MS4,”means any MS4 that is not already
covered by the Phase I MS4 stormwater program including municipally owned or
operated storm sewer systems, State or federally-owned systems, such as colleges,
universities, prisons, Maine Department of Transportation and Maine Turnpike Authority
road systems and facilities, and military bases and facilities.
P. Storm Drainage System. “Storm Drainage System” means the Municipality’s
Regulated Small MS4.
Q. Storm Water. “Storm Water” means any Storm Water runoff, snowmelt runoff, and
surface runoff and drainage; “Stormwater” has the same meaning as “Storm Water.”
R. Urbanized Area (“UA”). “Urbanized Area” or “UA” means the areas of the State of
Maine so defined by the latest decennial (2000) census by the U.S. Bureau of the Census.
Section 27-103 Applicability.
This Ordinance shall apply to all Persons discharging Storm Water and/or Non-Storm
Water Discharges from any Premises into the Storm Drainage System.
Section 27-104 Responsibility for Administration.
The Codes Enforcement Officer of the Town of Freeport is the Enforcement Authority
who shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 27-105 Prohibition of Non-Storm Water Discharges.
A. General Prohibition. Except as allowed or exempted herein, no Person shall create,
initiate, originate or maintain a Non-Storm Water Discharge to the Storm Drainage
System. Such Non-Storm Water Discharges are prohibited notwithstanding the fact that
the Municipality may have approved the connections, drains or conveyances by which a
Person Discharges un-allowed Non-Storm Water Discharges to the Storm Drainage
System.
B. Allowed Non-Storm Water Discharges. The creation, initiation, origination and
maintenance of the following Non-Storm Water Discharges to the Storm Drainage
System is allowed:
Adopted December 21, 2004
4
1. Landscape irrigation; diverted stream flows; rising ground waters;
uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20));
uncontaminated pumped ground water; uncontaminated flows from foundation
drains; air conditioning and compressor condensate; irrigation water; flows from
uncontaminated springs; uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps;
uncontaminated flows from footing drains; lawn watering runoff; flows from
riparian habitats and wetlands; residual street wash water (where spills/leaks of
toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred, unless all spilled material has
been removed and detergents are not used); hydrant flushing and fire fighting
activity runoff; water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources;
and individual residential car washing;
2. Discharges specified in writing by the Enforcement Authority as being necessary
to protect public health and safety; and
3. Dye testing, with verbal notification to the Enforcement Authority prior to the
time of the test.
C. Exempt Person or Discharge. This Ordinance shall not apply to an Exempt Person or
Discharge, except that the Enforcement Authority may request from Exempt Persons and
Persons with Exempt Discharges copies of permits, notices of intent, licenses and orders
from the EPA or DEP that authorize the Discharge(s).
27-106 Suspension of Access to the Municipality’s Small MS4.
The Enforcement Authority may, without prior notice, physically suspend Discharge
access to the Storm Drainage System to a Person when such suspension is necessary to
stop an actual or threatened Non-Storm Water Discharge to the Storm Drainage System
which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to
the health or welfare of persons, or to the Storm Drainage System, or which may cause
the Municipality to violate the terms of its environmental permits. Such suspension may
include, but is not limited to, blocking pipes, constructing dams or taking other measures,
on public ways or public property, to physically block the Discharge to prevent or
minimize a Non-Storm Water Discharges to the Storm Drainage System. If the Person
fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the Enforcement
Authority may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the
Storm Drainage System, or to minimize danger to persons. In taking such steps the
Enforcement Authority may enter upon the property of the Premises at reasonable hours
or a building on the Premises with the consent of owner, occupant or agent.
Section 27-107 Monitoring of Discharges.
In order to determine compliance with this Ordinance, the Enforcement Authority may
enter upon and inspect the property of the Premises subject to this Ordinance at
reasonable hours or any building on the Premises with the consent of the Premises’
owner, occupant or agent: to inspect the Premises and connections thereon to the Storm
Adopted December 21, 2004
5
Drainage System; and to conduct monitoring, sampling and testing of the Discharge to
the Storm Drainage System.
Section 27-108 Enforcement.
It shall be unlawful for any Person to violate any provision of or to fail to comply with
any of the requirements of this Ordinance. Whenever the Enforcement Authority believes
that a Person has violated this Ordinance, the Enforcement Authority may enforce this
Ordinance in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
A. Notice of Violation. Whenever the Enforcement Authority believes that a Person has
violated this Ordinance, the Enforcement Authority may order compliance with this
Ordinance by written notice of violation to that Person indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it, including, without limitation:
1. The elimination of Non-Storm Water Discharges to the Storm Drainage System,
including, but not limited to, disconnection of the Premises from the MS4;
2. The cessation of discharges, practices, or operations in violation of this
Ordinance;
3. At the Person’s expense, the abatement or remediation (in accordance with best
management practices in DEP rules and regulations) of Non-Storm Water
Discharges to the Storm Drainage System and the restoration of any affected
property; and/or
4. The payment of fines, of the Municipality’s remediation costs and of the
Municipality’s reasonable administrative costs and attorneys’ fees and costs.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice
shall set forth a deadline within which such abatement or restoration must be completed.
B. Penalties/Fines/Injunctive Relief. Any Person who violates this Ordinance shall be
subject to fines, penalties and orders for injunctive relief and shall be responsible for the
Municipality’s attorney’s fees and costs, all in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Moreover, any
Person who violates this Ordinance also shall be responsible for any and all fines,
penalties, damages and costs, including, but not limited to attorneys’ fees and costs,
incurred by the Municipality for violation of federal and State environmental laws and
regulations caused by or related to that Person’s violation of this Ordinance; this
responsibility shall be in addition to any penalties, fines or injunctive relief imposed
under this Section.
C. Consent Agreement. The Enforcement Authority may, with the approval of the
municipal officers, enter into a written consent agreement with the violator to address
timely abatement of the violation(s) of this Ordinance for the purposes of eliminating
violations of this Ordinance and of recovering fines, costs and fees without court action.
Adopted December 21, 2004
6
D. Appeal of Notice of Violation. Any Person receiving a Notice of Violation or
suspension notice may appeal the determination of the Enforcement Authority to the
Board of Appeals in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Freeport Zoning
Ordinance. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of receipt
of the Notice of Violation. The Board of Appeals shall hold a de novo hearing on the
appeal within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The Board of
Appeals may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the Enforcement Authority. A
suspension under Section 6 of this Ordinance remains in place unless or until lifted by the
Board of Appeals or by a reviewing court. A party aggrieved by the decision of the Board
of Appeals may appeal that decision to the Maine Superior Court within 45 days of the
date of the Board of Appeals decision pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure.
E. Enforcement Measures. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the
requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal to the
Board of Appeals, within 45 days of a decision of the Board of Appeals affirming the
Enforcement Authority’s decision, then the Enforcement Authority may recommend to
the municipal officers that the municipality’s attorney file an enforcement action in a
Maine court of competent jurisdiction under Rule 80K of the Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure.
F. Ultimate Responsibility of Discharger.
The standards set forth herein are minimum standards; therefore this Ordinance does not
intend nor imply that compliance by any Person will ensure that there will be no
contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of Pollutants into waters of the U.S.
caused by said Person. This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the
Municipality, or any officer agent or employee thereof for any damages that result from
any Person's reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.
Section 27-109 Severability.
The provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision,
clause, sentence, or paragraph of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person,
establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the
other provisions, clauses, sentences, or paragraphs or application of this Ordinance.
Section 27-110 Basis.
The Town of Freeport enacts this Non-Storm Water Discharge Ordinance (the
“Ordinance”) pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 (municipal home rule ordinance
authority), 38 M.R.S.A. § 413 (the “Wastewater Discharge Law”), 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et
seq. (the “Clean Water Act”), and 40 CFR Part 122 (U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency’s regulations governing the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(“NPDES”)). The Maine Department of Environmental Protection, through its
promulgation of the “General Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater from Small
Adopted December 21, 2004
7
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems” dated June 3, 2003, has listed the Town of
Freeport as having a Regulated Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (“Small
MS4”); under this General Permit, listing as a Regulated Small MS4 necessitates
enactment of this Ordinance as part of the Municipality’s Storm Water Management
Program.
1
Amended April 2, 2019
CHAPTER 28
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL ORDINANCE
TOWN OF FREEPORT
ARTICLE I
Section 28 -101
Purpose: The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect the health,
safety and general well -being of the citizens of Freeport, to enhance and
maintain the quality of the environment, to conserve natural
resources and prevent water and air pollution and to reduce/stabilize solid waste
disposal costs by providing for a comprehensive,
rational and effective means of regulating the disposal of solid
waste in Freeport in accordance with the provisions of 38 MRSA ss. 1304-B et
seq.
Section 28 -102
Repealed: Chapters 28, 29, and 30 of Freeport's ordinances are herewith
repealed. Chapter 28 is herewith replaced and enacted.
Section 28 -103
Definitions:
A. . Residential Waste is waste generated by single family and
two-unit dwellings, home occupations (including bed and
breakfasts with three or fewer units), and public and
private non -profit organizations such as schools and
churches. It includes construction or demolition debris and
bulky waste generated from a residence located in Freeport
and delivered in a vehicle no larger than a one -ton truck to
the designated disposal facility.
B. . Commercial Waste is waste generated by businesses or
organizations except as noted above.
C. . Construction or demolition debris includes debris resulting
from construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition of
structures. It includes, but is not limited to building
materials, asphalt, and any similar materials. It does not
include asbestos and other special wastes.
D. . Bulky wastes include solid waste consisting of such things
as furniture or furnishings, mattresses, ropes, cable,
fencing, carpet and carpet padding.
2
Amended April 2, 2019
E. . Recyclables include items that can be reused or reclaimed
to produce a new product and includes, but is not limited to,
the items identified in Article 3 below.
F. . Compostable leaf or yard waste includes leaves, grass
clippings, prunings and other similar items generated by lawn care
and gardening. Leaf and yard waste are not
considered as residential waste.
G. . Unacceptable waste is waste that cannot be accepted at the
Town's designated location for disposal, including but not
limited to, liquid wastes, hazardous wastes, biomedical
waste, containers that previously contained pesticides, infectious
waste, and asbestos. Special nuclear or by -product materials
within the meaning of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended, is unacceptable waste.
Unacceptable waste also includes "special waste" as
defined by 38 MRSA s1303 (10 -b). Questions pertaining
to the acceptability of materials may be directed to the
Solid Waste Director.
H. . Freeport's Recycling Facilities - Facilities include
recycling containers located at the Soule School (next to the
Village Store on South Freeport Road), Doherty's
Market (Wardtown Road), West Street Fire Barn (behind Police/Fire
Station) and the Freeport Recycling/Transfer Station located on
Hedgehog Mountain Road (off Pownal Road). Recycling facilities
may include other recycling
containers
I. sited from time to time at other locations within the Town
ARTICLE 2
WASTE HAULERS
Section 28 -201
No person shall engage in the business of collection, transportation or
disposal of solid waste generated or collected in Freeport without a
license to do so from the Solid Waste/Recycling Director.
Such licenses shall be for a period of 1 year unless sooner revoked
3
Amended April 2, 2019
for cause. The non -refundable fee for such licenses is $275 for
waste haulers who haul only residential waste to the designated
disposal facility, $275 for waste haulers who deliver only
commercial waste to the designated disposal facility, or $550 for
those waste haulers who haul both residential and commercial waste
to the designated disposal facility. Waste haulers delivering
commercial waste to the designated disposal facility must first sign a
commercial waste hauling agreement prior to applying or
reapplying for a commercial waste license. There shall be no
proration of license fees applied after 1 June. License fees shall be
paid before the license is issued. A license can only be used by the
business and/or applicant identified on an application. A license is
not transferable.
All renewal li censes shall be applied for by 24 June and, if granted,
will be effective on 1 July. New licenses may be applied for at
anytime. Any person applying for a new or renewal license
hereunder shall provide satisfactory proof of both irrevocable
commercial general liability insurance naming the Town of Freeport
as “additional insured” and irrevocable automobile liability
insurance each in the amount of $1,000,000.00, and shall have no
outstanding fees or charges under this ordinance. Application forms
shall be available at the Town Office.
Such waste haulers licensed by Freeport hereunder shall:
1. Pick up residential waste between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
Monday through Saturday and pick up commercial waste in
Zoning District Village I and Zoning District Village Commercial
I between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday.
2. Strictly segregate such residential waste from commercial waste.
3. Operate their lawful vehicles lawfully, safely and insure that they
are driven by current holders of Maine driver’s licenses.
4. Not be permitted to deliver loads containing both commercial and
residential waste to the Town's designated disposal facility.
5. Deliver all recyclable materials collected in the manner
prescribed by the receiving facility. Should recyclable materials
be delivered in a manner that result in additional charges from the
receiving facility (for example, excess contamination levels in
recyclable materials), the license
4
Amended April 2, 2019
holder is responsible for such charges and shall reimburse the Town for all
such charges assessed to the Town .
Notwithstanding 1M.R.S. §302 this obligation applies to existing
license holders as of January 1, 2019.
6. Cover and secure all loads.
ARTICLE 3
RECYCLING
Section 28 -301
Freeport operates three neighborhood recycling containers (silver bullets) and
the Recycling/Transfer Station located on Landfill
Road. The Town Council, by order, sets the hour s and conditions of
operation of the Recycling/Transfer Station. Disposal/Recycling of
any material is permitted only during the hours the
Recycling/Transfer Station is open and as otherwise permitted by
this Ordinance. Individuals leaving materials after operating hours will be
subject to summons and penalty. A fee established by the
Town Council may be charged for some items accepted at the
Recycling/Transfer Station Facility. A list of fees and associated
items will be maintained at the Recycling Facility and posted at the Town
Office.
No person shall remove anything from the Recycling Facility or recycling
containers except as permitted by the Town Council or Solid Waste
Director.
Any Freeport resident or property owner may discard recyclable
materials at one of Freeport's recycling facilities or contract with its solid waste
hauler to pick -up the recyclables.
Residential solid waste may have recyclable materials separated out prior to
pick -up by a licensed residential hauler or delivery to
Freeport's Recycling Center. Recyclable materials delivered to a
recycling container do not need to be sorted, and may consist of the
following (mixed) materials :
a. Paper Items: newspapers, magazines, phone books, mail,
brochures, catalogues, office/computer paper, br own bags with all plastic
removed.
b. Paperboard: cereal and food boxes, and egg cartons with plastic
5
Amended April 2, 2019
and metal removed
c. Clean Glass and Cans: clear, green and brown glass containers,
steel cans, aluminum foil and plates, empty paint cans (no dishes, ceramics,
mirrors, light bulbs).
d. Plastics: Clean consumer plastic containers (labeled #1 through
#7), such as clear milk jugs and beverage, food and detergent containers.
e. Other materials identified on the containers and/or allowed by
ecomaine.
Certain materials ma y also be delivered to the Freeport Recycling/Transfer
Station located on Hedgehog Mountain Road (off Pownal Road) or, if the
service is provided, collected by a residential solid waste hauler. There
will be a charge for some items. These materials include :
a. Clear #2 HDPE containers, such as milk jugs.
b. Clean used motor oil (free of other chemicals and materials)
c. Leaves, grass clippings, garden wastes
d. Christmas trees
e. Returnable bottles (proceeds donated to Freeport Community
Services)
f. Auto batteries (with no n-broken case) and household batteries
g. Brush (charge)
h. Wood waste (charge) (free of metal, plaster, sheetrock,
insulation, etc.)
i. Metal (charge) bedsprings, metal furniture, car parts, lawn
mowers, etc.
j. Tires (charge)
k. Asphalt shingles (charge) free of wood and flashing
l. Appliances (charge) refrigerators, stoves, etc.
m. Furniture (charge) chairs, sofas, tables, etc.
n. Household junk (charge) carpets, insulation, etc.
o. Goodwill Donation Box for good used clothing, shoes, games,
etc.
p. Anti-freeze and gasoline (charge)
q. Corrugated cardboard (boxes and packaging materials) - no
wax ed containers
r. Swap Shop - (items of reusable value that are workable and that are
not broken and that can be swapped or donated for reuse. No
bedding nor children's car seats are accepted. A disposal fee will be
charged for such items.
s. Computers, TV's, fluorescent light bulbs, thermostats (charge)
ARTICLE 4
6
Amended April 2, 2019
DESIGNATED DISPOSAL FACILITY
Section 28 -401
Under 38 MRSA s 1304 -B, as amended, Freeport hereby designates the
ecomaine Disposal Facility on Blueberry Road, off Congress
Street in Portland, Maine, as the residential and commercial disposal facility.
ARTICLE 5
DISPOSAL OF UNACCEPTABLE WASTE
Section 28 -501
No person without a license shall dispose of unacceptable solid waste in
Freeport. Such licenses require requisite final approvals
from each state, federal and other municipal agency for disposing of
the unacceptable waste in the manner proposed;
Section 28 -502
Residents without licenses wishing to dispose of unacceptable waste shall
contract with public companies licensed to specially handle
and dispose of such unacceptable waste.
ARTICLE 6
CITIZEN RESPONSIBILITIES
Section 28 -601
No person shall dump, discard or otherwise deposit refuse of any sort at any
place other than at the Freeport Recycling/Transfer
Station during operating hours or at curbside for delivery to the
recycling facilities or designated disposal facility, as allowable by
this Ordinance. However, any person, subject to state and local laws
and ordinances, may deposit or dump inert substances for fill
purposes only on any land in Freeport, with the permission of its owner.
Backyard composting is permissible.
No person shall include any commercial or unacceptable waste in with its
residential waste.
No person shall put out for curbside pickup any items that are
dangerous, or otherwise unsuited for pickup. It is also prohibited for
7
Amended April 2, 2019
a licensed hauler to pick up or collect leaf and grass clippings unless
these items are segregated from residential waste by the homeowner.
Any other person who collects leaves, grass clippings, or other yard
waste must also segregate such waste from other residential waste
and must deliver the yard waste to 1) the Freeport
Recycling/Transfer Station's composting area; 2) to a facility which meets the
specific criteria for the State of Maine Sludge and
Residuals Composting Rules, Chapter 567, Rules for Land
Application of Sludge and Residuals; or 3) to a private compost pile.
No person may compost more than 50 cubic yards of leaves, grass clippings,
or yard waste at his or her place of residence.
All demolition materials delivered to Freeport Recycling/Transfer Station
shall be separated and placed in designated areas.
Separation can occur on or off site.
Every producer of residential waste in Freeport must contract with a waste hauler
licensed for and by Freeport or bring their residential waste to the Freeport
Recycling/Transfer Station for a fee unless the producer takes their waste to
ecomaine and pays the tipping fee.
ARTICLE 7
MANDATORY RECYCLING
Section 28 -701
Every producer of commercial waste in Freeport must recycle cardboard
waste. Such waste may be delivered to Freeport's
Recycling Facility, or recycled otherwise. It must not be disposed of
with other commercial waste.
ARTICLE 8
ENFORCEMENT
Section 28 -801
The Chief of Police and his designees are charged by Freeport with
the enforcement of this Ordinance. In pursuance of these duties, the officers
charged with enforcement responsibilities herein may:
(a) ) Enter any property at reasonable hours or enter any
building with the consent of the owner, occupant or agent
8
Amended April 2, 2019
to inspect the property or building for compliance with this
Ordinance. A municipal official's entry onto property
under this paragraph is not a trespass.
(b) ) Issue a summons to any person who violates this Ordinance
which the official is authorized to enforce;
(c) ) When specifically authorized by the Freeport Town
Council, represent the municipality in District Court in the
prosecution of the alleged violations of this Ordinance,
which the official is authorized to enforce.
Any person, including, but not limited to, a landowner, the
landowner's agent or a contractor, who violates any of the provisions
of this Ordinance is liable for the penalties as set forth below.
The minimum penalty for undertaking an activity prohibited by this
Ordinance is $100, and maximum penalty is $l,000. The violator
may be ordered to correct or abate the violations. In the case of willful
violations, the violator shall be ordered to correct or abate
the violation. In the event that abatement is not feasible, the Court may
permit Freeport to decline to pick up and handle the violator's waste for
a given period of time.
Any waste hauler who co -mingles non -Freeport or non -residential
waste into Freeport's residential waste shall forfeit his license in
accordance with these provisions on Enforcement.
Any waste hauler who operates in violation of Article 2, paragraph numbered 3
above may forfeit his license in accordance with these provisions on
Enforcement.
In setting a penalty, the court shall consider, but is not limited to,
the following:
(a) Prior violations by the same party;
(b) The degree of environmental damage that cannot be
abated or corrected;
(c) ) The extent to which the violation continued following a
municipal order to stop; and
(d) ) The extent to which Freeport contributed to the violation
9
Amended April 2, 2019
by providing the violator with incorrect information or by failing to
take timely action.
AN ORDINANCE TO LEVY SERVICE CHARGES ON CERTAIN TAX EXEMPT PROPERTY
CHAPTER 29
Section 1. Authority
This Ordinance is enacted in accordance with 36 M.R.S.A. 652 (1)(L).
Section 2. Service Charge Established
An annual service charge is hereby established. It shall be levied by the Tax Assessor against all
residential property owned by an institution or organization if the property is otherwise totally exempt
from property taxation and used to provide rental income. The Assessor shall provide a list of such
property to the Town Council on request. This service charge shall not apply to parsonages.
Section 3. Calculation of Service Charge Limitation; Abatement
The service charge established in Section 2 shall be calculated according to the actual cost of providing
municipal services to the property in question and the persons who use that property. Services
considered in making this calculation shall include, without limitation: fire protection, police protection;
road maintenance and construction, traffic control, snow and ice removal; sanitation services; and any
services other than education and welfare.
Section 4. Collection
Unpaid service charges shall be collected following the procedure provided in 38 M.R.S.A. 1208, as may
be amended from time to time.
Section 5. Use of Revenues
Revenues accrued from service charges shall be used, as much as possible, to fund the cost of
providing the services which were considered in calculating the service charge.
Section 6. Appeals
Any institution or organization wishing to challenge the decision of the Assessor to levy a particular
service charge or the amount of a particular service charge may appeal that determination to the Board
of Assessment Review. Such appeals shall be filed in writing within sixty (60) days of the date on which
notice is provided by the Assessor to the institution or organization indicating the amount of the service
charge which they have voted to levy.
Amended July 1, 2008
1
VICTUALERS LICENSING ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 30
1. PURPOSE
The purpose of the Victualers Licensing Ordinance is to insure that establishments serving
food or drink intended for consumption by the public prepare their food and drink in a safe
and sanitary environment.
2. LICENSE REQUIRED
Any establishment that serves food or drink prepared for consumption by the public within
the corporate boundaries of the Town of Freeport shall be required to annually apply for and
be granted a Victualers License. A license shall be specific to the premises and entity which
is requesting the license. For example, a facility which is owned or operated at more than
one location, or in the same location and is operated by different parties or personnel or
which are physically separated shall require separate permits.
3. EXEMPTIONS
A Public or Private School, Public Service Organization, Private Club, Church Organization,
Fire Department, or any other non-profit organization selling food or drink on an infrequent
basis to solely raise money for a charitable cause shall be exempt from the requirements of
this license. Grocery stores, except those selling food items prepared on the premises, shall
be exempt. Establishments selling food and drink only through vending machines shall also
be exempt. The local exemption does not relieve an organization of state requirements.
The Municipal Officers shall have the authority to decide if an establishment is exempt or
not.
4. APPLICATIONS
A. Applicant: For the purposes of this ordinance, the applicant shall be the principal owner
of the establishment. If the owner is a corporation the applicant shall be the principal
stock holder of that corporation. If the principal owner of the establishment, or the
principal stockholder of the corporation owning the establishment, is not the person
primarily responsible for the actual operation of the establishment, then the person(s)
primarily responsible for the actual operation of the establishment, as well as the owner,
shall be reviewed as co-applicant(s) together with the owner.
B. Renewals: The Municipal Officers shall annually review all renewal applications for the
purpose of determining the status of the applicant’s previous conformance to this
ordinance and at such time make a decision as to (1) approve the renewal request, (2)
table the renewal request, setting a date for the applicant to come before the Officers to
Amended July 1, 2008
2
answer questions affecting consideration of the renewal request, or (3) for reason(s)
noted, disapprove the request. Applicants for renewal shall submit a completed
application with fees annually to the Town Clerk at least 30 days prior to the expiration
date.
C. New Applications: New applicants may apply to the Town Clerk at any time during the
year.
D. License Term: A license, when granted, shall be valid immediately following said
granting of license for a period of one year.
5. ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF A LICENSE
The Municipal Officers may deny the application for a license for one or more of the reasons
described as follows:
1. If the applicant fails any part of a state inspection or local health inspection.
2. If the applicant is not of good moral character. In determining good moral character the
Town Council shall consider all evidence presented but shall, in addition, check the
applicant’s police record, if any. Conviction of a class D or more serious crime may be
considered as evidence that the applicant lacks good moral character.
3. Failure to pay an outstanding fine, penalty or tax owed to the Town of Freeport by the
individual, corporation or principal stockholder of the corporation that is applying for the
license.
6. REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS
The Municipal Officers may place conditions and requirements on the license. These
conditions and requirements must be reasonably designed to promote the health, safety or
welfare of the Public. Examples of possible conditions include, but are not limited to,
specific opening and closing times, and measures designed to reduce noise.
7. FEES
The fees for a License shall be as follows:
New or Renewal $135.00
If an applicant also requires a Liquor License, there shall be an additional $15.00 (or such
additional amount as authorized by state law) for the liquor license.
8. REVOCATION OF LICENSE; DETERMINATION OF VIOLATIONS
If after investigation and hearing, the Municipal Officers concludes that the Licensee is unfit
to hold a license, it may revoke the license at any time. The Municipal Officers, for any
Amended July 1, 2008
3
cause which it considers satisfactory, may suspend a license for any period of time that it
considers proper. The Municipal Officers may determine that an establishment which has
not obtained a license is required to obtain a license, or that a licensed establishment has
violated conditions and restrictions applicable to its license. The Municipal Officers shall
provide the Licensee, at least three days prior to the hearing date, with notice of the time and
place of the hearing at which any of these issues will be considered.
9. A. Compliance Certification: An establishment requesting a Victualers License or renewal
of same, shall certify to the Municipal Officers and prove to said Officer's satisfaction that it
is not in violation of any Municipal Ordinance, including Zoning, or State or Federal law,
Statute or Regulation. The applicant shall also certify that all taxes, fines or penalty assessed
by the Town of Freeport on the establishment or equipment and fixtures contained therein are
fully paid, as of the date of the application. The Municipal Officers shall deny any
application which fails to meet these requirements.
B. Inspection: An establishment requesting a license for the first time shall be inspected by
the Codes Enforcement Officer and Fire Chief prior to any action being taken on the license
application. Any alterations or changes to an establishment will require additional
inspections.
C. Application Form: An establishment shall apply for a Victualers License or renewal on a
form designed for that purpose by the Town of Freeport. Failure of an applicant to fill out
the form completely, or any misstatements on said form shall result in the denial of the
license.
E. Health: An establishment licensed as a Victualer, and providing for on-premises food
consumption, shall provide with its renewal application a copy of its current state “Eating
License” issued by the Department of Health Services. A new application shall be
granted by the Municipal Officers only under the condition that the Victualer License
becomes effective after the Department of Health Services has issued a current state
“Eating License.”
10. PENALTY
Penalty: Any act made unlawful by this Ordinance and any violation of this Ordinance shall
be punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00 for each offense. Each day that such
unlawful act or violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
11. SEVERABILITY
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is for any reason held
to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not effect the validity of the remaining
portions of this Ordinance.
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
1
CHAPTER 31 COASTAL WATERS ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I INTRODUCTION
1. Purpose: The Coastal Waters Ordinance is hereby established regulating marine activities within the
anchorage of the Town of Freeport, Maine, in order to ensure safety to persons and property, to promote
availability, preservation and use of valuable public resources, and to create a fair and efficient framework
for administration of same.
2. Authority: This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by the Town’s general police
powers, the Home Rule provisions of the Constitution of the State of Maine, 30-A M.R.S.A. section 3001,
et seq. and 38 M.R.S.A. section 7.
3. Applicability: The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all tidal waters located within the
boundaries of the Town of Freeport, Maine.
4. Repeal: All prior harbor regulations including those enacted in December 1977, as amended, are
hereby repealed.
5. Severance: If any provision or clause of this Ordinance or application thereof to any person or persons
is held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not effect the validity of other provisions or applications of this
Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end provisions
of this Ordinance are declared to be severable.
6. Conflict: Nothing contained herein shall be construed to conflict with the lawful jurisdiction of the
United States Government with respect to enforcement of navigation, shipping or anchorage and associated
laws of the State of Maine.
ARTICLE II DEFINITIONS
1. The “anchorage” as used in this Ordinance shall include all tidal waters of the Town of Freeport. Tidal
waters extend to the mean high tide line.
2. The Harraseeket River anchorage is that portion of the anchorage upstream from a line drawn between
Stockbridge Point and Moore Point running through Pound of Tea Island, including Staples cove and all
waters to the north and east thereof to the head of navigation at Porter’s Landing and Mast Landing.
3. Boat: Boat as used in this Ordinance shall mean any floating object designed and used primarily for selfpropelled
navigation on the water.
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
2
4. Boat Yard: A place adjacent to tidal waters and located in the Marine Industrial Zone, as defined in the
Freeport Zoning Ordinance, where, as a business or gainful occupation, boats are hauled, stored, repaired
and/or constructed.
5. Channel: As defined by channel markers.
6. Commercial Passenger Boat: "Commercial Passenger Boat” means a boat, which carries passengers
for hire, on a charter or scheduled service basis or both. The term does not include the ferry service
engaged by the Bustins Island Village Corporation to provide public transportation to Bustins Island.
7. Commercial Zone: That portion of the anchorage which is reserved for the use of commercial fishing
vessels and described as bounded on the northeast by a line extending across the river aligned with the
current and/or former location of the ice batter pilings at the north end of Brewer's South Freeport Marine
(roughly N43 49.299’ W070 06.239’) and on the southwest by a line extending from the south end of
Harraseeket Lobster Company's wharf, to the nearest point of the mudflats which extend into the harbor
from Wolf's Neck.
8. Household: Those persons living in a single dwelling unit.
9. Marina: An all-tide waterfront facility located in the Marine Industrial Zone, as defined in the Freeport
Zoning Ordinance, whose activities may include sales, storage and maintenance of boats, and which
provides slips for permanent or transient berthing, sells fuel and supplies for boats and provides vehicle
parking.
10. Marine Vendor: The word " marine vendor “ as used herein shall include any person, having no
established or fixed place of business in the Town, selling or offering for sale tangible commodities from
the Town Wharf or any of the piers, floats or boats attached thereto and where delivery is made at the time
of sale. The word " marine vendor " shall include the words "hawker", "huckster" and " peddler ".
11. Marina Mooring: Mooring assignment used by marinas primarily for rental to transient marine traffic.
12. Mooring: A mooring is an underwater device either helix, granite block or mushroom, which tethers
boats. A Temporary Mooring is one, which is constructed to be hauled out of the water seasonally. A
Permanent Mooring is one, which is constructed to over winter in the water. A Flats Mooring is one, which
is located on the mud flats at low tide.
13. Non-resident: All persons not residents of the Town of Freeport are classified as non-resident.
14. Non-resident Commercial Marine Enterprise: A Commercial Marine Enterprise owned by a nonresident
of the Town of Freeport.
15. Non-resident Commercial Fisherman: A non-resident of the Town of Freeport who derives a
majority of his/her annual income from lobstering, clamming, or fishing or other marine fishery and who
has legally obtained all necessary permits, licenses and approvals.
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
3
16. Person: The word "person" as used herein shall include the singular and plural, and shall also mean or
include any club, partnership, society or legal entity.
17. Resident: Any person who occupied for more than 180 days in the preceding calendar year, real estate
which he/she rents, owns or resides within the Town of Freeport.
18. Resident Commercial Marine Enterprise: A Resident Commercial Marine Enterprise is a sole
proprietorship, partnership, corporation or other legal entity owned by a resident of the Town of Freeport
and located in the Town of Freeport in business for the purpose of sales, storage or maintenance of boats;
services to boatyards or marinas or the general public; selling or offering for sale a tangible marine related
commodity. To be considered a Resident Commercial Marine Enterprise the principal(s) must prove
(a) that a majority of his or her income is derived from the Commercial Marine Enterprise,
(b) that there is a record of business transactions,
(c) that the business has separate business quarters defined by lease or contract.
19. Resident Commercial Fisherman: A resident of the Town of Freeport who derives a majority of
his/her annual income from lobstering, fishing or clamming, or any other marine fishery and who has
legally obtained all necessary permits, licenses and approvals.
20. Resident/Recreational Mooring Assignment: This category of mooring assignment is limited to
persons who are residents of the Town of Freeport.
21. Skiff: A light rowboat, sometimes called a dinghy, of 14 feet or less in length.
22. Slip: A berthing space at floats or docks.
23. Yacht Club: A private association, corporation or other legal entity organized to promote recreational
boating.
24. Houseboat: A raft, hull, barge or vessel, designed primarily to be used as a commercial establishment
or living quarters, rather than navigation.
25. Lobster Float: A float used to store lobsters or related gear.
26. Aquaculture Venture: Any venture for the purpose of raising marine life.
ARTICLE III COASTAL WATERS COMMISSION
1 Organization:
(a) The Coastal Waters Commission shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Town Council.
Each Commissioner shall be a resident of the Town of Freeport and shall serve without compensation.
(b) Neither a municipal officer nor his/her spouse may be a member of the Commission.
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
4
(c) Any question of whether a particular issue involves a conflict of interest sufficient to disqualify a
member from voting thereon shall be decided by a majority vote of the members, except the member who
is being challenged.
(d) Commissioners may be removed by the Town Council for cause, after notice and hearing. The
Chairman of the Commission shall notify the Town Council Chairman of the forfeiture of office by a
Commissioner(s).
(e) The term of office of a member shall be three (3) years, except the initial appointments, which shall be
as follows: three (3) members for two (2) year terms; and two (2) members for one (1) year term.
(f) The Commission shall annually elect a chairman, vice - chairman and secretary from its membership
and may create and fill such other offices as it may determine. Officers shall serve one (1) year term and
shall be eligible for re-election.
2. Procedure:
(a) The Chairman shall call meetings of the commission as required. The Chairman shall also call meetings
of the Commission when requested to do so by a majority of the members or by the Town Council. A
quorum of the Commission necessary to conduct an official Commission Meeting shall consist of at least
four (4) members. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the Commission and shall be official
spokesman of the Commission.
(b) The Secretary shall maintain a permanent record of all Commission meetings and all correspondence of
the Commission. The secretary shall be responsible for maintaining those records which are required as a
part of the various proceedings which may be brought before the Commission. All records to be maintained
or prepared by the Secretary are deemed public and shall be filed in the Municipal Clerk's office and may
be inspected at reasonable times.
(c) The Commission may provide by rule, which shall be recorded by the Secretary, for any matter relating
to the conduct of any hearing, provided that any rule may be waived by the Chairman upon good cause
shown.
(d) The Commission may receive any oral or documentary evidence but shall provide as a matter of policy
for the exclusion of irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence. Every party shall have the right
to present his or her case or defense by oral or documentary evidence, to submit rebuttal evidence and to
conduct such cross-examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts.
(e) The transcript of testimony, if any, and exhibits together with all papers and requests filed in the
proceeding, shall become part of the record and shall include a statement of findings and conclusions, as
well as the reasons and/or basis thereof, upon all the material issues of fact, law or discretion presented in
the appropriate order, relief or denial thereof. Notice of any decision shall be mailed or hand delivered to
the petitioner, his or her representative or agent, the Planning Board, agency or office and the municipal
officers within seven (7) days of their decision.
(f) An appeal may be taken from any act or decision of the Coastal Waters Commission by procedure as
outlined in Article XI of this Ordinance.
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
5
3. Jurisdiction: The Coastal Waters Commission shall hear any appeal by any person affected directly or
indirectly from any decision, order, rule, act or failure to act of the Harbormaster. In deciding any appeal,
the Commission shall hear and approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or disapprove the
decision, order, rule, act or failure to act of the Harbormaster, from which the appeal is made.
ARTICLE IV HARBORMASTER
1. The Harbormaster shall enforce all federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations over
which he or she has been given jurisdiction, including specifically, but not limited to the Coastal Waters
Ordinance of the Town of Freeport and the provisions of 38 M.R.S.A., Sections 1-13.
2. The Harbormaster shall oversee the Town's moorings, floats, gangways, wharves, and channels and
ensure their proper maintenance is provided for.
3. The Harbormaster shall regularly attend the Coastal Waters Commission meetings and inform the
Commission of his/her activities as well as provide such available information as may be requested by the
Commission for the execution of its duties.
ARTICLE V MOORING ASSIGNMENTS
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
6
1. Registration: Persons desiring to place moorings in the Harraseeket River anchorage shall apply for
mooring assignments each year. During or before January of each year, the Harbormaster shall notify each
person who received a mooring assignment the previous year and in fact used this assignment for its
prescribed use, and any other applicants who have asked to receive a mooring application, that completed
applications shall be returned to the Harbormaster by the applicant no later than March 1st of that year.
Applications shall be made on the electronic form provided by the Harbormaster. Paper applications may
be made available upon request. Mooring Applications which are between one (1) and seven (7) days late
will be assessed a late fee, as established by the Town Council. Persons may request a waitlist application
at any time, however each applicant must renew their application each year between January 1st and March
31st. Any person who fails to renew their waitlist application will be removed from the list. The burden of
proof in determining residence, legitimacy of business usage, principal use of a vessel or any issues of
adequacy of design or construction, shall be upon the applicant. There shall be a maximum of three
hundred fifty (350) moorings, not including flats moorings, located in the Harraseeket River anchorage.
The Harbormaster shall decide on the number of moorings applicable in all Freeport tidal waters taking into
consideration the concerns of area residents, the ease of access to moorings and any other applicable
factors.
a. Persons desiring to place moorings anywhere in the anchorage of the Town of Freeport,
excluding the Harraseeket River anchorage, shall complete a mooring application.
Information relative to the application shall be followed as required by section 1 above,
Registration. This article does not apply to boats eight (8) feet or under that are not on a
permanent mooring.
2. Termination: All persons who had been assigned a mooring the entire previous year whose mooring
assignment is to be terminated by the Harbormaster for reasons of non-compliance with the Coastal Waters
Ordinance or any other reason shall receive written notification from the Harbormaster no later than
January 31. This notice shall state the fact of termination and the reason for termination, and inform the
applicant of his/her right to appeal the decision of the Harbormaster to the Coastal Waters Commission as
prescribed in Article XI below.
3. Mooring Assignment Application: Each application shall contain the following:
(a) The applicant's name (or applicants’ names in the event the mooring assignment is to be held jointly by
spouses), complete address, home telephone number, place of employment and work telephone number;
(b) The boat name, State or Federal registration number, the vessel identification number, the engine
number, name and address of boat owner(s);
(c) The type of boat, i.e. sail, power, inboard or outboard;
(d) Length of boat and hull configuration, i.e. deep keel, shallow draft;
(e) If the boat is less than twenty feet (20') in length, the type of mooring desired, temporary or permanent;
(f) Name, address and telephone number of person who will set, service and inspect the mooring;
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
7
(g) The signature or electronic signature of the applicant and date of application;
(h) Payment of the appropriate fee.
(i) Consent from the applicant allowing the Harbormaster, at any time the boat is occupied, to board and
inspect any tanks, valves, pumps and lines, including but not limited to, “Y” valves and electric systems
such as Electra San, to insure such tanks, valves, systems, etc. are not set in a position that would allow the
discharge of sanitary wastes into a Freeport anchorage.
4. Fees: All fees shall follow the fee schedule established by the Town Council.
The Coastal Waters Commission shall review fees at least once every two years and may make
recommendations for adjustments to the Town Council.
5. Mooring Assignment: All persons who received and used a mooring assignment in the previous year,
and whose mooring application was received in a complete and timely fashion, will receive a mooring
assignment for the current year on March 15 of that year, unless a delay is announced due to a change in
law, environment, etc. After March 16 the Harbormaster will award any remaining mooring assignments to
persons who have been on the waiting list. The Harbormaster and the Coastal Waters Commission will
maintain a balance of not less than ten percent (10%) non-resident mooring assignments. At all times the
following priority order shall be maintained:
(1) Resident Commercial Fisherman;
(2) Resident/Recreational;
(3) Commercial Passenger Boat
(4) Resident Commercial Marine Enterprise;
(5) Non-Resident Commercial Fisherman;
(6) Non-Resident Commercial Marine Enterprise;
(7) Non-Resident Recreational;
(8) Resident Subsequent;
(9) Non-Resident Subsequent.
In any one year not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of new mooring assignments shall be assigned to
non-recreational applicants.
6. Waiting List: The Harbormaster shall maintain one chronological waiting list with complete
application information of all applicants who have applied for but not received a mooring assignment.
Persons desiring a place on the waiting list may apply at any time by making out a mooring application
form and filing it with the Harbormaster. The list shall be in eight sections, each section in chronological
order as to when the application was received with recreational applications being limited to natural
persons:
(1) Resident Commercial Fisherman;
(2) Resident/Recreational;
(3) Resident Commercial Marine Enterprise;
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
8
(4) Non-Resident Commercial Fisherman;
(5) Non-Resident Commercial Marine Enterprise;
(6) Non-Resident Recreational;
(7) Resident Subsequent;
(8) Non-Resident Subsequent.
A copy of this waiting list, composed of all information required in Article V5 Section 3 of this Ordinance,
shall be posted in the Town Office and shall be provided to all members of the Coastal Waters
Commission, and made available for any Commercial Marine Enterprise or any others who request a copy.
7. Numbers:
(a) Marinas shall be assigned a total of not more than 15 mooring assignments each. These may not be
located in the Commercial zone without approval by the Harbormaster. If any of these moorings shall be
rented they shall be considered rental moorings.
(b) Yacht Clubs in existence as of January 1, 1999 shall be allowed not more that 4 (four) mooring
assignments each.
(c) All other categories listed in Article V.5 (I)-(II) may apply for one mooring assignment each.
Applicants desiring more than one mooring assignment must apply to the Coastal Waters Commission and
prove need.
8. Leasing: All mooring assignments (with the exception of Marina Rental Moorings) shall be used
exclusively for the personal use of the applicant solely for the boat listed in the application. No leasing,
subleasing, or assignment of moorings or mooring numbers shall be allowed.
9. Abandonment of Assignment: The Harbormaster shall deem abandoned any mooring assignments
substantially unused by the applicant for his/her vessel for a period of more than one season. Subsequent
application for a mooring number assignment by that person must be in accordance with the procedure
outlined for new applications, including placement in chronological sequence on the waiting list.
10. Placement: The Harbormaster shall develop a plan for the placement of moorings in the Harraseeket
River anchorage. He/she shall annually assign locations to each mooring and ensure placement in the
correct location. All moorings not located in the correct location shall be moved by the owner at his/her
own expense in accordance with the instructions of the Harbormaster. In the event of the failure of the
owner to comply with these instructions, the Harbormaster shall move or remove the improperly located
mooring and the cost shall be borne by the owner of the relocated mooring. Resident commercial fishing
vessel owners who request a place in the Commercial zone shall have their moorings assigned there by the
Harbormaster as soon as possible.
11. Construction:
(a) After April 1, 1987, all moorings in the Harraseeket River anchorage for boats in excess of twenty (20)
feet shall be permanent moorings.
(b) Boats under twenty (20) feet in length may be placed upon temporary moorings.
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
9
(c) All mooring construction and placement, in the Harraseeket River anchorage of the Town of Freeport,
must be approved by the Harbormaster.
12. Construction Standards in the Harraseeket River Anchorage: The mooring owner is responsible
for the adequacy of all mooring gear, tackle and maintenance.
(a) All permanent moorings shall comply with the following minimum specifications throughout the
anchorage.
(1) Each permanent mooring shall consist of a granite block or helix with heavy steel bottom chain
attached to a lighter top chain, mooring buoy and a nylon pennant. Nylon or synthetic material as approved
by the Harbormaster, may be substituted for the top chain.
(2) All granite blocks shall be constructed of solid granite with steel staples or eyebolt extending
completely through the block. Cement blocks, old engines and other miscellaneous weighted objects are
unacceptable as mooring anchors in the harbor.
(3) The mooring scope shall be approximately two times the water depth at maximum high water.
Total scope shall include bottom chain and top chain together, each of which shall consist of approximately
half the total length.
(4) Each mooring must have at least one swivel, which must be placed above the top chain. All
swivels and shackles must be larger than the chain diameter. All shackles and swivel pins shall be properly
seized. All eyes in the nylon rode shall be fitted with appropriate size thimbles. Pennants connecting the
mooring buoy to the moored boat shall be fastened to the lower eye of the mooring buoy and shall consist
of nylon line equal to 1 1/2 to 2 times the freeboard at the bow of the boat.
(5) Mooring tackle shall meet the following minimum:
Up to 20' As approved by the Harbormaster.
Registered Boat length (ft) Granite Block(lb) Bottom Chain Chain/Top Rode Nylon
20 - 25 2000 1/2 3/8 5/8
25 - 35 2500 1/2 3/8 5/8
35 - 40 3000 3/4 1/2 3/4
40 + As approved by the Harbormaster
(6) Standards for helix moorings are the same as for other types.
(7) Despite dimension standards established herein, any part of a mooring showing excessive wear
or any mooring or gear, which does not meet with the Harbormaster’s approval, shall not be permitted.
(8 All moorings shall be white in color with a blue horizontal stripe, be at least 18 inches in
diameter, and show 2/3 above the water at all times. This device will be marked with owner’s name and
permit number in a manageable and legible manner.
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
10
(9) All moorings shall be of appropriate size and design for the largest size boat likely to be placed
thereon.
(10) Wire cable will not be allowed in the anchorage.
(11) Old discarded moorings, mooring chain and related items must be removed from the
anchorage.
(b) Temporary Moorings:
(1) The design and construction of all temporary moorings shall be approved by the Harbormaster
prior to placement in the water and shall be of either mushroom or Dor-Mor construction.
(2) Hand mixed cement blocks, old engines, and other miscellaneous weighted objects are
unacceptable as mooring anchors in the harbor.
(c) Winter:
(1) Wooden spars and hard plastic net buoys may not be used in the Harraseeket River anchorage.
Floating rope may be used, but must be counterweighted to prevent excess rope from floating on the
surface. Temporary winter mooring items must be approved by the Harbormaster and may not be set
before October 15 and must be removed by May 1 each year. Winter hardware remaining in the water after
May 1 shall be removed by the Harbormaster at the expense of the owner and an appropriate fine levied in
accordance with Article X, Item 3.
(2) Pennants must be removed no later than December 21st.
13. Setting:
(a) No temporary mooring shall be set before sunrise on the first working day in April without the express
consent of the Harbormaster.
(b) If the applicant who has received a mooring assignment disposes of the boat on that mooring, he or she
shall notify the Harbormaster whether the boat will be replaced or the mooring is no longer needed.
14. Inspection:
(a) The Harbormaster or his appointed deputy shall inspect and approve or be otherwise satisfied that each
mooring is in safe condition before it is placed in the anchorage.
(b) Every second year permanent moorings in the Harraseeket River anchorage shall be inspected at the
owner’s expense and a report submitted to the Harbormaster. The Harbormaster has the authority to
require any necessary maintenance or replacement of parts or the whole mooring, tackle and/or gear.
(c) The Harbormaster shall maintain a file on each mooring, listing the date of the last inspection and the
name of the person who last inspected it.
15. Anchoring:
.
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
11
(a) Boats may anchor only in those areas and for the length of time permitted in writing by the
Harbormaster.
(b) The owner or operator of a boat desiring to anchor must provide a signed consent allowing the
Harbormaster, at any time the boat is occupied, to board and inspect any tanks, valves, pumps and lines,
including, but not limited to “Y” valves and electric systems such as Electra San, to insure such tanks,
valves, systems, etc. are not set in a position that would allow the discharge of sanitary wastes into a
Freeport anchorage.
16. Other Floating Objects: No mooring in this harbor shall be utilized to secure any floating object other
than a single boat without express written permission of the Coastal Waters Commission. The term "boat"
as used in this subsection shall include mooring derricks.
(a) Houseboats whether temporary or permanent are prohibited from mooring or anchoring in the Coastal
Waters of the Town of Freeport except at marinas, which provide the following:
1) A permanent float, dock or slip from which the houseboat may be directly boarded from land;
2) Connection to a public water supply by means of an individual anti-back flow valve;
3) A sewer connection to a public sewage system;
4) A year-round, all weather supply of electricity;
5) Parking as required by the codes and ordinances of the Town of Freeport;
(b) All lobster floats in the Harraseeket River shall be subject to the approval of the Harbormaster.
Maximum size float size will be six hundred forty (640) Square feet and will required to have no less than
two (2) moorings, one fore and aft. Mooring weight and tackle will be determined by the minimum
mooring requirements. If boats are tied to these floats, then the mooring requirements will be greater than
the minimum standards as determined by the Harbormaster.
17. Flats mooring: Vessels drawing less than six inches unladen, and other vessels with the express
permission of the Harbormaster, may utilize a flats mooring. Flats moorings shall be located and built of
such construction as the Harbormaster may approve. They shall be marked by some system to be
determined by the Harbormaster so as to be readily identifiable by him. These moorings shall not be
included within the three hundred fifty (350) mooring limitation contained in Article V, Section 1 above.
18. Ownership: Nothing in this Chapter conveys any property rights in a mooring assignment in the
Harraseeket River anchorage. A transfer of a commercial mooring may be made to family members by
request at the death of the person holding the mooring. If unassigned, the mooring assignment reverts to the
town and shall be assigned to the next eligible person. If a case should arise where a person holding a
resident/recreational mooring assignment requests a change to commercial, and then requests a change
back to resident/recreational, the request shall be granted. A husband and wife may hold any mooring in
common.
19. Residency Status and Fees: If a person who holds a valid mooring assignment changes residency
status, whether from resident to non-resident or from non-resident to resident, he/she is expected to notify
the Harbormaster immediately. In the case of change from resident to non-resident, the Harbormaster will
make a determination about fee increase. In the case of non-resident to resident, there will be no remission
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
12
of fees. Failure to accurately report resident or non-resident status will be considered fraud, and will be
subject to penalties under Article X of this ordinance as well as immediate forfeiture of the mooring
assignment after notice and hearing.
ARTICLE VI TOWN WHARF AND FLOATS
Town Wharf:
1. The Town of Freeport owns and operates one public wharf and floats, which provide the only all-tide
public access to Harraseeket Harbor in the Town. The purpose of the Wharf and Float System, maintained
at the public expense, is to provide access to the water for the residents of the Town of Freeport, including
Bustins Island, and to assure the facilities use for the benefit of the residents of the Town and for traditional
and historic purposes.
(a) Use of the Town Wharf and Floats: A use of the Town Wharf and floats that fits within the definitions
of Commercial fishing, lobstering or clamming, Recreation, Commercial Marine Enterprises, Marine
Venders or Marinas consistent with the rules and regulations in the Freeport Coastal Waters Ordinance
(formerly, Harbor Rules and Regulations) shall be permitted.
(b) Conduct on the Wharf: No persons shall use the wharf and floats to store fish bait or any other offensive
or dangerous material. Persons may store equipment and other items necessary for their business for
reasonable periods of time as approved by the Harbormaster.
(c) General Authority of the Harbormaster: In addition to other authority granted to the Harbormaster under
this Ordinance and under state, federal and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, the Harbormaster
shall have the general authority of supervisor and shall control the use of the wharf and floats by any
person. The Harbormaster shall strive to insure that all uses of the wharf and floats are consistent with this
Ordinance and that all persons using the wharf and floats do so in a safe manner.
(d) Berthing Zone: A berthing zone is hereby established from the southwest face of the existing Town
float system which is thirteen (13) feet from the face of the Town floats for the length of the existing Town
floats. Boats may berth along the southwest face of the Town float system only within the berthing zone
and not outside of it. No boat shall berth in the berthing zone for more than thirty (30) minutes out of each
sixty (60) minute period. All boats berthed on the southwest face of the Town floats shall be attended,
meaning that a person capable of operating the boat shall be on the boat. Any boat berthed in the berthing
zone shall, upon request of the Harbormaster, be moved to facilitate navigation to and from abutting
property. No vessels shall be berthed on the southwest face of the Town wharf in the area between the
bulkhead and the end of the Town wharf except that berthing may be allowed in that area upon the mutual
consent of the Harbormaster and the owner of the land behind the bulkhead, which consent shall not be
reasonably withheld. (Reference is made to an agreement dated April 25, 1989 between the Town of
Freeport and John Coffin, Constance Coffin, David Coffin and Regis Coffin). Violations of the berthing
zone section of this Ordinance shall be subject to a $30.00 fine per violation.
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
13
2. Town Hoist:
(a) No launching or landing of boats using the hoist shall be allowed without the permission of the
Harbormaster.
(b) Loads shall not exceed the posted hoist limit.
(c) The Harbormaster may terminate any use that he/she deems, in his/her sole discretion, to be unsafe.
Town Floats:
1. Unless approved by the Harbormaster, all boats secured at the Town Floats shall be attended, meaning
that a person capable of operating the boat shall be on the boat at all times.
2. No boat, attended or unattended, may be tied to the Town Floats overnight without the written consent
of the Harbormaster. The owner or operator of a boat desiring to tie to a Town Float overnight must
provide a signed consent allowing the Harbormaster, at any time the boat is occupied, to board and inspect
any tanks, valves, pumps and lines, including but not limited to “Y” valves and electric systems such as
Electra San, to insure such tanks, valves, systems, etc. are not set in a position that would allow the
discharge of sanitary wastes into a Freeport anchorage.
3. No person will leave any waste on the Town Wharf or Floats.
4. Skiffs may be secured at the finger floats on the north side of the Town Floats provided they comply
with all of the below listed conditions:
(a) Only skiffs owned by residents of the Town of Freeport may be left unattended at the finger
floats. Non-residents may leave skiffs unattended at the finger floats only with the written permission of
the Harbormaster.
(b) Each skiff shall be marked with the owner's name and a dinghy/skiff permit, which will be
assigned by the Harbormaster for purposes of identification. The fee for a dinghy/skiff permit shall be
$50.00 (fifty dollars).
(c) No skiffs may be secured on the outer faces of the Town Floats.
(d) All skiffs shall be properly secured and maintained, but shall not be secured with chains or wire,
nor padlocked to the float.
(e) Outboard motors of 25 H.P. or less may be left on skiffs secured at the Town Floats, with the
approval of the Harbormaster.
(f) No skiff longer than fourteen (14') feet may be secured on the Town Floats.
5. From June 15 to September 15 of each year, no fishing gear and related items shall be left on the town
Wharf and Floats for a period of more than 24 hours without permission of the Harbormaster. From
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
14
September 16 to June 14 fishing gear and related items can remain on the Town Wharf and Floats for up to
72 hours. At no time can any fishing gear or related materials be placed in public parking spaces.
ARTICLE VII TOWN LANDINGS
In recognition of the fact that the Town of Freeport owns several boat landing sites including the Dunning
Boatyard site and the Cove Road site, the following ordinance provisions enforceable by the Harbormaster
are made.
1. The Coastal Waters Commission will have responsibility for setting and administering policy and the
Harbormaster will have authority over all of these sites.
ARTICLE VIII OPERATIONS
1. No boat shall be operated within the Harraseeket River anchorage at a speed in excess of five knots or
cause a wake. This section shall not apply to operation in those two portions of the anchorage bounded as
follows:
(a) The northern portion of the anchorage bounded on the east, north and west by the anchorage limits and
on the south by a line drawn from the east end of Sandy Beach, so-called, on Weston Point due east (true)
to the Wolf's Neck Shore.
ARTICLE IX DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT
It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to disrupt the safe and lawful activities, or in any way
threaten the public safety, in or around the docks, wharfs, floats or tidal waters of the Town of Freeport,
Maine.
Any persons found in violation of this ordinance shall lose his/her mooring assignment(s) and all rights to
use the Town dock, wharfs and floats.
ARTICLE X PENALTIES
1. It shall be the primary duty of the Harbormaster to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. If the
Harbormaster shall find any provision of this Ordinance being violated, he/she shall notify the person
responsible for said violation, either verbally or in writing, indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action necessary to correct it. The Harbormaster shall maintain a written record of said notices.
In the event the violation compromises public safety or causes or threatens to cause property damage, then
notification of the violation shall be the fastest means available. In this case, if contact with the mooring or
boat owner or corrective action cannot be made within 24 hours, the Harbormaster is authorized to take
whatever corrective action is necessary, the expense and risk for which shall be borne by the mooring or
boat owner. If the mooring or boat owner fails to satisfy all financial obligations arising out of this incident
prior to January 1st of the succeeding year, he or she shall forfeit his/her mooring assignment until such
obligation is satisfied after proper notice and hearing. This section shall not limit in any way the authority
of the Harbormaster to act as provided in 38 M.R.S.A., Section 1.
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
15
2. Legal Action: When the above action does not result in the abatement or correction of the violation
condition, the Harbormaster, on behalf of the Town, is authorized to seek any and all actions, legal or
equitable. In addition to seeking civil penalties, the Town of Freeport may enjoin any person from
violating or continuing to violate a provision of this ordinance and may seek any other legal or equitable
remedies necessary to achieve compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. In any such action,
which the Town prevails, the Town shall be awarded reasonable attorney's fees and the cost of suit in
addition to any other relief to which it may be entitled.
3. Civil Penalty: Violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be deemed a civil violation. The
provisions of this ordinance are enforceable by the Harbormaster, Assistant Harbormaster, or any other law
enforcement officer whose jurisdiction includes the Town of Freeport. Any person who violates any
provision of this ordinance commits a civil violation punishable by a civil penalty of not less than $100 nor
more than $2,500. A separate violation occurs each day until the violation is ceased or corrected.
Commencement of action may be by service of process by a uniform traffic ticket and complaint as
provided in 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2601. All civil penalties shall be payable to the Town of Freeport.
4. Failure to Obey Order of the Harbormaster:
i. Offense Defined: As provided by 38 M.R.S.A. 13, a person is guilty of failure to obey an order of the
Harbormaster if the person intentionally, knowingly or recklessly fails to obey any lawful order of the
Harbormaster authorized pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. 1 et seq.
ii. Penalty: Failure to obey an order of the Harbormaster is a Class E Crime.
5.) The Harbormaster may remove the chain of any mooring with improper number, located in an improper
place or improperly constructed, if, two (2) weeks after written notice to the owner thereof, said owner fails
to correct the problem. Notice shall be in writing and shall include the action to be taken by the owner and
the fact that the mooring is subject to removal, and that the owner is liable for a fine.
6. Abandonment of watercraft
No person may abandon any watercraft in the harbor or maintain in the harbor any derelict watercraft or
watercraft for salvage. For the purposes of this section, the Harbormaster shall determine the status of a
watercraft. Such watercraft may be ordered removed by the Harbormaster at the expense of the registered
owner and may be sold at auction.
7. The Harbormaster shall suspend for one year or terminate the mooring assignment of any mooring
owner for non-compliance with this Ordinance after proper notice and hearing. After one year, the
applicant may reapply for a mooring assignment.
8. Abandonment of tackle
Any registered mooring holder who abandons or forfeits a mooring space is responsible for removing and
disposing of the tackle. Failure of the registered holder to remove such tackle shall constitute abandonment
thereof. Such tackle may be ordered removed by the harbormaster at the expense of the registered mooring
holder and may be sold at auction according to Article X, 6.
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
16
ARTICLE XI MENACES TO NAVIGATION
The Harbormaster is authorized to make the necessary and appropriate determination to remove any
menace to navigation within the waters of the Town of Freeport. This shall include, but is not limited to,
contracting for removal of the menace by the authorities of the State of Maine, Federal Government, or a
private contractor at the expense of either the Town of Freeport, some other governmental entity, or the
private entity responsible for the creation of the menace. An appeal may be brought to the coastal Waters
Commission.
1. Un-seaworthy, dangerous or deteriorated vessels, and other objects
No vessel, watercraft or float of any kind whatsoever which is un-seaworthy or in badly deteriorated
condition or which is likely to injure persons or damage private or public property, or which might become
a menace to navigation, shall be permitted to moor in the Harraseeket River anchorage or tie up at the town
wharf or floats. The Harbormaster and Coastal Waters Commission may separately or jointly determine
whether any watercraft is un-seaworthy, dangerous or in badly deteriorated condition and take appropriate
steps for its removal. This paragraph shall not apply to vessels in immediate distress as a result of current
emergencies.
ARTICLE XII APPEALS
1. The Freeport Coastal Waters Commission exists for the general purpose of studying and evaluating
public usage of and access to coastal waters, to advise the Town Council on proposed regulations
concerning the Town's coastal waters, supervise the enforcement of these rules and regulations through the
Harbormaster, oversee the maintenance and care of Town owned waterfront facilities through the
Harbormaster, and in conjunction with State and Federal authorities. The Coastal Waters Commission sits
as a board of appeals to hear an appeal from any person aggrieved by any decision, act or failure to act of
the Harbormaster. The Commission shall regularly inform the Town Council, Planning Board, and such
other boards, committees, commissions, or officials of the Town of its activities, as is appropriate.
2. Any and all persons aggrieved directly or indirectly by a decision, order, rule, act or failure to act of the
Harbormaster may appeal said decision, order, rule, act or failure to act to the Coastal Waters Commission.
In deciding any appeal, the Commission shall hear and approve, approve with modifications or conditions
or disapprove the decision, order, rule, act or failure to act from which the appeal is made in accordance
with the provisions of Section 604 of the Freeport Administrative Code.
3. Such appeals shall be made in writing to the Coastal Waters Commission within five calendar days of
the decision, order, rule, act or failure to act from which the appeal is taken. It must state with specificity
the decision, order, rule, act or failure to act from which the appeal is taken and the reason for the appeal.
The appeal shall be considered by the Coastal Waters Commission at its next regular meeting.
4. Any decision, order, rule, act or failure to act by the Harbormaster concerning the location of moorings
or boats, as a result of which location there is immediate danger to lives or property shall not be stayed
pending appeal.
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
17
5. An appeal may be taken by any party from a decision of the Coastal Waters Commission, within thirty
days after the decision is rendered, to the Superior Court in accordance with the Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure.
ARTICLE XIII FLOAT, WHARF & DOCK PERMITS
Permit Application
Any organization, person or business seeking to build (or modify) a float, wharf or dock (referred to as
“float” in this ordinance) shall receive, as a first step, approval from the Freeport Coastal Waters
Commission. A letter requesting consideration at a regular meeting of the Coastal Waters Commission
must be submitted 30 days in advance to gain access to the next month’s agenda. Written applications shall
include the following in duplicate copies of seven (7):
? Copy of signed and received certified letter(s) sent to neighbors within 250’ of the proposed project;
? Scale drawings of the proposed project;
? Confirmation of $100.00 application fee received by the Town of Freeport;
? Visual Map/LAT-LON of proposed wharf;
? Photographs of proposed site including, if available, aerial photos;
? Description of highest annual and low water marks in relation to proposed float.
Applicant or representative shall be available at the Coastal Waters Commission meeting to answer
questions which may include the following:
? How and where will the permanent and/or temporary structure be stored in the winter months?
Docks or floats stored on salt marsh are not acceptable.
? When will the structure be built?
? Will neighbors be allowed access?
? Who will build, store and maintain the float?
? Are there future plans for expansion?
? Have there been any objections from neighbors that you are aware of?
Coastal Waters reserves the right to request a site walk during the application process.
Float (“Project”) Standards:
The design, location and scale of all float projects are subject to approval by the Freeport Coastal Waters
Commission under the following guidelines. NOTE: Approval from the Freeport Waters Commission
does not relieve the applicant from the responsibility of obtaining approval from other town, state and
federal agencies with jurisdiction over the proposed float.
1. The project shall be no larger in dimension than is consistent with the conditions, use and character
of its surroundings; it will not adversely affect water use by adjacent properties; and will remain in
general harmony with that of existing activities in adjacent areas within the Freeport Coastal Water
Commission’s jurisdiction. The property for which the project will be constructed shall have a
minimum of 60 feet of water frontage. The length from the highest annual tide water mark shall not
exceed 125’ and must be completed within two years of final approval.
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
18
2. The project must not unreasonably interfere with customary or traditional public access ways to, or
public trust rights (fishing, fowling, and navigation) in, on, or over the submerged lands;
unreasonably interfere with fishing or other existing marine uses of the area; unreasonably diminish
the availability of services and facilities necessary for commercial marine activities; and
unreasonably interfere with ingress and egress or riparian owners. Project may require
accommodations such as steps or pier elevations allowing passage over or beneath the structure
3. The project will not pose hazard to navigational channels, nor pose a hazard to navigation by
obscuring visibility or by the display of distracting lights or reflective material. If appropriate the
float will display appropriate warning lights to aid in navigation and public safety at the discretion
of the Harbor Master, the US Coast Guard, or the Army Corps of Engineers.
4. The project will not encroach into, interfere with, or pose a hazard to: municipal or federal
navigational channels; existing mooring or berthing areas (commercial and recreational); public
access, public rights of way, public and private launching ramps in any Freeport Coastal Waters.
5. The project will be developed on soils appropriate for such use and construction so as to control
erosion.
6. The project will not cause water quality or other coastal resources to be degraded including
developed or natural beach areas, marshes, grasses and wildlife habitats.
7. The project shall not significantly impact fisheries or shellfish harvesting. Prior to approval
applications may be reviewed by the Shellfish Commission.
8. Registration and Identification will be required on all ramps and floats.
Once the Coastal Waters Commission grants approval, the applicant must complete applications and
secure approvals from all relevant Federal, State and Local agencies. The Coastal Waters Commission
must approve any changes or amendments to the original application before construction shall begin.
The Coastal Waters Commission may require that an expert review an application to determine
compliance with this Ordinance or to advice how an application may be improved so that is in
compliance. The total cost of any experts shall be paid for by the applicant. All outside fees shall be
paid in full before a Permit required under this Ordinance is issued.
Penalties for Unapproved Floats, Non-Conforming Floats, Unsafe Floats, Improperly Stored Floats,
Obstructing Floats, Abandoned Floats:
A. It shall be the duty of the Codes Enforcement Officer of the Town of Freeport to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance. If the Codes Enforcement Officer shall find that any of the provisions of this Ordinance are being
violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of any
structures, removal of any illegal structures; or the discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall
take any other action authorized by this Ordinance to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its
provisions. The Codes Enforcement Officer may employ an independent, recognized consultant, if necessary,
at the expense of the applicant, to assure compliance with performance standards of this Ordinance and
abatement of nuisances.
B. Legal Action and Violation: When any violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be found to exist,
including failure to comply with any provision of this Ordinance, the Codes Enforcement Officer shall notify
the Town Manager who shall then initiate any and all actions to be brought in the name of the Town. The
Town Manager shall notify the Town Council before any formal action begins.
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
19
C. Fines: Any person, firm or corporation being the owner of or having control or use of any building or
premises who violates any of the provisions hereof commits a civil violation and is subject to such fines as the
Town Council shall have established for violations of this Ordinance. Each day such a violation is permitted
to exist after notification thereof shall constitute a separate offense. All fines collected hereunder shall inure
to the Town of Freeport.
ARTICLE XIV DUMPING OF SEWAGE, OILS AND HAZARDOUS WASTE
PROHIBITED
No person may discharge, spill or permit to be discharged sewage, garbage, or other pollutants from any
source into the tidal waters within the boundaries of the Town of Freeport or onto the ice or banks thereof
in such a manner that the same may fall or be washed into such waters or in such a manner that the
drainage there from may flow into such waters.
No oil or other hazardous wastes shall be deposited in town dumpsters, waters or left on Town piers, floats
or landings under any circumstances. Such material must be disposed of properly at the Town’s designated
disposal site as specified in the appropriate waste disposal regulations.
ARTICLE XV LICENSING FOR COMMERCIAL PASSENGER BOATS
USING TOWN WHARF AND FLOATS
1. PURPOSES
The purposes of the Article are to fairly allocate the scarce public resources of berthing space and tie-up
time at the Freeport Town Wharf and Floats and to protect the health, safety and welfare of users of the
Town Wharf and Floats and passengers on Commercial Passenger Boats, which utilize the Town Wharf,
and Floats. The Town Wharf and Floats are public property, which the Town manages for the benefit of all
the residents of Freeport and it is not the intent of this ordinance to create any private property rights or
interests in the use of that public property.
2. DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION
Terms used in this ordinance shall have the same meanings as terms, which are defined in Article II of the
Coastal Waters Ordinance. In addition, the following terms have the following meanings.
a. "Commercial Passenger Boat” means a boat, which carries passengers for hire, on a charter or scheduled
service basis or both. The term does not include the ferry service engaged by the Bustins Island Village
Corporation (BIVC) to provide public transportation to Bustins Island.
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
20
b. "Resident Applicant" means an applicant for a license under this ordinance who has rented or owned (or
resided with a blood relative who has rented or owned) real estate in Freeport and has occupied that real
estate, both for at least 6 months during the calendar year in which the application is made.
c. "Non-resident Applicant" means any applicant for a license under this ordinance who is not a Freeport
Applicant.
d. "New License" means a license issued to an applicant who did not hold a valid license for a Commercial
Passenger Boat of the same capacity category on November 30th of the year in which the application is
made.
e. "Operator" means the owner, lessee or other person with the legal right to possession and control of a
boat.
f. "Parking" means off-street parking, which complies with the requirements of the Freeport Zoning
Ordinance.
g. "Renewal License" means a license issued to an applicant who held a valid license for a Commercial
Passenger Boat of the same capacity category on November 30th of the year in which the application is
made. The applicant must produce documentation that he/she has transported commercial passengers
within the Town of Freeport within the previous 12 months.
3. REGULATIONS
a. License Required: No Commercial Passenger Boat shall use the Town Wharf and Floats without first
obtaining and maintaining a license under this ordinance.
b. Performance Standards: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Coastal Waters Ordinance,
Commercial Passenger Boats using the Town Wharf and Floats shall comply with the following standards:
(i) Commercial Passenger Boats shall use only those portions of the Town Wharf and Floats, which have
been designated for such use by the Harbormaster;
(ii) No Commercial Passenger Boat shall be tied up or berthed at the Town Wharf and Floats for longer
than 30 minutes per hour or more than once per hour;
(iii) Boarding areas shall be kept clean and free of litter. Passengers shall be advised to carry out what they
carry in;
(iv) No signs advertising the service shall be allowed on town/public property with the exception of a
schedule of times and description of service posted on the public bulletin board;
(v) Amplified sound from commercial passenger boats shall not exceed 55 decibels during the day and 45
decibels at night;
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
21
(vi) The operators of Commercial Passenger Boats shall work together on scheduling their services, so that
the Town Wharf and Floats are used most efficiently;
(vii) The operators of Commercial Passenger Boats shall be flexible and accommodate other users of the
Town Wharf and Floats;
(viii) Advertising on a Commercial Passenger Boat, which uses the Town Wharf and Floats, shall be
limited to 2 signs of 16 square feet each. A sign with two faces shall be considered two signs; and
(ix) Each Commercial Passenger Boat shall pass necessary U.S. Coast Guard inspection for that vessel's
type and class.
c. Parking: The Operator of each Commercial Passenger Boat which utilizes the Town Wharf and Floats
shall provide Parking on land which the Operator either (1) owns or (2) leases or otherwise legally controls
for a term which equals or exceeds the term of the license under this ordinance. The number of off-street
parking spaces shall equal or exceed 50 percent of the sum obtained by adding together the number of
passengers the boat is licensed to transport under this ordinance and the number of crew members who
operate the boat. This parking requirement does not apply to the ferry service engaged by the Bustins Island
Village Corporation when providing public transportation.
d. Insurance: The operator of each Commercial Passenger Boat which uses the Town Wharf and Floats
shall maintain liability insurance with policy limits of no less that $1,000,000 which names the Town of
Freeport as an additional insured.
4. LIMITS ON SIZE OF BOATS, NUMBER OF LICENSES, CATEGORIES
a. Size Limited: No license shall be issued for a Commercial Passenger Boat, which exceeds forty-eight
(48) feet in length, or fifteen (15) feet in beam. The beam may increase with the permission of the
Harbormaster.
b. Large capacity vessel: a boat which is USCG licensed to transport more than six (6) passengers.
c. Small capacity vessel: a boat which is USCG licensed to transport a maximum of six (6) passengers.
d. Licenses per Category. No more than six (6) licenses for Commercial Passenger Boats shall be issued
or shall be in effect at any time.
e. Waiting List: The Harbormaster shall maintain a waiting list of all applicants who have not been issued
a commercial passenger license. A copy of the list shall be posted in the office of the Harbormaster.
Applications shall be dated upon receipt at the Town Office and shall be considered in chronological
sequence (regardless of year received) in accordance with the following priority:
a. Resident
b. Non-Resident
5. LICENSE FEES
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
22
The annual fees for a license under the Article shall be:
(a) $100.00 for a small capacity Commercial Passenger Boat; and
(b) $300.00 for a large capacity Commercial Passenger Boat.
6. LICENSE APPLICATION FILING PERIOD
Application for licenses under this ordinance must be received in the office of the Town Clerk on a regular
town office business day during the following periods of each year:
(a) December 1 through December 7 for applications from Freeport Applicants; and
(b) December 8 through December 15 for applications from Non-resident Applicants.
7. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
Application for a license under this ordinance shall be made by the Operator of the Commercial Passenger
Boat in writing and under oath on a form provided by the Town Clerk. The application shall contain the
following information and/or submissions:
(a) Name of the applicant;
(b) A brief description of the form of the applicant's business--i.e., sole proprietor, sole proprietor doing
business under a trade name, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, etc.;
(c) The applicant's residence address or local business address;
(d) The applicant's mailing address, designated by the applicant as the address where the applicant will
accept any notices served under this ordinance;
(e) A photograph of the Commercial Passenger Boat taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of
the filing of the application, which picture shall be 4" by 6" at minimum;
(f) A brief description of the types of charter/passenger/for-hire activities to be operated;
(g) A statement of the maximum number of passengers the applicant will transport in the Commercial
Passenger Boat.
(h) A copy of a certificate of insurance policies complying with the requirements of Section 3.d;
(i) A description of the parking spaces provided to comply with Section 3.c and a copy of the deed, lease or
other instrument, which gives the Operator the legal right to utilize the parking spaces;
(j) Copies of all United States Coast Guard licenses held by the Operator;
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
23
(k) A copy of the most recent United States Coast Guard Inspection Certificate for the Commercial
Passenger Boat if applicable;
(l) A statement that the applicant has not committed any violations of this ordinance within the year prior to
the date of application;
(m) A statement that the applicant has not, with the year prior to the date of application, operated a
Commercial Passenger Boat in an unlawful manner or in any manner so as to constitute a threat to the
public health, safety or welfare; and from the date of filing the application until the expiration or surrender
of any license issued as a result of the application, the applicant is required to notify the Clerk in writing of
any changes in any of the information contained in the application.
(n) A signed consent from the applicant attached to the application allowing the Harbormaster, at any time
the boat is occupied, to board and inspect any tanks, valves, pumps and lines, including but not limited to
“Y” valves and electric systems such as Electra San, to insure such tanks, valves, systems, etc. are not set in
a position that would allow the discharge of sanitary wastes into a Freeport anchorage.
8. AWARD OF LICENSES BY COASTAL WATERS COMMISSION
The Town Clerk shall forward all timely applications to the Coastal Waters Commission, which shall act on
the applications as follows:
a. Resident Applicants. At its first meeting in December of each year, the Coastal Waters Commission
shall award available licenses to Resident Applicants who qualify, first to applicants for Renewal Licenses,
and then to applicants for New Licenses, awarded by drawing lots if there is more than one.
b. Non-resident Applicants. At its first meeting in January of the succeeding year, if all available licenses
have not been awarded under paragraph 8(a) above, the Coastal Waters Commission shall award the
remaining licenses to Non-resident Applicants who qualify, first to applicants for Renewal Licenses, and
then to applicants for New Licenses, awarded by drawing lots if there is more than one.
9. QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSE
Before awarding a license under Section 8, the Coastal Waters Commission must find that the applicant
qualifies by meeting the following standards:
(a) the applicant has proven that he/she has either a mooring or other adequate berthing for his/her vessel
within the tidal waters of the Town of Freeport;
(b) the applicant will provide the parking required under section 3.c;
(c) the applicant has provided evidence of the insurance required by Section 3.d;
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
24
(d) the applicant has been issued all licenses required by the United States Coast Guard for the operation of
the Commercial Passenger Boat;
(e) the applicant has not committed any violations of this ordinance within the year prior to the date of
application;
(f) the applicant has not operated a Commercial Passenger Boat in an unlawful manner or in any manner to
constitute a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.
(g) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Commission finds that the applicant does not meet the above
standard(s), and provided that the Commission specifically finds that the violation or violations in
question did not constitute a threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the Commission may issue a
probationary license conditioned upon the licensee avoiding any further violations for a specified period
of time.
10. ISSUANCE OF LICENSE BY CLERK
After the Coastal Waters Commission has awarded the licenses under Section 8, the Town Clerk shall issue
the licenses to the successful applicants, to become valid at the date of issuance.
11. TERM OF LICENSES
All licenses issued under this ordinance shall take effect on the date of issuance by the Town Clerk under
Section 10 and shall expire one year from the date of issuance.
12. EFFECT OF LICENSES
Licenses issued under this ordinance are valid only for the Commercial Passenger Boat and the Operator
identified on the application. Any change in the status of any of those factors must be reviewed and
approved by the Coastal Waters Commission upon application made by the license holder.
13. REVOCATION OF LICENSES
The Coastal Waters Commission may revoke a license issued under this ordinance for any of the following
causes:
(a) Failure of the Operator to comply with the qualification standards of Section 9;
(b) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for license;
(c) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of carrying on the Operator's business or
any Commercial Passenger Boat;
(d) Any violation of this ordinance;
Town of Freeport
Coastal Waters Ordinance, Chapter 31
Amended January 8, 2019
25
(e) Conducting the Commercial Passenger Boat business in any unlawful manner.
Before revoking a license, the Coastal Waters Commission shall provide the Operator with notice and the
opportunity to be heard. The Coastal Waters Commission shall give the Operator written notice of the
grounds for revocation and of the date, time and place of the hearing, mailed to the Operator at the mailing
address designated in the Operator's license application at least 7 days before the scheduled hearing date. If
the Operator chooses to waive a hearing, the Operator may surrender the license to the Town Clerk at any
time prior to the scheduled hearing.
14. INTERIM PROVISIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSES
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 6 and 8, license applications for the six licenses under this
Article shall be accepted for a period of seven days prior to the effective date of this ordinance. On the first
town office business day after the effective date, the Town Clerk shall forward the applications to the
Coastal Waters Commission. At its first meeting after the effective date, the Coastal Waters Commission
shall award the licenses to qualified applicants in each capacity category, first to Freeport Applicants and
then to Non-resident Applicants.
ARTICLE XVI BUSTINS ISLAND
The Bustins Island Village Corporation (BIVC) Ferry shall tie-up for no longer than 30 minutes in any hour
at the Town Floats at a Ferry location designated by the Harbormaster for the purposes of boarding and
discharging passengers to and from Bustins Island and other Freeport Islands. The Bustins Island Ferry
shall have access to the Ferry location on a first priority basis for the above purposes. The BIVC Ferry
captain shall coordinate the ferry's docking schedule with the Harbormaster before each season and report
any changes during the season. The BIVC Ferry will not have priority over Town float usage for
unscheduled trips to Freeport’s Islands. The BIVC Ferry shall be attended at all times when at the Town
Floats.
ARTICLE XVII AQUACULTURE VENTURES
All aquaculture venture(s) must receive a permit(s) from the Coastal Waters Commission.
Amended September 7, 2010
Amended January 8, 2019, Article V
Amended June 20, 2017
SHELLFISH CONSERVATION ORDINANCE
TOWN OF FREEPORT
CHAPTER 32
Section 32-101 AUTHORITY:
This Ordinance is enacted in accordance with 12 M.R.S.A., Section 6671.
Section 32-201 PURPOSE:
To establish a Shellfish Conservation Program for the Town of Freeport which will
insure the protection and optimum utilization of shellfish resources within its limits.
These goals will be achieved by means which may include:
A. Licensing;
B. Managing the number of shellfish harvesters;
C. Restricting the time and area where digging is permitted;
D. Limiting the minimum size of clams taken;
E. Limiting the amount of clams taken daily by a harvester;
F. Enhancing the clam resources by the various recognized means;
e.g. reseeding, etc.
G. Identifying and addressing water quality issues;
H. Public education;
I. Working with state, federal and local officials to protect and optimize the shellfish
resource;
J. Any other activity reasonably related to the purpose of the protection and optimum
utilization of Freeport’s shellfish resources.
Section 32-301 EFFECTIVE DATE, DURATION, AND AMENDMENT:
1. Effective Date: This Ordinance which has been approved by the Commissioner of
Marine Resources shall become effective after its adoption by the Municipality. A
certified copy of the Ordinance is filed with the Commissioner within twenty (20)
days of its adoption.
2. Amendment: This Ordinance may be amended from time to time by the Town Council.
Prior to adopting an amendment, the written approval of the amendment by the
Commissioner of Marine Resources shall be filed with the Town Clerk. A certified
copy of any amendment adopted by the Town Council shall be filed with the
Commissioner of Marine Resources with twenty (20) days of its adoption.
Section 32-401 SHELLFISH CONSERVATION COMMISSION: The Shellfish
Conservation Program for the Town of Freeport will be administered by the Shellfish
Conservation Commission consisting of seven (7) members to be appointed by the
Freeport Town Council for terms of three (3) years. The Commission’s responsibilities
include:
Amended June 20, 2017
1. Establishing annually in conjunction with the Department of Marine Resources the
number of shellfish digging licenses to be issued;
2. Surveying the clam flats to maintain current information on shellfish resources;
3. Submitting to the Freeport Town Council proposals for the expenditures of funds for
the purpose of shellfish conservation;
4. Keeping this Ordinance under review and making recommendations for its
amendments;
5. Securing and maintaining records of shellfish harvest from the Town’s managed
shellfish areas and closed areas that are conditionally opened by the Department of
Marine Resources;
6. Recommending conservation closures and openings with the Area Biologists of the
Department of Marine Resources and recommending other long-term management goals;
7. Submitting an annual report to the Municipality and the Department of Marine
Resources covering the above topics and all other Commission activities;
8. Identifying conservation projects which qualify an applicant for Renewal of a
Commercial License. The Shellfish Warden shall record the names and hours worked by
individuals on a conservation project and submit them to the Shellfish Conservation
Commission;
9. Identifying and addressing water quality issues;
10. Managing the depuration harvesting program, including development and
implementation Freeport’s Pollution Abatement Plan
Section 32-501 DEFINITIONS:
1. Resident: For the purpose of this Ordinance, except in the case of a student, the term
“Resident” shall mean a person who owns or rents real estate within the Town of
Freeport which is his or her permanent, fixed place of abode and principal place of
residence. If a person claiming to be a resident neither owns nor rents real estate, they
shall be required to produce such other evidence of municipal residency as may be
required by the Town Clerk. A person shall not qualify as a resident of this
Municipality unless he or she has maintained a permanent, fixed place of abode and
principal place of residence within the Town of Freeport for twelve (12) months prior
to the date his/her claim of municipal residence is made. A person shall cease to be a
resident of this Municipality on the date he/she acquires a permanent fixed place of
abode and principal place of residence in any other Municipality or moves from the
Town of Freeport. In the case of a student, the student may live temporarily outside of
Amended June 20, 2017
this Municipality while enrolled in school provided that such student maintains his or
her fixed permanent principal residence in this Municipality.
2. Nonresident: The word “Nonresident” means anyone not qualified as a resident under
this Ordinance.
3. Shellfish, Clams: When used in the context of this Ordinance, the words “shellfish”
and “clams” means soft-shell clams, Mya Arenaria and the hardshell quahog clam,
Mercenaria mercenaria, and the razor clam, Ensis directus.
4. Municipality: Refers to the Town of Freeport, Maine.
5. All flats bordering the Wolf’s Neck State Park as of December 8, 1983 are now under
the jurisdiction of the Freeport Shellfish Conservation Ordinance. Recreational
digging in Wolf’s Neck State Park will not require a recreational license. To the
extent of Freeport’s authority, the shellfish stocks within the state parks located in
Freeport, including Wolfe’s Neck State Park, are available for commercial harvesting,
subject only to the restriction that sufficient viable stocks must first be maintained for
recreational harvesters.
Section 32-601 LICENSING:
A Municipal Shellfish Digging License is required. It is unlawful for any person to dig
or take shellfish from the shores and flats of this Municipality without having a current
license issued by this Municipality as provided by this Ordinance.
A Commercial Digger must also have a valid State of Maine Commercial Shellfish
License issued by the Department of Marine Resources in order to harvest shellfish
commercially.
Shellfish licenses are not required in order to dig and take no more than one peck in the
State Park areas where and when it is lawful to do so.
A. Designation, Scope, and Qualification:
(1) Resident Commercial Shellfish License: The license is available to residents
of the Town of Freeport at a minimum age of twelve (12) and entitles the
holder to engage in the activities of commercial harvesting of shellfish in
accordance with the ordinance and conservation measures of this Municipality.
(2) Nonresident Commercial Shellfish License: The license is available to
nonresidents of this Municipality at a minimum age of twelve (12) and entitles
the holder to engage in the activities of commercial harvesting of shellfish in
accordance with the ordinance and conservation measures of this Municipality.
Amended June 20, 2017
(3) Resident Student Commercial License: The license is available to residents of
this Municipality between the minimum age of fourteen (14) years old and the
maximum age of twenty-six (26) years old on May 1 of the year in which the
application is made. Applicants must show proof of age and proof of school
attendance at the time of the application, and must also continue full-time
student status during the school year through the license period. Students
attending college or other postsecondary education must also show proof of a
minimum of twelve (12) college or postsecondary education credit hours per
semester to be considered full-time students. Applicants under the age of
eighteen (18) must also have the signature of a parent or guardian on the
application for the license to be valid. This license entitles the holder to
engage in the activities of commercial harvesting of shellfish in accordance
with the ordinance and conservation measures of this Municipality.
(4) Resident and Nonresident Senior Commercial Licenses: The license is
available to all holders of Freeport Commercial Shellfish Licenses who turn
age sixty-five (65) while in possession of an existing license.
(5) Non-Resident Student Commercial License: This license is available to nonresidents
of this Municipality between the minimum age of fourteen (14) years
old and the maximum age of twenty-six (26) years old on May 1 of the year in
which the application is made. Applicants must show proof of age and proof
of school attendance at the time of application, and must also continue fulltime
student status during the school year through the license period. Students
attending college or other postsecondary education must also show proof of a
minimum of twelve (12) college or postsecondary education credit hours per
semester to be considered full-time students. Applicants under the age of
eighteen (18) must also have the signature of a parent or guardian on the
application for the license to be valid. This license entitles the holder to
engage in the activities of commercial harvesting of shellfish in accordance
with the ordinance and conservation measures of this Municipality.
(6) Resident Recreational Shellfish License: The license is available to residents
and real estate taxpayers of Freeport. A resident-recreational shellfish license
entitles the holder to dig and take no more than one peck of shellfish in any one
day.
(7) Nonresident Recreational Shellfish License: This license is available to
nonresidents of this Municipality and entitles the holder to dig and take no
more than one peck of shellfish in any one day.
(8) Limited Recreational Shellfish License: This license is available to residents
and nonresidents of this Municipality and entitles the holder to dig and take no
more than one peck of shellfish in any one day. Unless otherwise specified, all
the provisions of this Ordinance applicable to Resident and Nonresident
Amended June 20, 2017
Recreational Shellfish Licenses are applicable to Limited Recreational
Shellfish Licenses.
(9) License Must Be Signed: The licensee must sign the license to make it valid.
B. Applications for Commercial Licenses:
(1) Applications for renewal commercial licenses and new commercial licenses
shall be submitted to the Town Clerk at the times specified in Section 6(E) and
6(I), respectively.
(2) Contents of Application: The application must be in the form of an affidavit and
must contain the applicant’s name, current address, birth date, height, weight,
signature, and whatever other information the Municipality may require.
(3) Misrepresentation:
a) Application void. If at any time prior to the issuance of a license, the Town
Clerk becomes aware of circumstances which suggest that the applicant has
given false information on the license application, the Town Clerk shall
request the Police Chief, or his designee, to investigate those circumstances
and any other circumstances relevant to the license application and report
to the Clerk. If the results of the investigation continue to suggest that the
applicant has given material false information on the license application,
the Clerk shall communicate the results of the investigation to the applicant
and provide the applicant with an opportunity to respond in writing. If,
after reviewing the applicant's response, the Clerk concludes that the
applicant gave material false information on the license application, the
Clerk shall void the application. A pending investigation under this
subparagraph (a) shall not preclude an otherwise qualified applicant from
participating in the drawing pursuant to Section 6(I), but no license shall be
issued to such applicant until the Clerk has made a determination on the
results of the investigation. In the event the Clerk determines to void the
application, the Clerk shall award the license to the next qualified applicant
on the list prepared pursuant to Section 6(I). An applicant whose
application is voided shall not be entitled to any refund of license fees.
b) If, after the issuance of a license, the Town Clerk becomes aware of
circumstances that suggest that the licensee gave false information on the
license application or if the licensee no longer complies with the license
requirements, the Town Clerk shall request the Police Chief, or his
designee, to investigate those circumstances and any other circumstances
related to the license application. If the results of the investigation continue
to suggest that the licensee gave false information on the license
application or that the licensee no longer complies with the license
requirements, the Town Clerk shall give the licensee a minimum of seven
(7) days notice of a hearing before the Board of Appeals to determine
Amended June 20, 2017
whether or not the licensee gave false information on the license
application or no longer complies with the license requirements. The
Police Chief, or his designee, shall present the evidence suggesting that
false information was given or that the licensee no longer complies with the
license requirements. The licensee shall have the right to present evidence
to refute the allegations. If, after hearing, the Board of Appeals determines
that material false information was given or that the licensee no longer
complies with the license requirements, the Town Clerk shall revoke the
license and give the licensee written Notice of Revocation. A licensee
whose license is revoked shall not be entitled to any refund of license fees.
(c) Change of Address: If a licensee’s address changes at any time, the
licensee must provide written documentation to the Town Clerk within 30
days after the change. If the Police Chief or his designee finds that there is
sufficient evidence to prove that a licensee failed to notify the Town Clerk
of a change of address as required under this subsection, the Police Chief,
or his designee, shall present that information to the Town Clerk. If the
Town Clerk determines that there was a change of address without the
notification required by this subsection, the Clerk shall give notice of the
suspension to the licensee and shall suspend the license for a period of 30
days from the date of such notice.
C. Application for Recreational Licenses:
(1) Resident and Nonresident Recreational Licenses will be available beginning in
June. Except for Limited Recreational Shellfish License, licenses are effective
July 1 through June 30.
(2) Limited Recreational Shellfish Licenses are effective for three (3) calendar
days, beginning on the day the license is issued or such other date as indicated
by the License.
(3) Contents of Application: The application will be in the form of an affidavit and
must contain the applicant's name, current address, mailing address, birth date,
height, weight, signature, and whatever other information the Municipality may
require.
(4) Misrepresentation:
a) Application void. If at any time prior to the issuance of a license, the Town
Clerk becomes aware of circumstances which suggest that the applicant has
given false information on the license application, the Town Clerk shall
request the Police Chief, or his designee, to investigate those circumstances
and any other circumstances relevant to the license application and report
to the Town Clerk. If the results of the investigation continue to suggest
that the applicant has given material false information on the license
application, the Clerk shall communicate the results of the investigation to
Amended June 20, 2017
the applicant and provide the applicant with an opportunity to respond in
writing. If, after reviewing the applicant's response, the Clerk concludes
that the applicant gave material false information on the license application,
the Clerk shall void the application. An applicant whose application is
voided shall not be entitled to any refund of license fees.
b) If after the issuance of a license, the Town Clerk becomes aware of
circumstances which suggest that the licensee gave false information on the
license application, the Town Clerk shall request the Police Chief, or his
designee, to investigate those circumstances and any other circumstances
related to the license application. If the results of the investigation continue
to suggest that the licensee gave false information on the license
application, the Town Clerk shall give the licensee a minimum of seven (7)
days notice of a hearing before the Board of Appeals to determine whether
or not the licensee gave false information on the license application. The
Police Chief, or his designee, shall present the evidence suggesting that
false information was given. The licensee shall have the right to present
evidence to show that false information was not given. If, after hearing, the
Board of Appeals determines that material false information was given, the
Town Clerk shall revoke the license and give the licensee written Notice of
Revocation. A licensee whose license is revoked shall not be entitled to any
refund of license fees.
(5) Recreational License. Any person who holds a State of Maine Shellfish License
is not eligible for a recreational license. A Recreational Shellfish Licensee
may not engage in the wholesale or retail sale of any shellfish harvested under
this license.
(6) Recreational license violations:
a) The possession of more than one (1) peck of clams by anyone not
possessing valid State and Town - issued Commercial Licenses constitutes
a court summons; and if the violator is found to be in violation in a court of
law, he/she will automatically forfeit said Recreational license for the
remainder of the license period.
b) If the holder of a recreational license is convicted of a wholesale or retail
sale of shellfish harvested within the Town of Freeport under the
recreational license, that recreational license shall be automatically
suspended from the date of conviction through the remainder of the license
period.
D. Fees: Effective October 1, 2008 (amended 05/15/12): The fees for the licenses are as
stated below and must accompany in full the application for the respective license.
Fees received from shellfish licensing shall be used by the Town for shellfish
management, conservation and enforcement.
Amended June 20, 2017
(1) Resident Commercial: Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00)
(2) Nonresident Commercial: Four Hundred Dollars ($400.00)
(3) Resident Student Commercial: Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00)
(4) Non-Resident Student Commercial: Fifty Dollars ($50.00)
(5) Resident Recreational: Eleven Dollars ($11.00)
(6) Nonresident Recreational: Twenty-two Dollars ($22.00)
(7) Limited Recreational: Fifteen Dollars ($15.00)
(8) Resident and nonresident Freeport Senior Commercial Licenses: All fees will
be waived.
(9) A recreational license is not required for a digger under 12
years of age to engage in recreational clam harvesting.
(10) License Fees will be waived for individuals 70 years or older for
resident and nonresident recreational licenses.
(11) No fees (commercial or recreational) are refundable at any time.
(12) A surcharge shall be applied to each license purchased as follows to
provide a dedicated revenue source for water quality testing:
• Resident Commercial: Thirty Dollars ($30.00)
• Non-Resident Commercial: Thirty Dollars ($30.00)
• Resident and Non-Resident Student Commercial: Thirty Dollars
($30.00)
• Resident and Non-Resident Recreational: Five Dollars ($5.00)
• Limited Recreational: Five Dollars ($5.00)
E. Limitation of Diggers: Because the shellfish resources are limited and because a
commercial or recreational digger can be expected to harvest a certain volume of
clams per year, the number of diggers must be controlled. This number will vary
from year to year depending upon estimates of the resource capabilities and
management requirements consistent with good resource utilization. The following
procedures will be followed to exercise the control:
(1) Prior to May 15 the Freeport Shellfish Conservation Commission will establish
the number of commercial and recreational licenses to be issued, and submit
Freeport’s Municipal License Allocation Request to the Commissioner of
Marine Resources for review and authorization.
(2) The Shellfish conservation Commission will notify the Town Clerk in writing
prior to June 1 of the number of licenses to be issued. No reservation will be
accepted by telephone.
(3) The town clerk shall issue licenses to residents and non-residents following
authorization by the Commissioner of Marine Resources as specified below:
From July 1st through September 28th annually, 10 % of the total commercial
licenses and 10 % of the total recreation licenses shall be reserved for nonresidents.
Beginning September 29 annually, any remaining licenses shall be
issued on a first come, first serve basis, without regards to residency.
Amended June 20, 2017
(4) In the year that a new Resident and/or Nonresident Senior Commercial License
is issued by the Town Clerk, for each senior license issued, a commercial
license will then become available and added to the number of commercial
licenses to be issued that year.
Renewal Commercial License: An application for a renewal commercial license must be
made at the Town Clerk's office during a regular business day during the month of April
and must be accompanied by payment of 50% of the required license fee. This 50 %
payment must be received before the close of business on the last business day in April.
The remainder of the fee must be paid no later than the close of business on the last
business day in May. Failure to pay either the 50 % or the 100% of the license fee by the
close of business on the last respective business days shall result in not being eligible for
a renewal license. Renewal licenses will then be issued, following authorization by the
Commissioner of Marine Resources, at the Town Clerk’s office during regular business
days between June 16 and June 30. Such licenses shall be valid from July 1 through June
30.
As an alternative to making application at the Town Clerk’s office, an application for a
renewal commercial license may be submitted to the Town Clerk’s Office by mail.
Applications by mail must be received at the Town Clerk’s office on a day the Clerk’s
office is open for business no earlier than April 1 and no later than April 30, or
postmarked by April 30. The application must be accompanied by the 50% of the
required license fee. The Town Clerk shall mark all applications with the date and time
of receipt.
To be eligible to purchase a renewal license, a person must have been licensed for the
previous year; and must have completed twelve (12) points of conservation work
(Resident and Nonresident Senior Commercial Licenses are exempt from this
requirement). Resident and Nonresident Student Commercial Licenses are required to
perform 10 points of clam flat survey work as determined by the Shellfish Commission.
The Shellfish Conservation Commission will determine annually what activities
constitute conservation work, the point value of those activities and the time scheduled
for conservation activities. The Commission will schedule appropriate clam flat surveys
as a conservation activity each year, as needed. As a general guide, the Commission shall
consider assigning one (1) point to one (1) hour of conservation work. However, the
Commission may assign a greater or lesser value to the activity depending on the
conservation value of the activity. Failure to meet the requirements set forth by the
Freeport Shellfish Commission shall result in failure to qualify for a renewal license. In
the event that the number of qualifying applications exceeds the number of available
licenses, licenses shall be awarded pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section 6 (I) of
this Ordinance.
No person may perform conservation work as a surrogate for the applicant. The Shellfish
Commission may substitute other types of conservation work at the request of
commercial harvesters age 60 and over. Any requests shall be made by the license holder
in person by the last regularly scheduled Freeport Shellfish Commission meeting before
Amended June 20, 2017
the conservation activity is scheduled. Any commercial harvester who removes clams
from the flats for personal use or sale while engaged in conservation work will not
receive credit for that conservation work.
The Shellfish Conservation Commission may waive all or part of the requirement for
conservation points for an applicant who provides the Commission with a written
statement from a physician indicating that the applicant was not able to participate in any
regularly scheduled conservation time due to incapacitation by illness or injury. At the
request of an applicant, made at a regular monthly meeting of the Commission, the
Commission may arrange on an point-for-point basis:
(a) Another time to complete conservation work for an applicant who
demonstrates to the Commission that the illness or incapacitation of a parent,
spouse or child prevented that person from participating in regularly
scheduled conservation work: or
(b) Alternate less strenuous work for an applicant who provides the Commission
with a written statement from a physician indicating that the applicant is not
physically able to participate in regular conservation work.
F. License Expiration Date: Except for Limited Recreational Shellfish Licenses, each
license issued under authority of this Ordinance expires at midnight on the thirtieth
(30th) day of June.
G. Reciprocal Harvesting Privileges: Freeport does not currently participate in a
reciprocal harvesting agreement with any other municipality.
H. Suspension: If the Police Chief or Shellfish Warden presents to the Town Clerk
evidence that any licensee has been convicted of two violations of this Ordinance
within the license (July 1 to June 30) year, the Town Clerk shall give the licensee
seven (7) days notice of the suspension of the license for thirty (30) days, stating the
reason for the suspension. The licensee has the right to meet with the Town Clerk
during that seven (7) day period to review the evidence of convictions in the Town
Clerk’s possession, and to present any evidence showing the licensee does not have
the convictions. A third conviction of violations of this Ordinance in the same
licensed year will result in forfeiture of the license for the remainder of the licensed
year. This suspension/forfeiture rule applies to commercial licensees. A commercial
harvester whose license has been suspended or forfeited may still be eligible for a
renewal license in the subsequent year, provided he/she has fulfilled conservation -
work requirements. See Section 11 for recreation license violations.
I. New Commercial Licenses: New Commercial licenses, when available, will be
advertised in the local newspaper(s) during the first week of June in the year in which
the license(s) become available (hereinafter called the new-license year). Applications
for these licenses must be received by the Town Clerk no later than June 15 of the
new-license year and must comply with the provisions of Section 6.B of this
Amended June 20, 2017
Ordinance. Any licenses(s) available for the new-license year will be issued by June
30 in accordance with the following procedure:
(1) The Town Clerk shall designate an assistant, who may be any appointed
municipal official or municipal employee who is disinterested in the outcome
of the procedure. “Disinterested” means not related by blood, marriage or
adoption to any of the applicants and not having a direct or indirect pecuniary
interest in the outcome of the procedure. No elected municipal official and no
member of the Shellfish Conservation Commission shall serve as the Clerk’s
assistant in carrying out this procedure.
(2) The Clerk shall prepare a list of the names of the qualifying applicants; the list
need not be in any particular order. Next to each name on the list, the Clerk
shall enter a unique three digit number, selected at random, and shall write
each such number on an index card. All the index cards shall be of uniform
size, color and texture.
(3) The Clerk’s assistant shall then place all the numbered index cards in a box or
other container capable of being closed and sufficiently large that the index
cards can be mixed by shaking the container.
(4) The Clerk’s assistant shall shake the container in order to mix the contents, and
shall then place or hold the container at a location above the Clerk’s eye level
so that the Clerk can reach into the container and withdraw cards without
seeing the numbers on the cards.
(5) The Clerk shall withdraw the cards one-by-one, reading each number drawn
aloud. The Clerk’s assistant shall make a list of each of the numbers so drawn
in the order in which they are drawn. Then, using the list prepared under
subparagraph 2 above, the Clerk shall place the corresponding applicant’s
name next to each number.
(6) The Clerk shall then issue the available licenses to the qualifying applicants,
first to residents and then to non-residents, in the order in which their names
appear on the list prepared under subparagraph (5).
(7) The procedure set forth in this Section 6 (I) shall be a public proceeding, open
to the public pursuant to 1 M.R.S.A. Section 403, but no applicant or any
member of the public has any right to participate in the procedure. Applicants
are not required to be present at the time the licenses are issued. The procedure
shall be conducted at the Freeport Town Office on the dates designated in
Section 6 (E) (3) for each category of license, at a time to be set by the Clerk.
The Clerk shall announce the exact time for the procedure by posting a notice
in the Freeport Town Office at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the
procedure. Any failure to provide such notice shall not invalidate the results of
the procedure.
Amended June 20, 2017
J. No Night Harvesting: It is unlawful for any person to dig or take shellfish from the
shores or flats of Freeport at night. For the purposes of this paragraph, the term
“night” means that period of time beginning one hour after sunset and ending one hour
before sunrise.
K. Aiding and Abetting: A harvester holding a commercial license who aids and abets
the harvest of shellfish in violation of this Ordinance shall be subject to the same
penalties as the person he has assisted.
Section 32-701 OPENING AND CLOSING OF FLATS:
The Shellfish Conservation Commission, with the approval of the Commissioner of
Marine Resources, may open and close areas for shellfish harvest. Upon
recommendation of the Department of Marine Resources Area biologist that the status of
the shellfish resource and other factors bearing on sound management indicate that an
area should be opened or closed, the Shellfish Conservation Commission may call a
public hearing on ten-day’s notice published in a newspaper having general circulation in
the Town, stating the time, place and subject matter of the hearing, and shall send a copy
of the notice to the Department of Marine Resources. The decision of the Shellfish
Conservation Commission made after hearing shall be based on findings of fact.
Winslow Park Closure: In order to preserve a beach area for the public use during the
summer months, a portion of the flats within and adjacent to Winslow Park shall be
closed to shellfish harvesting between May 1 and November 30 annually. The portion so
closed is the area on the left side of the public boat ramp (as viewed from the land) lying
between the shore and a line extending easterly from the seaward tip of the boat ramp to a
red painted post at a point on the shore established by the Shellfish Warden. In
consideration of that seasonal closure and notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
Chapter 34 of the Freeport Code (Winslow Park Administrative Policies), commercial
license holders using Winslow Park shall not be charged any parking or ramp fees.
Section 32-801 FINES:
Any person harvesting shellfish in an area closed for conservation shall be subject to the
following: violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be subject to, but not limited
by, the penalties established by State Law, Title 12 M.R.S.A., Section 6671.
Section 32-901 MINIMUM LEGAL SIZE OF SOFT SHELL CLAMS:
It is unlawful to possess soft shell clams that are less than two (2) inches in length. The
tolerance is listed below:
A. Tolerance: Any person may possess soft shell clams that are less than two (2) inches
if, beginning on the effective date of this article, they comprise less than 10% of any
bulk pile; and beginning in calendar year 1986, they comprise less than 10% of any
bulk pile. The tolerance shall be determined by numerical count of not less than one
(1) peck nor more than four (4) pecks taken at random from various parts of the bulk
pile or by count of the entire pile if it contains less than one (1) peck.
Amended June 20, 2017
B. Method of Determining Tolerance: The tolerance is determined by a one (1) peck
measure of a “LOT”. The word “LOT” as used in this Ordinance means the total
number of soft shell clams in any bulk pile. Where soft shell clams are in a box, barrel
or other container, the contents of each box, barrel or container constitute a separate
“LOT”.
Section 32-1001. EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance which has been approved by the Commissioner of Marine Resources
shall become effective after its adoption by the Municipality provided a certified copy of
the Ordinance is filed with the Commissioner within twenty (20) days of its adoption.
Amendments as of 2/24/2015:
Section 32-601 (E) amended by the Town Council on February 24, 2015.
Amendments as of 09/06/2016:
Section 32-601 (A)(3)
Section 32-601 (A) (5)
Section 32-610 (B)(3)(b)
CHAPTER 33 STYROFOAM ORDINANCE
Whereas, the Council finds that:
1. Located in Maine on the shore of the North Atlantic Ocean, an
area known world-wide for its natural beauty, fish and other
wildlife, the Town of Freeport believes that it has an obligation
to maintain and preserve its special natural environment;
2. Maintenance of Freeport as litter-free as possible is important
to protect and preserve its natural environment and enhance its
quality of life for residents and visitors;
3. The United Nations Environmental Programme Diplomatic Conference
in Montreal (Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the
Ozone Layer) acknowledged the threat of chlorofluorocarbons to
the earth's atmosphere and established international goals for
the phased reduction of the manufacture and use of specific
chlorofluorocarbon compounds ("CFC's"). The Town of Freeport
supports international and federal efforts to reduce the
non-essential use of chlorofluorocarbons.;
4. The Federal Environmental Protection Agency reports that foam
products account for 28% of ozone-depleting potential of CFC's.
Blowing agents used in the production of non-CFC PSF's create
hazardous earth-level smog;
5. The Federal Environmental Protection Agency has issued a national
municipal waste strategy calling for a 25 percent reduction in
solid waste by 1992. The strategy, titled "The Solid Waste
Dilemma: An Agenda for Action", includes the promotion of
recycling. The State of Maine is considering how to implement
this strategy;
6. The State of Maine has banned the service of food and beverages
in polystyrene foam containers at facilities or functions of the
State or its political subdivisions effective January 1, 1990
(38 MRSA Section 1651 et seq.);
7. Readily disposable consumer plastic containers and wrappers
(including those made from polystyrene foam) are essentially not
biodegradable and as litter do not decompose over time into the
natural environment;
8. The use of readily disposable consumer plastic containers and
wrappers has increased annually and projections indicate a
significant growth in their use;
9. Plastic litter, particularly polystyrene foam, poses a threat to
the natural environment, including fish and other wildlife;
-1-
10. This Ordinance will serve the public interest by reducing the
amount of non-biodegradable waste littering Freeport as a portion
of any substitute packaging is expected to be composed of
biodegradable material in whole or in part. Polystyrene foam
litter is highly durable, buoyant, and non-biodegradable and,
therefore, persists and detracts from the appearance of the area
longer than many other types of litter;
11. At the present time there is no Recycling Program in Freeport for
polystyrene foam food or beverage containers;
12. Some other commonly used food packaging materials are also
non-biodegradable and contribute to litter problems;
nevertheless, the Council finds that it is appropriate to
regulate polystyrene foam food packaging while not regulating
other types of food packaging at this time for the following
reasons:
A. To minimize disruption in the food services and sales
industry, the Council should avoid banning a wide range of
packaging materials at one time. It might be appropriate to
ban other packaging materials in the future, but an
incremental approach to eliminating undesirable packaging
materials will cause less disruption and allow the Town to
handle enforcement in more manageable stages;
B. Polystyrene foam is the most commonly used non-reuseable
food packaging material for prepared foods in restaurants
and food service establishments in Freeport and, therefore,
prohibiting its use for such purpose and its sale at retail
will be the most effective way of reducing non-biodegradable
litter in Freeport;
C. Ingestion of polystyrene foam particles has been identified
as a hazard to wildlife, while this problem has not been
associated with other food packaging materials.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDERED:
1. On and after January 1, 1990, no retail food vendor shall serve
or sell prepared food and no food packager shall package meat,
eggs, bakery products or other food in polystyrene foam (PSF)
containers;
2. On and after January 1, 1990, no vendor in the Town of Freeport
who sells tangible personal property at retail shall sell
polystyrene foam food or beverage containers;
3. Violations of this Ordinance shall be punishable by fines as
follows:
A. A fine not exceeding $250 for the first violation in a
one-year period;
B. A fine not exceeding $500 for the second and each subsequent
violation in a one-year period;
-2-
4. Provided nevertheless that the effective date of this Ordinance
shall be postponed if and as long as there is developed and
maintained an effective Town-wide Recycling Program for
polystyrene foam food and beverage containers, as determined by
the Town Council;
5. Definitions. As used in this Ordinance the following terms have
the following meanings:
A. "Biodegradable" means material capable of being broken down
by micro-organisms into simple substances or basic elements;
B. "Chlorofluorocarbons" are the family of substances
containing carbon, fluorine and chlorine;
C. "Food Packager" means any person located within the Town of
Freeport who places meat, eggs, bakery products, or other
food in packaging materials for the purpose of retail sale
of those products;
D. "Prepared food" means food or beverages which are served at
the food vendor's location having been previously prepared
elsewhere or are prepared at the vendor's location by
cooking, chopping, slicing, mixing, brewing, freezing or
squeezing. "Prepared food" does not include any raw
uncooked meat or eggs. Prepared food may be eaten either on
or off premises;
E. "Person" means any natural person, firm, corporation,
partnership, or other organization or group however
organized;
F. "PSF" means polystyrene foam;
G. "Recycling Program" - a process whereby used materials are
separated from the solid waste stream and utilized as a raw
material in the manufacture of a new product or for new
economic use;
H. "Restaurant" means any establishment located within the Town
of Freeport selling prepared food to be eaten by customers.
Restaurant includes a sidewalk or other outdoor food vendor;
I. "Retail Food Vendor, Vendor" means any person, restaurant,
store, shop, sales outlet or other establishment, including,
without limitation, a grocery store, convenience or variety
store or a delicatessen located within the Town of Freeport
which sells prepared food;
If any part or provision of this Ordinance or the application thereof
to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the
Ordinance, including the application of such part or provision to
other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby and
shall continue in full force and effect. To this end, provisions of
this Ordinance are severable.
-3-
1
CHAPTER 34
WINSLOW PARK
ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
ARTICLE I – GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. TOWN COUNCIL - The Town Council is the Chief Administrator of Winslow
Park under the terms of the Adelaide W. Harb Trust, and shall:
1. Insure that the provisions of the Adelaide W. Harb Trust are carried out;
2. Delegate the operational responsibility to the Town Manager or anyone else they
approve to insure proper management of the Park on a daily basis;
3. Set all policies governing the Park;
4. Evaluate Park operations annually;
5. Approve all fees and charges pertaining to the Park. Park fees will be listed on
the Town fee schedule adopted by the Town Council.
B. TOWN MANAGER - The Town Manager is directly responsible to the Town
Council, and shall:
1. Meet with the Town Council as needed or upon request to inform them of the
status of the Park;
2. Hire and remove the Park Manager, consistent with the personnel policies and
ordinances of the Town;
3. Hire and remove the Park Staff at the recommendation of the Park Manager,
consistent with the personnel policies and ordinances of the Town;
4. Hold staff meetings as needed or upon request with the Park Manager in order
to assess needs and make recommendations;
5. Require that efficient and proper records be kept regarding the operations of the
Park, such as:
1) Financial, Annual Budget, User Fees, Camper Fees
2) Requisition Sheets
amended 05/07/2019
2
3) Mileage Sheets
4) Accident Reports
5) Payroll
6) Income Records
7) Inventory
8) Maintenance and Repair Costs Sheet
9) Annual Report
10) Evaluations (Staff, Park, etc.)
6. Recommend policies to the Council, such as hiring policy, etc.;
7. Obtain permission to build on grounds or change appearance of Park in any way.
C. PARK MANAGER - The Park Manager is directly responsible to the Town
Manager, and shall:
1. Prepare and submit an Annual Budget with projected revenues to be included as
part of the overall Municipal Budget.
2. Meet with the Town Manager on an as needed basis.
3. Maintain the Park at optimal level.
4. Recommend the hiring of Park Staff (gate attendants, park rangers) to the Town
Manager.
5. Maintain proper and efficient records of the entire Park operation.
6. Evaluate staff mid-season as well as at the end of the season.
7. Make park safe for the public.
8. Post signs and information for campers and day users.
9. Hold weekly staff meetings.
10. Establish a reservation system for campers and groups.
11. Maintain good public relations.
12. Submit a payroll on Monday morning of each week.
13. Have information regarding the park at the gate to hand to public.
3
14. Deposit income for each day in deposit box.
15. Obtain permission to build on grounds or change appearance of the park in any
way.
16. Manage the park in accordance with the Policies, Rules & Regulations and Fees
adopted by the Town Council, except that the Manager shall have the discretion
to make exceptions to a Park rule where such exceptions are considered to be in
the best interests of the Park. Where such exceptions occur more than once
under similar circumstances, the Park Manager shall recommend to the Town
Council that the Rules & Regulations or Policies be amended in accordance with
the exception being made.
ARTICLE II - HIRING POLICY - SEASONAL
The Staff for Winslow Park will, if practicable, be hired by April 1 of each year. In order to
insure the hiring of the staff by April, a job announcement should be placed in the local
newspapers in January and February of each year. Interviews can take place in February and
March.
ARTICLE III - RULES FOR WINSLOW PARK
1. The Manager of the Park is responsible to the Town Manager.
2. The Park will open. Memorial Day Weekend through Mid- October (weather
dependent).
3. The Park will be open from 8:00 A.M. to 9:30 P.M. in July and August. From Memorial
Weekend through June and Labor Day through the last weekend in September, it will be
open 8 A.M. to 9 P.M. The Park, including beach and picnic areas, will close for Day
Use and Visitors one half hour after sunset.
4. Pets are allowed in the Park under restraint and shall not be left unattended. Pets are to
be on a leash that does not exceed 6' in length and shall be under control of the handler.
Only one pet per campsite or one pet per adult for day use visitors shall be allowed. NO
PETS ON THE BEACH. Pet owners are REQUIRED to clean up after their pets
IMMEDIATELY.
5. The discharge of firearms or other weapons and hunting is prohibited. Fireworks are
also prohibited.
4
6. All vehicles shall conform to posted regulations as to speed and parking. Vehicle speed
in the Park is not to exceed 5 MPH, and vehicles will park in designated areas only.
Automobiles, motorcycles, bicycles and vehicles are allowed as transportation to and
from the park, but will be restricted if used unnecessarily or are a nuisance because of
noise. All-Terrain Vehicles are not permitted. No overnight parking shall be allowed
from the Westerly property line of Winslow Park to the Main Gate. Vehicles parked in
non-designated areas will be subject to towing at owner's expense.
7. Open fires where permitted shall be confined to fireplaces furnished for that purpose
and shall be kept to a reasonable size. Fires will be restricted to areas so designated. No
fires shall be left unattended.
8. The removal, molesting, injury or damage to anything natural, physical or historical
within the area is strictly prohibited and may result in eviction with forfeitures of paid
fees. No digging, trenching, or metal detectors allowed.
9. Disorderly conduct, including being under the influence of controlled substances,
indecent acts, or the use of coarse language, may result in eviction with forfeiture of fees
paid.
10. Refuse must be placed in containers provided or packed out.
11. Park Personnel are not permitted to accept gratuities.
12. Ball playing, frisbee throwing and similar activities shall not interfere with the enjoyment
and safety of other park users. Frisbee throwing is not allowed in the beach.
13. Group use shall be confined to those areas so designated or assigned by the Park
Manager.
14. Group reserved area day use should be reserved in advance (after Feb. 1) by contacting
the Park Manager and by paying a non-refundable deposit. Groups that are juvenile in
nature shall have one adult supervisor per six (6) children.
15. Campers must register in person before setting up camp on site
16. Camping Reservation System:
(a) A limited amount of seasonal sites are available. Available seasonal campsites will be
awarded by a lottery system.
5
(b) Sites 1-23 are not available for seasonal use.
17. The number of camping parties admitted to the area will be limited to the number of
campsites available (normal authorized campsites should not exceed 100 lots).
Overloads are limited to 10 sites and must have prior approval of the Park Manager.
18. Check-out time is 11:00 AM.
19. Vacancies will be filled on a first-come, first-serve basis.
20. Fourteen (14) consecutive nights shall be the limit on sites 1-23.
21. Campsite occupancy will be limited to one camping party
22. A camping party shall be defined as:
(a) FAMILY One or two parents and their minor children using an R.V. and/or the
number of tents necessary and appropriate to accommodate family and lot size. Fee
covers 2 adults and one shelter.
(b) NON-FAMILY Maximum six (6) individuals per campsite. Fee covers two (2)
adults and one shelter. Additional fee will be charged per each additional adult and per
additional shelter. Maximum of two shelters per site if appropriate to lot size. Second
shelter may be a tent only. Additional fee will be charged per each additional adult and
per additional shelter. Maximum two (2) shelters per site if appropriate to lot size.
23. Daytime campsite guests must register and pay a day use fee. Overnight campsite guests
must register and pay a fee.
24. Generators may be used only from 8-9 A.M., 11 A.M.-1 P.M., 5-7 P.M. * The park
reserves the right to not allow generators that are deemed too loud or disturbing at the
discretion of park personnel.
25. Clotheslines will be confined to campsites. No rope, twine or wire will be attached to
trees or shrubs in sites 1-23. Clotheslines on remaining sites shall be hung so as not to
cause any damage to existing vegetation and shall be subject to the management's
discretion.
26. Quiet hours are from 10 P.M. to 7 A.M.
27. No more than 2 automobiles will be allowed in any one campsite in addition to the
registered recreational vehicle.
6
28. Group campsites must be reserved in advance by contacting the Park Manager or his
designee.
29. Bathing will be restricted to the area so designated.
30. Boating and water skiing must be outside designated swimming areas.
31. The use of floating devices are permitted providing they are U.S.C.G. approved. Face
masks or snorkels are prohibited, except that Coast Guard approved life jackets may be
used at the discretion of the Park Manager. S.C.U.B.A. and skin divers must register at
the gate house with a current C Card from a nationally recognized organization, the
location of the planned dive, and expected time of return.
32. Pets are not allowed on the beach.
33. Fires or grills are not allowed on the beach.
34. The use of soaps & detergents is prohibited on the beach.
35. There are no lifeguards at the beach area. Swimming is at your own risk and is restricted
to the sand beach.
36. The use of areas in the Park shall be limited to the purposes for which they are being
preserved and to activities determined by the Park Manager to be compatible with those
purposes.
The following are not allowed in the beach area from the boat launch ramp to the next
point of land, north and east: boating, water skiing, clamming and worming.
37. A fee toward future ramp repairs is required from boat launch ramp users.
38. A campsite for park personnel will be supplied at no cost only if that person is assigned
to night-time duty.
39. Reservations will be accepted postmarked no earlier than November 1st for Harb
Cottage. Persons who rent Harb Cottage are responsible for seeing that their guests
comply with the rules of the park as well as to all rules specific to Harb Cottage.
40. The scenic trail shall be maintained as a park commons to be maintained and reasonably
used for all in an open condition.
41. The boat ramp is for seasonal use, i.e., the ramp is used for the winter storage of the
park's floats and gangways and will not be kept clear of snow and ice to facilitate boating
operations. Only those devices that will permit a boat to be launched and free floating
or recovered without blocking the ramp for more than twenty (20) minutes are
7
authorized on the ramp. Only exceptions to this regulation will be made with advance
permission of the Winslow Park Commission.
42. Charcoal shall be burned only in grills provided, or private grills, and disposed of in
designated containers.
43. Items of value shall be held in "lost and found" until December 31 of the same year,
when, if not claimed, shall become Park property.
44. Park permission must be obtained for any archaeological activities.
45. Camp parents shall drop off and pick up campers at the gatehouse.
46. Winslow Park is Not Responsible for any items lost or stolen on premises.
47. All Deposits are Non-Refundable.
48. No alcoholic beverages are allowed in the park except at individually rented campsites
and at Harb Cottage. Alcohol may be served within the confines of the rental shelters by
hiring a licensed and insured caterer and filling out a police detail form with the Freeport
Police department.
49. A violation of any Park rules may result in dismissal or removal from the Park.
50. When applying for a reservation at Harb Cottage, the applicant must be the person who
will occupy the cottage. Duplicate requests for the same party will not be considered.
No sub-letting is allowed.
ARTICLE IV - RULES FOR HARB COTTAGE
1. Harb Cottage tenants and their guests must adhere to all rules pertaining to Winslow
Park. Tenants will be responsible for their guests.
2. No pets allowed.
3. Check-in time is after 2 p.m. on the date of arrival. Check-out time is before l0 a.m. on
the date of departure.
4. Harb Cottage has a maximum overnight capacity of six (6) adults, and no more than ten
(10) total persons.
5. All camping visitors must register at the Gatehouse and will be assigned a site within the
campground. No tents, tag-a-longs, or R.V.'s are allowed on Harb Cottage premises at
any time.
8
6. Only boats belonging to Harb Cottage tenants, the park, or pre-approved by the park
manager may be moored at the Harb Cottage dock. ALL BOATS MUST BE PREREGISTERED
PRIOR TO DOCKING. The dock is available for pedestrian traffic to
all Winslow Park patrons. No swimming is permitted.
9
7. A maximum of 6 cars may be parked within the Harb Cottage parking area. Any
additional cars must be parked at the Winslow Park Farmhouse and will be assessed a
$2.00 per vehicle parking fee. No parking is allowed along any roadway or on the Harb
Cottage lawn.
Must be parked in the general day use area and any fees associated with this paid.
Additional parking on the road near the cottage only with prior park manager approval.
8. Any activities with over 25 people total in attendance (including tenants) must receive
prior approval by the Manager. Groups of larger than 150 people total are subject to
approval by the Winslow Park Commission. (Please allow at least 3 months for the
approval process).
All activities with over 25 people total shall adhere to the following additional rules:
A. An additional damage deposit of $500 will be required upon arrival; $250
B. Any over-flow parking fees (see Rule #7) will be deducted directly from the damage
deposit unless prior arrangements for payment are made;
C. Tenant must provide additional portable toilets at the rate of 1 portable toilet per
each 50 people. For example, 25-50 people will require 1 portable toilet. All necessary
arrangements and any costs incurred for acquiring portable toilets shall be the direct
responsibility of the tenant and not of Winslow Park.
D. No amplified music or voice beyond 9 p.m. Quiet time for all of Winslow Park is 10
p.m.
E. Any gathering of more than 25 people where alcohol is present must have a police
chaperone. One (1) officer will be required for each 100 people or any fraction thereof.
(Example calculation same as above method.) All arrangements and costs shall be the
sole responsibility of the tenant. The Freeport Police Department will make
arrangements for requests made at least one (1) month in advance.
9. Your security deposit will be held until an inspection of the Cottage is complete. All but
$100.00 will be returned by mail, less any charges for damage or cleaning. The remainder
of the deposit will be returned after an evaluation of the phone bill determines the
amount owed for long-distance calls, and that amount has been deducted from the
$100.00. The tenant will be responsible for damages and/or charges over deposited
amount.
RATES FOR HARB COTTAGE ARE AS FOLLOWS:
10
Resident Non-Resident
WEEKLY RATES
(Utilities Included)
July 1st to Labor Day $900 $1,000
Except July 20 to Aug. 10 $1,000 $1,100
June & September $700 $800
MONTHLY RATE
Winter Rental (2 Adults) $850 $850
(Tenant Pays Utilities)
Amended March 6, 2007
1
TOWN OF FREEPORT
CONSERVATION COMMISSION ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 35
Section 35-1 Definitions
As used in this Ordinance, unless the context indicates otherwise, the following terms have the
following meanings:
1. Commission. “Commission” means the Conservation Commission established
pursuant to Section 35-2.
2. Land Bank Fund. “Land Bank Fund” means the fund for the purchase of municipal
land established pursuant to Section 35.7.
3. Hedgehog Mountain Fund. “Hedgehog Mountain Fund” means the fund created by
the remaining monies raised for the purchase of the Hedgehog Mountain property and
any future income from the operation and maintenance of the Hedgehog Mountain
property.
4. Hedgehog Mountain Plan. “Hedgehog Mountain Plan” means the Report of the
Hedgehog Mountain Planning Committee as accepted by the Freeport Town Council
on March 1, 1994.
5. Hedgehog Mountain Property. “Hedgehog Mountain Property” means the property
described in the Hedgehog Mountain Plan and any additions to that parcel that may
be from time to time acquired by the Town.
Section 35-2 Commission Established
A Conservation Commission shall be established which shall consist of and be administered by
seven (7) persons appointed by the Freeport Town Council for staggered three-year terms. The
members must be legal residents of the municipality and shall serve without compensation. The
Commission shall annually elect a Chair, a secretary and a treasurer from among its members
and shall adopt reasonable rules for the conduct of its meetings. The decisions of the
Commission shall be by majority vote of those present and voting and no business may be
transacted without a majority of the members present. The Commission shall keep accurate
records of its meetings and actions and shall file an annual report with the Town Manager.
The Commission may also appoint up to five associate members, which associate members may
assist in the work of the Commission and participate in its discussions but shall hold no office
and have no vote.
Neither a municipal officer nor a member of the Freeport Planning Board may be a member of
the Commission.
Amended March 6, 2007
2
In the event of a permanent vacancy, the Town Council shall, within 60 days of its occurrence,
appoint a person to serve for the unexpired term.
Members and associate members may be removed by the Town Council for cause, after notice
and hearing. Excessive absence from regular schedule meetings shall be considered cause for
removal.
Section 35-3 Powers and Duties
The Commission:
1. May purchase and acquire, in its name, on behalf of the municipality, fee simple interests
and any lesser interests, including conservation restrictions, development rights or
easements, in any real property situated within the borders of the municipality, of the
types set forth in Section 35-4, including any improvements on that real property,
provided that all purchases or acquisitions are consistent with the Commission’s open
space plan;
2. May recommend to the Town Council the acceptance of gifts of any real property
interests or of funds to further the purposes of the land bank or the conservation goals of
the Commission;
3. May dispose of all of any portion of the real property interests held by it, subject to the
Constitution of Maine to the extent applicable and subject to the approval of the Town
Council and the Commission;
4. May incur debt, pledging the full faith and credit of the municipality, only after having
been authorized to do so by the Town Council;
5. May obtain such professional services as are necessary in order to perform its duties,
including development and updating of the Commission’s open space plan;
6. May maintain, manage and improve land and interests in land held by it in a manner
which allows public use and enjoyment consistent with the natural, historic and scenic
resources of the land, including planting, pruning, and cutting of trees and shrubs to
manage and enhance natural systems and constructing nature trails, bird nest boxes and
nature identification signs, provided that the expenditure of Land Bank funds for
administration, maintenance, management and limited capital improvement of
municipally owned conservation lands shall not exceed 10% of the Land Bank Fund
without a 2/3 vote of the Commission.
7. May, as delegated to it by the Town Council from time to time, be responsible for the
care and superintendence of public parks and other properties as designated by the Town
Council and, subject to the approval of the Town Council, direct the expenditure of all
monies appropriated for the improvement of the same;
Amended March 6, 2007
3
8. May conduct research in conjunction with the Planning Board into local land and water
areas;
9. May seek to coordinate the activities of conservation bodies organized for similar
purposes.
10. May advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets
which in its judgment it deems necessary utilizing such funds as may be donated to the
Town of Freeport or appropriated by the Town Council for such purposes;
11. Prepare and maintain an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned, within the
Town of Freeport, including marsh lands, swamps and other wetlands for the purpose of
obtaining information pertinent to proper utilization, protection, development or use of
such open areas.
12. May recommend to the Town Council or Planning Boards or any agency of the State of
Maine, a program for better utilization, protection, development or use of such open
areas.
13. Shall submit to the Town Council annually a budget for all expenses and projects of the
Commission that do not involve the acquisition of property interests or the management
of Hedgehog Mountain. Separate budgets for the expenditure from the Land Bank and
Hedgehog Mountain Funds will be limited to the purposes for which these funds are
dedicated. All expenditures authorized by the Commission must be approved by the
Town Council through the budgetary process.
Section 35-4 Types of Land which may be acquired:
Land, interests in land and other real property interests to be acquired and held as part of the
commission must be situated within the boundaries of the municipality and may consist of any of
the following types of land and interests in land:
1. Ocean, harbor, river, stream, lake or pond frontage and adjoining backlands;
2. Fresh or saltwater marshes, estuaries, flood plains and adjoining uplands;
3. Islands;
4. Land for future active or passive public outdoor recreational use, including hiking
trails, bicycle paths, green belts and high elevations with a view;
5. Aquifers, aquifer recharge areas and other ecologically fragile or significant
property;
Amended March 6, 2007
4
6. Properties with unique historical or geological characteristics or otherwise
important to the community’s cultural welfare;
7. Woods or forestland suitable for a town forest or usable by deer as a wintering
yard;
8. Farmland or wildlife habitat;
9. Open spaces which help to shape the settlement pattern of the community by
promoting the village concept and discouraging sprawl; or
10. Vacant parcels of land, vacant buildings and properties or buildings and properties
in significant disrepair which may be reclaimed for the purpose of establishing
natural areas for open space or park land.
Section 35-5 Maintenance of Real Property
The Commission shall retain any real property interest acquired pursuant to this chapter
predominantly in its natural, scenic or open condition, except as otherwise provided in this
ordinance. Except upon the approval of the Town Council, and where appropriate, subject to the
Constitution of Maine or state law, the Commission shall not allow:
1. Construction or placing of buildings; roads, other than paths for recreational use;
signs; billboards; other advertising, utilities or other structures on or above the
surface, except in furtherance of the purposes of this ordinance;
2. Dumping of placing of trash, waste, or unsightly or offensive material;
3. Removal or destruction of trees, shrubs or other vegetation, except where necessary
for management purposes and to enhance natural systems or open-space uses;
4. Excavation, dredging or removal of loam, peat, gravel, soil, rock or other mineral
substance in such manner as to affect the surface, except limited grading to enhance
the open-space uses of the land;
5. Surface use except for purposes permitting the land or water area to remain
predominantly in its natural, scenic or open condition; or to permit the land to
continue to support the cultural values for which it was purchased.
6. Activities detrimental to drainage, flood control, water conservation erosion control
or soil conservation; or
7. Other acts or uses detrimental to the cultural, natural, scenic or open condition of the
land or water areas.
Amended March 6, 2007
5
In determining whether or not to approve a request to use, improve or dispose of any real
property interest acquired by the Commission in a manner otherwise prohibited by this section
the Town Council and the Commission shall consider whether the request is in the interest of
conservation and any national, state, regional or local program in furtherance of conservation;
any public, state, regional or local comprehensive land use or developmental plan affecting the
land; and any known proposal by a governmental body for use of the land.
Section 35-6 Annual Filing of Plan:
The Commission shall file annually with the Town Manager an open-space, public-access and
conservation plan which shall be, as far as possible, consistent with the Town’s comprehensive
plan and with any regional planning relating to the area. The Commission may, from time to
time, amend the plan. The Commission shall actively seek comments from the Planning Board,
Town Council and the general public at a public hearing before adopting a plan or revisions to a
plan. The plan must show all real property interests then currently held by the Commission,
including a description of the use of those interests and all acquisitions, improvements or
dispositions of all real property interests held by the Commission at any time during the year
preceding each filing, including the reason for that acquisition, improvement or disposition. The
plan shall also delineate all potential open space being considered for purchase and shall
establish policies and priorities for these purchases.
Section 35-7 Land Bank Fund
The Commission shall meet its financial obligations for purchasing property interests on behalf
of the Town by drawing upon a municipal land bank fund to be set up as a separate account
within the Town. Deposits into the fund shall include:
1. Funds appropriated to be deposited into the fund by vote of the Town Council;
2. Voluntary contributions of money or other liquid assets to the fund;
3. Interest from deposits and investments; and
4. Proceeds from disposal of real property interests.
All expenses lawfully incurred in carrying out this ordinance must be evidenced by proper
vouchers and shall be paid by the Town only upon submission of warrants duly approved by the
Commission. The Town shall prudently invest available assets of the fund and all income from
any investment shall accrue to the fund.
The Commission shall keep a full and accurate account of its actions, including a record as to
when, from and to whom and on what account money has been paid or received relative to this
ordinance, and as to when, from or to whom and for what consideration of real property interest
Amended March 6, 2007
6
have been acquired, improved or disposed of. These records and accounts shall be subject to
examination by the Town Council.
Section 35-8 Management of the Hedgehog Mountain Property
The Commission shall manage the operation and maintenance of the Hedgehog Mountain
property consistent with the Hedgehog Mountain Plan.
The Commission shall review the Hedgehog Mountain plan at least every five years and
recommend changes necessary for the proper management and operation of the Hedgehog
Mountain Property. All proposed changes to the Hedgehog Mountain Plan must be approved by
a two-thirds majority vote of the full Commission before being presented to the Freeport Town
Council which will take action on such proposals only after public hearing.
The Commission shall annually, on a date set by the F report Town Council, submit a budget for
the management and operation of the Hedgehog Mountain property to the Council for approval.
The approved budget shall be funded by the Hedgehog Mountain Fund. The budget shall be
implemented by the commission without further approvals by the Freeport Town Council, except
that any proposed expenditure for non-budgeted items or items exceeding budgeted expenses
must be pre-approved by the Freeport Town Council. To the greatest extent possible, the budget
for the operation and maintenance of the Hedgehog Mountain property shall be limited in
amount to the annual income produced by the Hedgehog Mountain Fund. All income from the
management and operation of the Hedgehog Mountain property shall be deposited in the
Hedgehog Mountain fund which shall be segregated from any other Commission fund.
Expenditures from this fund shall not be subject to any of the restrictions set forth in Section 35-
3. An accounting of the Hedgehog Mountain Fund shall be submitted to the Town Council
annually and shall accompany the budget.
Amended July 1, 2008
1
CHAPTER 37
DOGS, ANIMALS AND FOWL
ARTICLE I IN GENERAL (RESERVED)
ARTICLE II DOG ORDINANCE
Section 37-201 Title
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Dog Ordinance of the
Town of Freeport, Maine".
Section 37-202 Authority and Purpose
This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authority in Title 30A M.R.S.A., Sections
2101 and 3001 and the purpose of this Ordinance is to provide regulations in addition to
those contained in Title 7 M.R.S.A., Sections 3911-3964 with respect to controlling dogs
throughout the Town of Freeport in the interest of the health, safety and general welfare
of its residents.
Section 37-203 Definitions
203.1 "At Large" means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of any
person by means of personal presence and attention as will reasonably control the
conduct of such dog.
203.2 "Owner" means any person, firm, association, partnership, or corporation owning,
controlling, keeping or harboring a dog.
203.3 "Nuisance" shall mean a dog which by loud, frequent, and habitual barking,
howling or yelping, disturbs the peace, or a dog which chases persons or vehicles, or a
dog which causes damage to persons or property.
203.4 "Dangerous Dog" shall mean a dog that causes reasonable fear of bodily injury to
any person or which attacks or threatens to attack any person.
203.5 "Cemetery" means a public or private graveyard, burial ground, or area set apart
for interment of the dead, including not only the individual lots for depositing of the dead
but also any areas surrounding said lots that are within the borders of the graveyard,
burial ground, or area set apart for interment of the dead.
Amended July 1, 2008
2
Section 37-204 Regulations
204.1 No dog shall be kept within the limits of the Town unless such dog shall have been
licensed and such license is displayed by its owner in accordance with the statutes of the
state. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any dog belonging to an out of
state resident, visiting within the town, without the intention of becoming a resident, but
the owner of such a dog shall comply with the remaining provisions of this article.
204.2 An owner shall not permit a nuisance.
204.3 Dangerous dogs shall be confined in a secure enclosure or on a chain or leash
controlled by the owner or custodian at all times.
204.4 It shall be unlawful for any dog, licensed or unlicensed, to run at large, except
when used for hunting.
204.5 No person shall cause or permit any animal or dog owned by him or her, in his or
her custody, or under his or her control to be within any cemetery unless on the
walkways and roadways and held in leash by a responsible person, the leash not to
exceed eight (8) feet in length or unless one dog under voice control.
204.6 An owner must remove and dispose of any feces left by his/her animal on any
sidewalk, street, beach, public property or private property (other than the property of the
owner of the animal or of a person who has consented to the presence of the animal on
his or her property) and deposit such feces into appropriate litter receptacle. An owner
whose animal is present on any property from which the animal’s feces is required to be
removed pursuant to this section must have in his or her possession a plastic bag or
similar utensil not part of the human body for collecting and removing the feces. This
regulation shall not apply to any person who, by reason of physical handicap, is unable to
comply with the requirement.
Section 37-205 Fees and Boarding Charges
Prior to the release of an impounded dog, the owner shall pay the following to the Town
Clerk:
205.1 The per diem and mileage cost of the officer who impounds the dog.
205.2 An impoundment fee of $25.00 for each dog.
205.3 Animal Shelter Board Fee.
205.4 It shall be the duty of a police officer or dog control officer to keep or cause to be
kept, an accurate and detailed record of the impoundment and disposition of all dogs
coming into his custody.
Amended July 1, 2008
3
ARTICLE III
Section 37-301 Penalties
301.1 Owners who violate the provisions of this Ordinance shall be punished by a civil
penalty in accordance with MSRS Title 7 Section 3915 as amended from time to time.
Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation. All penalties recovered shall
be paid to the Town. Before initiating an enforcement action against any person for a
second or subsequent violation, the Chief of the Police Department shall personally
inquire into the facts and circumstances of the matter and make a determination that the
violation is sufficiently serious to warrant an enforcement action. If the Police Chief
determines that a dog constitutes a habitual nuisance or is dangerous, the Town may seek
a court order requiring the removal of the dog beyond the Town limits or the destruction
of the dog.
Amended October 4, 2011
1
CHAPTER 38 FIREWORKS
ARTICLE I FIREWORKS ORDINANCE
Section 38-101 Definitions in accordance with
MRSA 221-A, sub 1-A
Consumer Fireworks. “Consumer fireworks” has the same
meaning as in 27 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 555.11
or subsequent provision, but includes only products that are
tested and certified by a 3rd-party testing laboratory as
confirming with United States Consumer Product Safety
Commission standards, in accordance with 15 United States
Code, Chapter 47. “Consumer fireworks” does not include the
following products:
A. Missile-type rockets, as defined by the State Fire
Marshal by rule;
B. Helicopters and aerial spinners, as defined by the
state Fire Marshal by rule; and
C. Sky rockets and bottle rockets. For purposes of
this paragraph, “sky rockets and bottle rockets”
means cylindrical tubes containing not more than 20
grams of chemical composition, as defined by the
State Fire Marshal by rule, with a wooden stick
attached for guidance and stability that rise into
the air upon ignition and that may produce a burst
of color or sound at or near the height of flight.
Fireworks. “Fireworks” means any:
A. Combustible or explosive composition or substance;
B. Combination of explosive compositions or substances;
C. Other article that was prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion,
explosion, deflagration or detonation, including
blank cartridges or toy cannons in which explosives
are used, the type of balloon that requires fire
underneath to propel it, firecrackers, torpedoes,
skyrockets, roman candles, bombs, rockets, wheels,
colored fires, fountains, mines, serpents and other
fireworks of like construction;
D. Fireworks containing any explosive or flammable
compound; or
E. Tablets or other device containing any explosive
substance or flammable compounds.
The term “fireworks” does not include consumer fireworks or
toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which
Amended October 4, 2011
2
paper caps or plastic caps containing 25/100 grains or less
of explosive compound are used if they are constructed so
that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in
place for the explosion, toy pistol paper caps or plastic
caps that contain less than 20/100 grains of explosive
mixture, sparklers that do not contain magnesium chlorates
or perchlorates or signal, antique or replica cannons if no
projectile is fired.
Section 38-102 Sales Prohibited
No person or group may sell, possess with the intent to sell
or offer for sale consumer fireworks or fireworks.
Section 38-103 Use Prohibited
No person or group of persons shall use, display, fire or
cause to be exploded fireworks or any of said items
enumerated in Section 38-101 “Consumer Fireworks”.
Section 38-104 Fireworks Display
A fireworks display requires a permit from the Maine
Commissioner of Public Safety or his or her designee under
the provisions of 8 M.R.S.A. §§ 221 – 237, and particularly
section 227-A. The Fire Chief, or his or her designee,
shall inspect the proposed display site at the time of the
inspection conducted by a representative of the Maine Public
Safety Department under 8 M.R.S.A. § 227-A(2).
Section 38-105 Use Prohibited Within Fifty Feet of Public
Way
No person shall use, display, throw, drop or cause to be
discharged or exploded, any consumer fireworks or fireworks
at any time, within fifty feet of any public way.
Section 38-106 Civil Penalties
Whoever violates any of the provisions of the foregoing
Sections, shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100) per day and not more than
twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500) per day, plus
attorney’s fees and costs.
Amended 05/21/2019
1
CHAPTER 39
LOITERING, CURFEW AND NOISE
ARTICLE I LOITERING, CURFEW AND NOISE ORDINANCE
SECTION 39-101 LOITERING
No person shall loiter in, on, or adjacent to any of the streets, ways or public
places, in the Town of Freeport, and no person shall loiter unnecessarily in or
about any private dwelling or peep into windows of any private dwelling to the
discomfort or alarm of the residents of such dwelling, the neighbors, or any
person going to and from the same.
SECTION 39-102 CURFEW
No parent, legal guardian or other person having the care and control of a child
under the age of fifteen years shall permit such child to be or remain in or on any
of the streets, ways, or public places of the Town of Freeport after nine o'clock in
the evening unless such child shall be engaged in the performance of some
lawfully authorized employment or shall be in the course of active travel over said
streets, ways, or public places between a specific point of origin and a specific
destination or shall be accompanied by said parent, legal guardian or other adult
person.
SECTION 39-103 NOISE
A. No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continue any loud,
profane, boisterous, unnecessary, or unusual noises which shall either annoy,
disturb, injure, or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others.
The sounding of any horn or signaling device, except as a danger warning; the
playing of any radio, musical instrument, phonograph, or any other machine or
device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the
peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring inhabitants and passersby; the use of any
loud speaker or amplifier for the purpose of commercial advertising or attention
of the public to a specific building, location or business; yelling, shouting,
hooting, whistling, or singing shall be considered to be loud, disturbing, and
unnecessary noises and a violation of this Ordinance but such enumeration shall
not be deemed exclusive except as authorized by the Town Council.
B. This ordinance shall not apply to noise emitted by or related to:
1. Any bell or chime from any building clock, school, or church.
2. Any siren, whistle, or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles or any
other alarm systems used in an emergency situation; provided, however,
Amended 05/21/2019
2
that burglar alarms or car alarms not terminating within 30 minutes after
being activated shall be unlawful.
3. Warning devices required by the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration or other state or federal safety regulations.
4. Farm operations as defined by 7 M.R.S 152.
5. Noise from domestic power equipment, such as but not limited to power
saws, sanders, grinders, lawn and garden tools, or similar devices operated
during daytime hours.
6. Timber harvesting (felling trees and removing logs from the woods)
during daytime hours.
7. Noise generated by any construction or demolition equipment which is
operated during daytime hours. Emergency construction or repair work by
public utilities shall also be exempted. Construction during non-daytime
hours may be exempted from the provisions of this ordinance by order of
the Chief of Police, if it is demonstrated that extenuating circumstances
disallow construction during daytime hours.
8. Noise created by refuse and solid waste collection during daytime
hours.
9. Municipal, public works, or utility projects.
C. For the purposes of section 39-103(B), “daytime hours” means the hours between
6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday; between 6:00 a.m. and 10
p.m. Friday through Saturday; and between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sunday
SECTION 39-104 ENFORCEMENT
A. This Ordinance may be enforced by any sworn law enforcement officer of the
Freeport Police Department as a civil violation.
B. Violations of sections 39-101 shall be punishable by a civil penalty or not more
than $100, which shall be assessed against the person creating the violation.
C. Violations of Section 39-102 shall be punishable by a civil penalty of not more
than $100, which shall be assessed against the parent, legal guardian, or other
adult person responsible for the care and control of the child in question.
D. Violations of section 39-103 shall be punishable by a civil penalty assessed
against either the person creating the violation, or the owner of record of the
property upon which the violation occurs or continues to occur, if that person
should be a separate and distinct entity from the person causing the violation.
Each day that a violation occurs or continues to occur shall be considered a
separate violation and may be punished separately. Violations shall be punishable
by a civil penalty according to the following schedule:
Amended 05/21/2019
3
i. The first violation in a one year period shall be punishable by a
civil penalty of at least $250, but not more than $500.
ii. The second violation in a one year period shall be punishable by a
civil penalty of at least $500, but not more than $1,000.
iii. The third and any subsequent violations in a one year period shall
be punishable by a civil penalty of at least $1,000, but not more
than $2,000.
iv. In addition to civil penalties listed above, any subsequent
violations beyond three within a one year period shall constitute a
nuisance subject to injunctive relief.
Revision history
The provisions of this chapter were originally adopted as an Ordinance at the annual Town Meeting on
March 12, 1962.
Revised 04/03/2018 – Added sec. 39-103(B)&(C), substantially revised sec. 39-104.
Revised 05/21/2019-Removed sentence in Section 39-103 Noise.
CHAPTER 40 OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC PASSAGE
ARTICLE I OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC PASSAGE ORDINANCE
Section 40-101
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the
Obstructing Public Passage Ordinance of the Town of
Freeport.
Section 40-102
It shall be unlawful for any person, either alone or in
consort with others, to purposely or recklessly hinder or
impede:
1. The free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic
or pedestrians on, upon, across, over or to any public
way,public sidewalk or other public place or building;
2. The free and uninterrupted use of, or access to, any
property or business adjacent to, upon or facing or
fronting on any public way, publicc sidewalk or other
public place or building.
Section 40-103
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
Ordinance shall, upon conviction therefor, be subject to a
fine of up to $100.00 for each violation, which fine shall
enure to the Town of Freeport.
The provisions of this section were adopted as an Ordinance
August 6, 1974.
-1-
Adopted July 1998
1
ORDINANCE REGULATING THE MANNER OF SALE OF
TOBACCO PRODUCTS
(CHAPTER 41)
Section 1. Title.
This ordinance shall be known as the Regulation to Protect Children from Illegal
Tobacco Sales Ordinance.
Section 2. Findings and Purposes.
The Freeport Town Council does hereby find that:
(a) Substantial scientific evidence exists that the use of tobacco products causes
cancer, heart disease, and various other medical diseases. The Surgeon General
of the U.S. has found that tobacco-caused diseases are the leading cause of
premature, preventable death and disability in the U.S.;
(b) The National Centers for Disease Control have found that at least four hundred
thirty-four thousand (434,000) Americans die each year from tobacco-caused
diseases. The Surgeon General of the U.S. and the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services have found that a majority of those Americans die of
tobacco caused diseases became addicted to nicotine in tobacco products as
adolescents before the age of legal consent.
(c) The National Institute on Drug Abuse has concluded that the nicotine in tobacco
products is a powerful addictive drug and identify nicotine addiction as the most
widespread example of drug dependence in the U.S.;
(d) The Surgeon General of the U.S. has found that nicotine in tobacco products is as
addictive as cocaine and heroin; and
(e) The National Institute on Drug Abuse has found that tobacco use by adolescents
precedes and is predictive of adolescent illicit drug use.
Accordingly, the Freeport Town Council finds and declares it in the public interest to
prohibit self-service sales, self-service displays, racks and shelves of tobacco products
except in those premises to which access by minors is not allowed.
The Freeport Town Council further finds it is within its basic police power to implement
and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
Adopted July 1998
2
Section 3. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article, shall be construed as
defined in this section:
1. “Business” means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other
business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments
where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other
entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other
professional services are delivered in the Town of Freeport.
2. “Exempt Business” means any business except tobacco specialty stores that does
not allow anyone under eighteen years of age to enter unless accompanied by an
adult. These establishments will be exempt from the ordinance as written.
3. “Person” shall mean any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal
entity.
4. “Self-service merchandising” means open display of tobacco products and pointof-
sale tobacco products that the public has access to without the intervention of
an employee.
5. “Tobacco product” means any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless
tobacco, snuff or any other form of tobacco which may be utilized for smoking,
chewing inhalation or other manner of ingestion.
6. “Tobacco retailer” shall mean any person or governmental entity that operates a
store, stand, booth, concession, or other place at which sales of tobacco products
are made to purchasers for consumption or use in the Town of Freeport.
7. “Vendor assisted” means any automated, self-service device which, upon
insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses cigarettes or
any other tobacco product.
8. “Vending machine” means any automated, self-service device which, upon
insertion of money, token or other form of payment, dispenses cigarettes or any
other tobacco product.
9. “Tobacco specialty store” shall mean a tobacco retailer whose business
exclusively or primarily involves the sale of tobacco products and related goods.
Section 4. Regulation of Manner of Sale of Tobacco Products.
Adopted July 1998
3
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, business, or tobacco retailer, except tobacco
specialty stores which do not allow persons under the age of eighteen (18) to enter
the premises, to sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale or display for sale any
tobacco products by means of self-service merchandising.
Section 5. Enforcement.
A. Enforcement of this ordinance shall be the responsibility of the Chief of Police or
his or her designee.
Section 6. Violations and Penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, managers, operates or otherwise
controls the use of any premises subject to this ordinance to fail to comply with
any of its provisions.
B. Any person, business, tobacco retailer, or owner, manager or operator of any
establishment subject to this ordinance shall eliminate the self-service
merchandising of tobacco products except for tobacco specialty stores which do
not allow persons under the age of eighteen (18) to enter the premises.
C. Any person, business, tobacco retailer, or owner, manager or operator of any
establishment subject to this ordinance who violates any provision of this
ordinance shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, punishable by:
1) First violation, a warning issued by the Freeport Police Department.
2) Second violation within one year, a fine, not exceeding one hundred
dollars ($100.00), payable to the Town of Freeport.
3) Third violation within one year, a fine, not exceeding two hundred dollars
($200.00), payable to the Town of Freeport.
4) For a fourth or more violation within one year, a fine, not exceeding one
thousand dollars ($1000.00), payable to the Town of Freeport.
Section 7. Other Applicable Laws.
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit tobacco vending machines and
distribution of tobacco product samples where they are otherwise restricted by other
applicable laws.
MERCURY THERMOMETER ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 42
Section 1. Definitions
A. Town means the Town of Freeport
B. Mercury thermometer means a mercury-containing product that is used to measure
body temperature. A mercury-containing product is a product, device, instrument
or equipment into which elemental mercury or mercury compounds are intentionally
added during its formulation or manufacture and in which the continued presence of
mercury is desired to provide a specific characteristic or to permit a specific function.
C. Health care facility means any hospital, nursing home, extended care facility, longterm
facility, clinic or medical laboratory, state or private health or mental institution,
clinic, physician’s office or health maintenance organization.
D. Manufacturer means any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation,
governmental entity, organization, combination, or joint venture that produces a
mercury fever thermometer. If the mercury thermometer is produced in a foreign
country, the manufacturer is the importer if domestic distributor.
Section 2. Retail Sale Prohibited. A person shall not sell or supply (including online
retail) mercury fever thermometers to consumers and patients, except by
prescription. The manufacturers of mercury fever thermometers shall
supply clear instructions on the careful handling of the thermometer to
avoid breakage and proper cleanup should a breakage occur with all
mercury fever thermometers sold through prescriptions.
Section 3. Manufacturing Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to manufacture a
mercury thermometer in the Town.
Section 4. Importation Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any facility to import,
purchase, or distribute a mercury thermometer in the Town, except in the
case of medical necessity as determined by a licensed physician.
Section 5. Restriction on the Sale of Mercury Thermometers. Thirty (30) days after
the adoption of this ordinance, a person may not sell or supply mercury
fever thermometers to consumers and patients.
Section 6. Penalty. Any person who violates this ordinance shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more that $500.00 per unit
sold.
ADOPTED JANUARY 16, 2001



Amended July 22, 2019
1
CHAPTER 43 PUBLIC PEDDLERS’ ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I, TITLE, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
Section 43-101 Title
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Public Peddler’s Ordinance of the Town
of Freeport
Section 43-102 Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to define, regulate and license peddlers.
Section 43-103 Definitions
1. The word “person” as used herein shall include the singular and the plural, and shall also
mean and include any person, firm or corporation, association, club, partnership or
society, excepting bonafide charitable, service, religious, municipal organizations or
agencies, or organizations sponsored by the 4th of July committee or its successor.
2. The word “peddler” as used herein shall include any person selling or offering for sale
tangible commodities from any public street or other public place within the Town of
Freeport, and where delivery is made at the time of sale. The word “peddler” shall include
the words “hawker” and “huckster”.
3. The word “town” shall mean the Town of Freeport, Maine.
4. The word “resident” shall mean a person whose domicile is in
Freeport.
5. The words “Licensing Board” shall mean the Town Council or its
designee.
Amended July 22, 2019
2
ARTICLE II GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 43-201 License Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler as defined in Article I of
this Ordinance within the corporate limits of the Town of Freeport without first obtaining a
license therefore as provided herein. Peddlers’ licenses shall be issued for the sale of food items
only and those food items shall be primarily intended to be consumed at the time of purchase.
Any distribution of free product samples shall be limited to samples of food for sale at that
location. Peddlers’ licenses shall be limited to one per person.
Section 43-202 Application Requirements and Licensing Procedures
1. Applications for peddler licenses shall be accepted only on municipal business days, within
each category, according to the following schedule.
Renewal applications by residents and non-residents - January 2 through 15.
New applications by residents - January 16 through 23.
New applications by non-residents - January 24 through 31.
2. Applications for licenses under this Ordinance must be made by the owner or lessor of the
cart. The applicant shall file with the Town Clerk a sworn application in writing on a
form to be furnished by the Town Clerk, which shall require the following information:
a. Name and description of the applicant including company,
corporation, DBA, etc.;
b. Address - local and legal address for receipt of notices.
In the event of change of either address, the applicant is obligated to notify the
Town Clerk so that the application may be revised;
c. A brief description of the types of food and/or beverages
to be sold;
d. If a vehicle is to be used to transport the cart, a description of the same, together with
license number or other means of identification;
e. A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of
the filing of the application, which picture shall by 2”x2” showing the head and
shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;
Amended July 22, 2019
3
f. The names of at least two (2) reliable property owners of the Town who will certify as
to the applicant’s good character and business responsibility, or, in lieu of the
names of references, any other available evidence as to the good character and
business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly
evaluate such character and business responsibility;
g. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime,
misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense
and the punishment or penalty assessed therefore;
h. A sketch, drawn to scale, and, if available, a photograph of the cart to be used in the
operation of the business labeling all aspects including, but not limited to,
materials, measurements, appurtenances, signs, awnings, umbrellas, fuel,
refrigeration, off-cart items, water supply and colors to indicate compliance with
the performance standards listed in Section 43-204 below. Specific measurements,
designs and locations of the cart and all appurtenances, including all off-cart items,
shall be submitted.
Following the assignment of the location, a sketch, drawn to scale, showing the
proposed operations location and its measurements, the location of the cart and all
appurtenances, all off-cart items, and the relationship of all of the above features to
all site features of the immediate area including, but not limited to, sidewalks,
driveways, buildings, landscaping, paths, signs and utilities, to show compliance
with the requirements of this Ordinance shall be submitted to the Town Clerk.
3. A non-refundable application fee of Fifty-five Dollars ($55.00) for
residents and One Hundred and Ten Dollars ($110.00) for non-residents shall accompany
each application. A non-refundable license fee of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for
residents and Seven Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($750.00) for non-residents shall be paid
at the time the license is issued;
4. a. Upon receipt of such application, the original shall be
referred to the Chief of Police, who shall cause such
investigation of the applicant’s business and moral character to be made as he or
she deems necessary for the protection of the public good.
b. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant’s character or business
responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse on
such application his or her recommendation for non-issuance and his or her
reasons for same and return said application to the Town Clerk, who shall notify
the applicant that his or her application is disapproved.
c. If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of
the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse on the
application his or her recommendation for approval and return said application to
Amended July 22, 2019
4
the Town Clerk, who shall forward the application to the Municipal Officers for
final action.
5
a. The Town Clerk shall retain all applications until all have been endorsed by the
Chief of Police as either unsatisfactory or satisfactory. Upon endorsement of all
applications by the Police Chief, those renewal applications endorsed as
satisfactory shall be forwarded to the Municipal Officers at the next scheduled
Town Council meeting for approval.
b. At its first regular meeting following issuance of renewal licenses the Municipal
Officers shall by lottery grant any available new licenses to qualified residents
endorsed as satisfactory by the Police Chief, who have satisfied all provisions of
this Ordinance.
c. If any Public Peddler Licenses remain following steps outlined in 5(a) and 5(b)
the Town Clerk shall forward all endorsed new applications by qualified nonresidents
to the Municipal Officers who shall by lottery grant any remaining
licenses to qualified non-residents who have satisfied all provisions of this
Ordinance.
d. After the commercial licenses have been granted by the Municipal Officers, the
Town Clerk may issue them but not until the licensee has submitted to the Town
Clerk:
1. A copy of the required certificate of insurance
required by Section 43-203(5);
2. The location of the parking space required by Section 43-203(4) and a copy
of the lease agreement or other instrument under which the parking space
will be available to the applicant.
3. A valid victualers license. The peddler cart may operate only while such
license is in effect.
4. A valid license issued by the State of Maine Department of Human Services
for food service. The peddler cart may operate only while such license is in
effect.
5. All applicable fees specified in 43-202 (3) of this Ordinance.
e After the Municipal Officers have granted all available licenses, the Town Clerk
or designee shall conduct a lottery to assign peddler locations. At least 14 days
before the lottery, the Town Clerk or designee shall mail written notice of the
time and place of the lottery to each licensed peddler and shall post and publish
Amended July 22, 2019
5
public notice. Those licensed peddlers who are present at the lottery in person or
by agent acting under written authority may select their own locations in the
order in which their names are drawn. Licensed peddlers who are not so present
will be assigned locations at random by Town Clerk or designee. Issued licenses
shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the
name and address of said licensee, the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the
date of issuance, and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as
the license number. The Town Clerk shall keep a permanent record of all
licenses issued.
f. All public peddlers assigned locations in the initial season lottery must complete
all license requirements set forth in Section 43-202 (5) (d) 1 through 5 and pay
all applicable fees by May 31st of the license year. Any applicant who does not
submit to the Town Clerk all items listed in 43-202 (5)(d) 1 through 5 by the
May 31st deadline set forth above shall forfeit any fees already paid to the Town
of Freeport as well as their rights to any Public Peddler license and assigned
location already granted for that license year. Vendors who forfeit their licenses
may not apply for a “renewal license” in following license year, but may apply
as a “new” applicant.
g. Any assigned public peddler location unused for a period of 30 consecutive days
shall be deemed abandoned. This includes any location that has not been open
for business and operating over a period of 30 days, regardless of whether
licensee has placed equipment on that location.
h. If a peddler location is subsequently relinquished voluntarily, abandoned or
forfeited, the Town Clerk shall offer the location to the remaining licensees in
the priority order that they were drawn in that year’s initial lottery. This
process shall be repeated for any subsequent open/available peddler locations
that occur throughout the year.
i. Any peddler locations remaining unassigned following the procedures set forth
above may be issued on a first come, first serve basis by the Municipal
Officers to any person who can meet the standards contained in 43-202 above.
j. Any person who has held a peddler’s license under this Ordinance for four
consecutive renewal terms shall not be issued a fifth renewal license but may
apply as a new applicant.
Section 43-203 General Provisions
1. The Traffic and Parking Committee or its’ successor will designate the number of
commercial licenses available by determining the commercial peddler locations for each
Amended July 22, 2019
6
calendar year no later than November 30 of the preceding year. Safety concerns shall be a
major criteria when designating locations. The Town Council shall have the authority to
relocate, at any time, any existing commercial peddler location previously assigned by the
Traffic and Parking Committee for cause shown. The number of non-commercial peddler
licenses issued annually shall not exceed two (2) as provided in Section 43-203 (2&3).
2. The Public Safety Building site located at 4 Main Street (Map 9 Lot 16) shall be reserved for
use by the Freeport Fire and Rescue Companies. The Licensee must follow all provisions of
the Ordinance except no fees or proof of insurance shall be required. No cart or related
items may be placed in parking spaces or the park area on the corner of Main and West
Streets.
3. The public lot (Map 11, Lot 27A) shall have one area reserved for use by the PORT Teen
Center and FHS All Sports Boosters.
4. Parking: Each licensee must provide one parking space per cart in compliance with the
requirements of Section 5.14 A.5 of the Freeport Zoning Ordinance for retail trade
operations. The licensee must have control and possession of the parking space for each
month of operation of the cart by written lease agreement or other legal instrument. In lieu
of providing one additional parking space, a peddler may pay a per-month fee to the Town
based on the highest rental of the Town owned Oak Street parking lot.
5. Peddlers shall maintain in full force and effect at all times a policy of comprehensive public
liability insurance with limits of not less than $300,000, naming the Town of Freeport as
additional insured. A certificate of insurance must be provided before a peddler’s license is
issued.
6. All Freeport municipal, school and public service groups using the locations described in
Sections 2&3 above shall provide the Town Clerk’s Office with a complete financial report
of activities conducted at these locations by December 31 of each year. Failure to comply
with this provision may result in forfeiture of the right to use either location during the
following calendar year.
7. Licenses for locations described in Sections 2&3 above for Memorial Day through Labor
Day shall be granted by the Licensing Board at its first meeting in May of each year.
Application for licenses must be submitted to the Town Clerk’s Office no later than April
15. Should more than one application be received for one or both of the locations, the
Licensing Board shall grant licenses based on the drawing of lots.
8. A license issued by the State of Maine Department of Human Services for food service and
a victualers license issued by the Freeport Town Council must be obtained before peddler
cart operation commences and the peddler cart may operate only while such licenses are in
effect.
Section 43-204 Performance Standards
Amended July 22, 2019
7
1. Location. The cart shall not be operated in a way that would
restrict or interfere with ingress to or egress from any building, abutting parcel or public
place or obstruct adequate access by fire, police or sanitation vehicles. The cart shall not
interfere with pedestrian flow on the sidewalk.
2. All utility connections shall be secured and safe.
3. The operations area shall be kept clean and free of litter. At least one trash receptacle shall
be provided. Public trash receptacles on the street shall not be used by the operation. All
trash shall be disposed of in conformance with Town regulations.
4. Cart design shall conform to the following requirements:
a. Materials: Carts may be commercial construction or
individually constructed. All carts shall be made of solid, durable materials.
b. Color: Neon and fluorescent colors are prohibited. Permitted colors shall be shades
of the following: red, white, gray, black, yellow, maroon, green, blue, brown,
beige and stainless steel.
c. Shape: “Theme” cards, such as one in the shape of hot dogs are prohibited.
d. Size: Maximum dimensions of a peddler’s caret or unit shall be no greater than 38
inches in width and 8 feet in length and must be removed from sidewalks at the
end of each day. Maximum height of the cart shall be six (6) feet from the top of
the cart body, excluding umbrella or awning, to the bottom of the cart where it (or
the wheels) touches the ground. Maximum height from the bottom of the cart (or
the wheels) to the uppermost top of any umbrella or awning attached to the cart
shall be eight (8) feet. The bottom of the canopy of the umbrella or awning shall
be at least 80” off the ground.
5. Awnings and umbrellas shall be constructed of a non-rigid
fabric such as, but not limited to, canvas, ripstop nylon or soft plastic.
6. Any hitch shall be visually identified for safety purposes with a wrapper, bicycle type flag
or other similar unobtrusive identifying device which does not obstruct the clear area
and which meets the requirements of the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act.
7. Cart shall not be motorized.
8. Peddler carts are allowed the following signs subject to the following requirements.
a. No more than two (2) signs, excluding lettering on an
umbrella or awning, are permitted on each cart. Lettering on an umbrella or
awning is permitted in addition to the two signs. In addition, one menu board is
Amended July 22, 2019
8
permitted and shall be no larger than six (6) square feet. A menu board is not
considered a sign.
b. Each sign shall be secured to the cart at a maximum height no higher than the
bottom edge of the umbrella or awning material.
c. The maximum size of each sign shall be four (4) square feet.
d. Each sign face shall be counted as one sign.
e. Free standing signs are prohibited.
f. Sign design shall meet the following requirements:
1. One or both signs may be preprinted, movable letter
signs or chalk boards;
2. Any other type of sign shall be included as part of
the approval process.
9. Cart lighting shall conform to the following requirements:
a. Lighting shall not increase the light level at the perimeter of the operations area by
more than 5 foot candles above the ambient light level. However, total
maximum lighting at the perimeter of the operations area shall not exceed fifteen
(15) foot candles.
b. Light sources shall be aimed or shielded so that the light projects downward and in
no case shall the angle be less than 20 degrees below horizontal.
10. Generators are prohibited.
11. Cart operators shall dress in a manner sufficient to meet the requirements of the current
State of Maine Food Safety Code.
12. Off-cart items, except for ones located on the cart, are limited to the following items:
one trash receptacle, one recycling receptacle, two coolers and one chair. These items
shall be located immediately adjacent to or under the cart.
13. No animals shall be attached to the cart except for guide animals.
14. Amplified sound shall not exceed 75 decibels during the day and 55 decibels at night.
15. All applicable local, state and federal requirements shall be met.
16. A flame resistive shield surrounding the cooking elements shall be installed to protect
the customer from open flame and hot surfaces. The cooking elements shall be
Amended July 22, 2019
9
approved listed (i.e., U.L. Factory Mutual, etc.) permanently attached to the cart and
not in or on separate facilities. An ABC extinguisher shall be mounted to the cart.
The peddler cart shall meet all local, state and national fire codes. Before a permit is
issued, the peddler cart containing cooking elements shall be inspected by the Fire
Department. An inspection fee in the amount set by the Town Council shall be paid
to the Fire Department by the owner of the cart prior to its use.
17. Each cart shall display its valid State Food Service and local victualers licenses in a
visible location.
Section 43-205 Transfer
No license issued under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be used at any time by any
person other than the one to whom it was issued. No locations assigned according to 43-202
(5)(e) shall be transferred except according to the provisions of 43-202 (5)(h) or (i).
Section 43-206 Revocation of License
1. Licenses issued under the provisions of this Ordinance may be
revoked by the Municipal Officer after notice and hearing for any of the following
causes:
a. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in
the application for license;
b. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of carrying on his
business as a peddler;
c. Any violation of this Ordinance;
d. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
e. Conducting the business of peddling in any unlawful manner or in such a
manner as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the
public.
2. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth
specifically the grounds of compliance and the time and place of hearing. Such
notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the licensee’s legal address
at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing.
Section 43-207 Expiration of License
Amended July 22, 2019
10
All licenses issued under the provisions of this Ordinance shall expire at ll:59 p.m. on
November 30 of the year of issuance. The vendor cart and all accessory items associated
with the vendor cart must be removed from the assigned location by November 30 of the
year of issuance. Any cart or other property remaining on the assigned location beyond
November 30 may be removed, stored, and /or impounded by the Police Chief or their
designee, in a manner consistent with the removal of abandoned vehicles from public
spaces. Any costs of said removal/storage will be the responsibility of the licensee.
ARTICLE III APPEAL
Section 43-301 Appeal
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or the Town Clerk in the
disapproval of an application as provided in Article II of this Ordinance shall have the right
of appeal to the Town Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Town Council
within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such
person’s legal address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal.
The Town Council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of
such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in Article II of
this Ordinance for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the Town
Council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. Any person aggrieved by the action
of the Licensing Board shall have the right to appeal to Superior Court.
ARTICLE IV ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
Section 43-401
1. This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Town’s Codes
Enforcement Officer.
2. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Codes Enforcement Officer shall have the
right to appeal that decision to the Board of Appeals. An appeal must be filed in
writing with the CEO within ten (10) days after the “date of issuance” inscribed by
the Codes Enforcement Officer on a written notice of decision sent to the alleged
violator.
3. Any person violating this ordinance shall commit a civil violation, punished by:
Amended July 22, 2019
11
a. For the first offense, a civil penalty of $100 per
day per occurrence;
b. For the second violation, revocation of the license by the Licensing Board.
ARTICLE V EFFECTIVE DATE
Section 43-501
Provisions of this Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon passage by the Freeport
Town Council.
Amended March 18, 2014
Amended July 22, 2018-adding procedure for reassigning vacated locations.
Amended April, 1999
1
CHAPTER 44 PINBALL AND VIDEO MACHINE ORDINANCE
Amended April 1999
Section 44-101 License Required for Coin Operated Amusement
Machines
No person, firm, corporation or association shall keep for public patronage, or allow
the operation of any coin operated amusement machine in or on any premises under his,
her or its charge, custody or control without first having obtained an annual license
therefor from the Town Clerk upon the approval of the issuance of said license by the
Municipal Officers and the payment of the applicable license fees herein set forth; which
licenses shall not be transferable and shall expire on July lst of each year. Said licenses
shall be granted only to qualified applicants and premises as meet the strict requirements
of this Ordinance.
Section 44-102 Definitions
1. Coin Operated Amusement Machine - As used in this
Ordinance, a "coin operated amusement machine" shall
include any and all of those mechanical or electronic
machines, or games which upon the insertion of a coin,
slug, token, plate or disc, or upon payment of a fee, may
be operated by the public generally, or the members of a
club or organization, for use as a game, entertainment or
amusement and does not dispense any form of payoff, prize
or reward except free replays; whether or not they
register a score and/or can be placed in operation by a
remote control.
2. Qualified Applicants - The phrase "qualified applicant"
shall mean a person, firm, corporation or association of
good moral character. Proof of good moral character shall
include general testimony of the applicant's reputation in
the community and the results of a records check by the
Police Department. Such results shall be considered
relevant only if they disclose a felony conviction within
the last ten (10) years.
3. Qualified Premises - The phrase "qualified premises"
shall mean the business location where the coin operated
amusement machines are to be licensed which must comply in
Amended April, 1999
2
every respect with the local zoning ordinance, and also
with the State and local Building, Plumbing, Health and
Fire Safety Codes, rules and regulations, and the proposed
use of the premises shall not adversely effect the proper
use or property values of the other property in the area
and does not create any traffic hazards in the area.
Section 44-103 License Application and Information Required
1. Every applicant for such a license or the renewal of same
shall complete and file an application on a form
prescribed by the Town Clerk which shall state the number
of amusement machines to be licensed and pay an
Application Fee of $25.00 with said application, and upon
the receipt of the license as approved and granted by the
Municipal Officers, the applicant shall pay an Annual
License Fee of $100.00 for each amusement machine that is
so licensed.
2. As part of said application, the applicant shall file an
affidavit which will identify all the owners, officers,
partners, or managers of the applicant's place of business
with the places of residence at the time of the
application and for the immediately preceding five (5)
years, and a statement as to the nature, date, and
location of any criminal convictions excluding motor
vehicle violations, as to those persons, within the
preceding five (5) years. Also, each of those named
persons, if so requested by the Chief of Police shall file
a signed release authorized by Title 16, Section 620(6),
"Criminal History Record Information Act" of the Maine
Revised Statutes. The submission of any false information
in any application for a license or the failure of any of
said persons named therein to deliver said signed release,
if so requested by the Chief of Police for obtaining
applicable criminal record information, shall be grounds
for the denial of the application or revocation of any
license previously granted.
Section 44-104 Investigation of Application
1. Upon receipt of each application with the filing fee, the
Town Clerk shall forward copies of same to the Codes
Amended April, 1999
3
Enforcement Officer, the Fire Chief and the Police Chief
for their investigation and they shall prepare a written
report as to whether the applicant and the proposed
licensed premises are qualified for the issuance of said
license as per the provisions of Sections 44-102-1 and 2
of this Ordinance and the other applicable provisions of
the Town's Code or Ordinance, State and Federal Laws. The
said report shall be filed with the Town Clerk who shall
forward copies of same along with a copy of the
application and affidavit to the Municipal Officers.
2. The Municipal Officers by a majority vote may authorize
the issuance of said license, provided that the applicant and
the proposed licensed premises are found qualified for the
issuance of the license under the provisions of this Ordinance.
Any vote for the denial of said license must set forth the reasons
for same.
Section 44-105 General Conditions
1. No license shall be issued if the applicant or any owner,
officer, manager or partner of the applicant shall have
been convicted of a crime, excluding motor vehicle
violations, in this State or any other state within five
(5) years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
2. No such license shall be issued for any premises if the
main entrance of said premises is located within
two-hundred fifty (250) feet of any school, church or
residential property, unless the applicant can show to the
satisfaction of the Municipal Officers that the issuance
of said license will have no detrimental or adverse
effects on the general welfare of the area or normal use
of the property in the area.
3. No person under twenty (20) years of age shall be
permitted to use or operate such licensed amusement
machine on any premises where beer, wine, liquor is
served. No person under fourteen (14) years of age shall
be permitted to use or operate such licensed amusement
machine on other premises without parental consent. No
school age children shall be allowed to play such machines
during regular school hours. It shall be the
responsibility of the licensee and persons in charge of
Amended April, 1999
4
the management of the licensed premises to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this section and the
failure to do so shall be grounds for the revocation of
said license.
4. Any such license shall not be transferable among owners or
to different locations and shall be conspicuously posted
on the licensed premises showing the number of duly
licensed machines.
Section 44-106 Suspension or Revocation of Licenses
Any license granted under the provisions of this Ordinance may
be suspended or revoked by the Municipal Offcers for either a
violation of, or failure to comply with, any of the provisions
of this Ordinance. The determination as to the severity of the
violation and whether a license suspension or revocation is
warranted shall be made by the Municipal Officers, after due
notice to the licensee and a Public Hearing relative thereto.















GENERAL
ASSISTANCE
ORDINANCE
Prepared by Maine Municipal Association
August 2006
GENERAL ASSISTANCE ORDINANCE
The Municipality of __________________________ enacts the following General
Assistance Ordinance. This Ordinance is filed with the Department of Health & Human
Services (DHHS) in compliance with Title 22 M.R.S.A. §4305(4).
Signed the _______ day of ________________, _________, by the municipal officers:
(day) (month) (year)
__________________________ ___________________________
(Print Name) (Signature)
__________________________ ___________________________
(Print Name) (Signature)
__________________________ ___________________________
(Print Name) (Signature)
__________________________ ___________________________
(Print Name) (Signature)
__________________________ ___________________________
(Print Name) (Signature)
_________________________ ___________________________
(Print Name) (Signature)
i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
GENERAL ASSISTANCE ORDINANCE
Article I – Statement of Policy ........................................................................................... 1
Article II – Definitions ........................................................................................................ 3
Section 2.1 – Common Meaning of Words .................................................................... 3
Section 2.2 – Special Definitions ................................................................................... 3
Applicant .................................................................................................................. 3
Application Form ...................................................................................................... 3
Basic Necessities .................................................................................................... 3
Case Record ............................................................................................................ 4
Categorical Assistance ............................................................................................ 4
Claimant .................................................................................................................. 4
Deficit ...................................................................................................................... 4
Disabled Person ...................................................................................................... 4
Dwelling Unit ............................................................................................................ 4
Eligible Person ......................................................................................................... 5
Emergency .............................................................................................................. 5
General Assistance Program ................................................................................... 5
General Assistance Administrator ........................................................................... 5
Household ............................................................................................................... 5
Income ..................................................................................................................... 6
Initial Applicants ....................................................................................................... 7
Just Cause............................................................................................................... 7
Lump Sum Payment ................................................................................................ 7
Material Fact ............................................................................................................ 8
Maximum Levels of Assistance ............................................................................... 8
Misconduct .............................................................................................................. 8
ii
Municipality .............................................................................................................. 8
Municipality of Responsibility ................................................................................... 8
Need ........................................................................................................................ 8
Net General Assistance Costs ................................................................................. 9
Period of Eligibility ................................................................................................... 9
Pooling of Income .................................................................................................... 9
Real Estate .............................................................................................................. 9
Recipient ................................................................................................................. 9
Repeat Applicants ................................................................................................... 9
Resident .................................................................................................................. 9
Resources ............................................................................................................. 10
30-Day Need ......................................................................................................... 11
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants .............................................................................. 11
Unmet Need .......................................................................................................... 11
Work Requirements ............................................................................................... 11
Article III – Administrative Rules and Regulations ........................................................... 12
Section 3.1 – Confidentiality of Information ................................................................. 12
Release of Information .......................................................................................... 12
Information from Other Sources; Penalty .............................................................. 12
Misuse of Information ............................................................................................ 13
Section 3.2 – Maintenance of Records ....................................................................... 13
Case Records ........................................................................................................ 13
Retention of Records ............................................................................................. 14
Article IV – Application Procedure .................................................................................. 15
Section 4.1 – Right to Apply ........................................................................................ 15
Who May Apply ..................................................................................................... 15
Application Via Telephone ..................................................................................... 15
Written Application Upon Each Request ................................................................ 15
iii
Applications Accepted; Posted Notice ................................................................... 16
Section 4.2 – Application Interview ............................................................................. 16
Section 4.3 – Contents of the Application ................................................................... 16
Section 4.4 – General Assistance Administrator’s Responsibilities at the Time
of the Application ..................................................................................................... 17
Application Requirements ...................................................................................... 17
Eligibility Requirements ......................................................................................... 18
Applicant Rights ..................................................................................................... 18
Reimbursement/Recovery ..................................................................................... 18
Section 4.5 – Responsibilities of the Applicant at the Time of Application .................. 19
Section 4.6 – Action on Applications ........................................................................... 20
Written Decision ....................................................................................................... 20
Content ..................................................................................................................... 20
Section 4.7 – Withdrawal of an Application ................................................................. 21
Section 4.8 – Temporary Refusal to Accept Application ............................................. 21
Section 4.9 – Emergencies ......................................................................................... 22
Disqualification ......................................................................................................... 22
Assistance Prior to Verification ................................................................................. 23
Telephone Applications ............................................................................................ 23
Limitation on Emergency Assistance ....................................................................... 23
Section 4.10 – Residence .......................................................................................... 25
Moving/Relocating ................................................................................................... 25
Institutions ............................................................................................................... 25
Temporary Housing ................................................................................................. 26
Disputes ................................................................................................................... 26
Article V – Eligibility Factors ............................................................................................ 27
Section 5.1 – Initial Application ................................................................................... 27
Initial Application ...................................................................................................... 27
Subsequent Applicants............................................................................................. 27
iv
Section 5.2 – Eligibility for Categorical Assistance ...................................................... 28
Section 5.3 – Personal Property.................................................................................. 28
a) Liquid Assets ........................................................................................................ 28
b) Tangible Assets ................................................................................................... 29
c) Automobile Ownership ......................................................................................... 29
d) Insurance ............................................................................................................. 30
e) Transfer of Property ............................................................................................. 30
Section 5.4 – Ownership of Real Estate ...................................................................... 30
a) Principal Residence ............................................................................................. 30
b) Other Property ..................................................................................................... 32
Section 5.5 – Work Requirement ................................................................................ 32
Employment; Rehabilitation ...................................................................................... 32
Verification ............................................................................................................... 33
Ineligibility ................................................................................................................. 33
Ineligibility Due to Job Quit or Discharge for Misconduct ......................................... 34
Just Cause ............................................................................................................... 34
Applicant’s Burden of Establishing Just Cause ........................................................ 35
Eligibility Regained ................................................................................................... 35
Dependents .............................................................................................................. 35
Exemptions .............................................................................................................. 36
Section 5.6 – Municipal Work Program ....................................................................... 36
Consent .................................................................................................................... 37
Subtracting Value of Workfare Performed from Client’s GA Debt ............................ 37
Limitations ................................................................................................................ 37
“Workfare First” Policy ............................................................................................. 39
Work-Related Expenses ........................................................................................... 41
Disqualification ......................................................................................................... 41
Eligibility Regained ................................................................................................... 41
Reports ..................................................................................................................... 42
v
Section 5.7 – Use of Resources .................................................................................. 43
Minors ...................................................................................................................... 43
Mental or Physical Disability ..................................................................................... 44
Written Notice; Disqualification ................................................................................. 44
Forfeiture of Benefits ................................................................................................ 45
Section 5.8 – Period of Ineligibility .............................................................................. 45
Work Requirement ................................................................................................... 45
Fraud ........................................................................................................................ 46
Article VI – Determination of Eligibility ............................................................................ 47
Section 6.1 – Recognition of Dignity and Rights ......................................................... 47
Section 6.2 – Determination; Redetermination ............................................................ 47
Section 6.3 – Verification ............................................................................................ 48
Eligibility of applicant; duration of eligibility ............................................................... 48
Applicant’s responsibilities ....................................................................................... 48
Initial Applicants ....................................................................................................... 48
Repeat Applicants .................................................................................................... 49
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants ................................................................................. 49
Overseer’s responsibilities ....................................................................................... 49
Redetermination of eligibility .................................................................................... 50
Penalty for Refusing to Release Information ............................................................ 51
Section 6.4 – Fraud ..................................................................................................... 51
Period of Ineligibility ................................................................................................. 51
Right to a Fair Hearing ............................................................................................. 52
Reimbursement ........................................................................................................ 52
Dependents .............................................................................................................. 52
Section 6.5 – Period of Eligibility ................................................................................. 53
Section 6.6 – Determination of Need .......................................................................... 53
Income for Basic Necessities ................................................................................... 54
Use-of-Income Requirements .................................................................................. 55
vi
Calculation of Income and Expenses ....................................................................... 56
Consolidation of Deficit ............................................................................................. 57
Section 6.7 – Income .................................................................................................. 57
Income Standards .................................................................................................... 57
Calculation of Income ............................................................................................... 58
Types of Income ....................................................................................................... 58
a) Earned income................................................................................................ 58
b) Income from Other Assistance or Social Services Programs ......................... 59
c) Court-Ordered Support Payments .................................................................. 60
d) Income from Other Sources ............................................................................ 60
e) Earnings of a Son or Daughter ....................................................................... 60
f) Income from Household Members ................................................................... 60
g) The Pooling or Non-Pooling of Income ........................................................... 61
h) Lump Sum Income .......................................................................................... 61
Section 6.8 – Basic Necessities; Maximum Levels of Assistance ............................... 63
Overall Maximum Levels of Assistance .................................................................... 63
Maximum Levels of Assistance for Specific Basic Necessities ................................ 63
A) Food .............................................................................................................. 64
B) Housing ......................................................................................................... 65
Rental Payments to Relatives ....................................................................... 65
Rental Payments to Non-Relatives ................................................................ 66
Mortgage Payments ...................................................................................... 66
Liens .............................................................................................................. 68
Property Taxes .............................................................................................. 69
Housing Maximums ....................................................................................... 70
C) Utilities .......................................................................................................... 71
Electricity Maximums for Households Without Electric Hot Water ................. 71
Electricity Maximums for Households that Use Electrically Heated
Hot Water ................................................................................................. 72
Non-Electric Utilities ...................................................................................... 72
vii
D) Fuel ............................................................................................................... 72
E) Personal Care and Household Supplies ........................................................ 72
F) Other Basic Necessities ................................................................................ 73
1) Clothing ..................................................................................................... 73
2) Medical ...................................................................................................... 73
3) Hospital Bills .............................................................................................. 74
4) Dental ........................................................................................................ 75
5) Eye Care ................................................................................................... 75
6) Telephone Charge ..................................................................................... 76
7) Work-Related Expenses ............................................................................ 76
8) Travel Expenses ........................................................................................ 76
9) Burials, Cremations ................................................................................... 76
10) Capital Improvements ............................................................................... 77
Section 6.9 – Burials; Cremations ............................................................................... 77
Funeral Director Must Give Timely Notice ............................................................. 77
Application for Assistance Shall be Calculated on Behalf of the Deceased ........... 78
The Financial Responsibility of Certain Family Members ...................................... 78
Consideration of the Financial Responsibility of Family Members ......................... 79
Proration of Familial Responsibility ........................................................................ 79
Ten Days to Determine Eligibility ........................................................................... 80
The Municipal Obligation to Pay When Legally Liable Relatives or Others
Can Contribute ................................................................................................ 80
Burial Expenses ..................................................................................................... 80
Cremation Expenses ............................................................................................. 81
Section 6.10 – Notice of Decision ............................................................................... 81
Written Decision .................................................................................................... 81
Contents ................................................................................................................ 81
Disbursement of General Assistance .................................................................... 82
viii
Article VII – The Fair Hearing ......................................................................................... 83
Section 7.1 – Right to a Fair Hearing .......................................................................... 83
Section 7.2 – Method of Obtaining a Fair Hearing ...................................................... 83
Written Request ..................................................................................................... 83
Scheduling the Fair Hearing .................................................................................. 84
Section 7.3 – The Fair Hearing Authority .................................................................... 84
Section 7.4 – Fair Hearing Procedure ......................................................................... 85
Claimant’s Failure to Appear ................................................................................. 86
Section 7.5 – The Fair Hearing Decision ..................................................................... 87
Article VIII – Recovery of Expenses ............................................................................... 89
Recipients ................................................................................................................... 89
Recipients Anticipating Workers’ Compensation Benefits ........................................... 89
Recipients of SSI ........................................................................................................ 90
Relatives ..................................................................................................................... 90
Article IX – Severability ................................................................................................... 91
Appendixes
Appendix A – GA Overall Maximums
Appendix B – Food Maximums
Appendix C – GA Housing Maximums
Appendix D – Electric Utility Maximums
Appendix E – Heating Fuel
Appendix F – Household & Personal Items
Appendix G –2005-2006 Mileage Rate
Appendix H – Funeral Maximums
Appendix I – Definition of Misconduct (26 MRSA § 1043(23))
1
ARTICLE I
Statement of Policy
The Municipality of _______________________ administers a program of general
assistance (GA) available to all persons who are eligible to receive assistance in
accordance with the standards of eligibility as provided within this ordinance,
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) GA policy and in 22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4301 et seq.
Every effort will be made to recognize the dignity of the applicant while encouraging
self-reliance. The program will strive to help eligible persons achieve self-maintenance
by promoting the work incentive. When possible, it will seek to alleviate needs other
than financial through rehabilitative, preventive and protective services. The general
assistance program will place no unreasonable restrictions on the personal rights of the
applicant or recipient, nor will there be any unlawful discrimination based on sex, age,
race, nationality, religion, sexual orientation or disability. The municipality is committed
to including qualified individuals with disabilities, in municipal services, programs, and
activities. As a result, the municipality will promote a GA program that when viewed in
its entirety, is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. GA
applicants with physical or mental disabilities that require a reasonable accommodation
in order to access and/or utilize the municipal GA program are encouraged to provide
the municipality with advance notice regarding the accommodation request.
The general assistance administrator will act promptly on all applications for assistance
and requests for fair hearings. GA applicants will be provided information regarding
their rights and responsibilities under the GA program. Within 24 hours of receiving an
application, the administrator will provide the applicant a written decision, whether or not
assistance is granted, that will state the specific reasons for the decision. The
administrator will also provide the applicant written notice that the applicant may appeal
to the municipal fair hearing authority if dissatisfied with the decision. When an
2
applicant is determined to be eligible, assistance appropriate to the need will be
furnished within 24 hours after the completed application is submitted except when the
administrator issues non-emergency assistance conditionally on the successful
completion of a workfare assignment (see section 5.6 of this ordinance).
The administrator will maintain complete and accurate records pertaining to each
applicant and recipient. These records are confidential as a matter of law (see 22
MRSA §4306).
The administrator will post notice stating the day(s) and hours the administrator will be
available. The administrator, or other designated person/entity, will be available to take
applications in the event of an emergency at all other times. A copy of this ordinance
and Maine General Assistance law will be readily available to any member of the public
upon request. Notice to this effect will be posted.
3
ARTICLE II
Definitions
Section 2.1—Common Meaning of Words
Unless otherwise apparent or defined, all words in this ordinance will have their
common meaning.
Section 2.2—Special Definitions
Applicant. A person who has submitted, either directly or through an authorized
representative, an application for general assistance or who has, in an emergency,
requested assistance without first completing an application. In addition, all persons on
whose behalf an authorized application has been submitted or on whose behalf benefits
have been granted shall be considered applicants.
Application Form. A standardized form used by the general assistance administrator for
the purpose of allowing a person to apply for general assistance and confirming the fact
that a person has made application. The application form must be signed by the
applicant to be considered complete.
Basic Necessities. Food, clothing, shelter, fuel, electricity, non-elective essential
medical services as prescribed by a physician, nonprescription drugs, basic telephone
service where it is necessary for medical reasons, property taxes when a tax lien placed
on the property threatens the loss of the applicant’s place of residence, and any other
commodity or service determined essential by the municipality.
“Basic necessities” do not include:
? Phone bills
? Cable or satellite dish
television
? Mail orders
? Vehicle payments
? Credit card debt
? Furniture
? Loan re-payments
4
? Cigarettes
? Alcohol
? Pet care costs
? Vacation costs
? Legal fees
? Late fees
? Key deposits
? Security deposits for rental
property(except for those
situations where no other
permanent lodging is
available unless a security
deposit is paid, and a waiver,
deferral or installment
arrangement cannot be made
between the landlord and
tenant to satisfy the need for
the immediate payment of the
security deposit or payment in
full) (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(1)).
Case Record. An official file containing application forms; correspondence; narrative
records and all other communications pertaining to an applicant or recipient; written
decisions regarding eligibility including reasons for those decisions as well as the types
and amounts of assistance provided; and all records concerning an applicant’s request
for fair hearing and those fair hearing decisions.
Categorical Assistance. All state and federal income maintenance programs.
Claimant. A person who has requested a fair hearing.
Deficit. An applicant’s deficit is the appropriate overall maximum level of assistance for
the household as provided in section 6.8 of this ordinance less the household income as
calculated pursuant to section 6.7 of this ordinance, provided such a calculation yields a
positive number. If the household income is greater than the appropriate overall
maximum level of assistance, the household has no deficit.
Disabled Person. A person who is presently unable to work or maintain a home due to
a physical or mental disability that is verified by a physician or qualified mental health
provider.
Dwelling Unit. A building or part thereof used for separate living quarters for one or
more persons living as a single housekeeping unit (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(2)).
5
Eligible Person. A person who is qualified to receive general assistance from the
municipality according to the standards of eligibility set forth in this ordinance (22
M.R.S.A. § 4301(3)).
Emergency. Any life threatening situation or a situation beyond the control of the
individual which, if not alleviated immediately, could reasonably be expected to pose a
threat to the health or safety of a person At the municipality’s option, a situation which is
imminent and which may result in undue hardship or unnecessary cost to the individual
or municipality if not resolved immediately. (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(4), 4308(2), 4310).
General Assistance Program. A service administered by a municipality for the
immediate aid of persons who are unable to provide the basic necessities essential to
maintain themselves or their families. A general assistance program provides a specific
amount and type of aid for defined needs during a limited period of time and is not
intended to be a continuing “grant-in-aid” or “categorical” welfare program. This
definition shall not in any way lessen the responsibility of each municipality to provide
general assistance to a person each time that the person is in need and is found to be
otherwise eligible to receive general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(5)).
General Assistance Administrator. A municipal official designated to receive
applications, make decisions concerning an applicant’s right to receive assistance, and
prepare records and communications concerning assistance. He or she may be an
elected overseer or an authorized agent such as a town manager, welfare director, or
caseworker (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(12)).
Household. “Household” means an individual or a group of individuals who share a
dwelling unit. When an applicant shares a dwelling unit with one or more individuals,
even when a landlord-tenant relationship may exist between individuals residing in the
dwelling unit, eligible applicants may receive assistance for no more than their pro rata
share of the actual costs of the shared basic needs of that household according to the
maximum levels of assistance established in the municipal ordinance. The income of
6
household members not legally liable shall be considered as available to the applicant
only when there is a pooling of income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(6)).
Income. “Income” means any form of income in cash or in kind received by the
household including:
? Net remuneration for services
performed
? Cash received on either
secured or unsecured credit
? Payments received as an
annuity, retirement or
disability benefits
? Veterans’ pensions and/or
benefits
? Retirement accounts or
benefits
? Workers’ compensation
? Unemployment benefits
? Federal and/or state tax
returns
? Benefits under any state or
federal categorical assistance
program such as, TANF,
Supplemental Security
Income, Social Security and
any other payments from
governmental sources (unless
specifically prohibited by any
law or regulation)
? Court ordered support
payments, e.g., child support
? Income from pension or trust
funds
? Household income from any
other source, including
relatives or unrelated
household members
? Student loans
? Rental income
The following items shall not be considered as income or assets that must be liquidated
for the purposes of deriving income:
1) Real or personal income-producing property, tools of trade, governmental
entitlement specifically treated as exempt assets by state or federal law;
2) Actual work-related expenses, whether itemized or by standard deduction, such
as taxes, retirement fund contributions, union dues, transportation costs to and
from work, special equipment costs and child care expenses; or
7
3) Earned income of children below the age of 18 years who are full-time students
and who are not working full time.
In determining need, the period of time used as a basis for the calculation shall
be a 30-day period commencing on the date of the application. This prospective
calculation shall not disqualify an applicant who has exhausted income to
purchase basic necessities, provided that the income does not exceed the
income standards established by the municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)).
4) Certain public benefit programs are specifically exempt from being counted as
income for purposes of GA. These programs include:
? Food Stamps (7 USCS § 2017(b))
? Li-Heap (42 USCS § 8624)
? Family Development Accounts (22 M.R.S. § 3762)
? Americorp VISTA program benefits (42 USCS § 5044 (f))
? Property tax rebates issued under the Maine Residents Property Tax
Program (AKA “Circuitbreaker” Program) (36 M.R.S.A. § 6216)
? Aspire Support Service Payments (10-144 CMR Chapter 323)
Initial Applicants. A person who has not applied for assistance in this or any other
municipality are considered initial applicants.
Just Cause. A valid, verifiable reason that hinders an individual from complying with
one or more conditions of eligibility or from attending a scheduled fair hearing (22
M.R.S.A. § § 4301(8), 4316-A(5)).
Lump Sum Payment. A one-time or typically nonrecurring sum of money issued to an
applicant or recipient. Lump sum payment includes, but is not limited to, retroactive or
settlement portions of social security benefits, workers' compensation payments,
unemployment benefits, disability income, veterans' benefits, severance pay benefits, or
money received from inheritances, lottery winnings, personal injury awards, property
8
damage claims or divorce settlements. A lump sum payment includes only the amount
of money available to the applicant after payment of required deductions has been
made from the gross lump sum payment. A lump sum payment does not include
conversion of a nonliquid resource to a liquid resource if the liquid resource has been
used or is intended to be used to replace the converted resource or for other necessary
expenses. (22 MRSA § 4301 (8-A)).
Material Fact. A material fact is a fact that necessarily has some bearing on the
determination of an applicant’s general assistance eligibility, and which would, if
disclosed to the administrator, have some determinable effect on the calculation of
eligibility or the issuance of a grant of assistance.
Maximum Levels of Assistance. The amount of financial assistance for a commodity or
service as established in section 6.8 of this ordinance or the actual cost of any such
basic necessity, whichever is less.
Misconduct. For purposes of the GA work requirement (see 22 MRSA §4316-A)
misconduct shall have the same meaning as misconduct defined in 26 MRSA §1043
(23). (See Appendix I of this ordinance for the official definition of misconduct.)
Generally, employees are guilty of misconduct when the employee violates his or her
duties or obligations to the employer. Employees who engage in a pattern of
irresponsible behavior to the detriment of the employer’s interest may also be found
guilty of misconduct.
Municipality. Any city, town or plantation administering a general assistance program.
Municipality of Responsibility. The municipality which is financially liable for the support
of an eligible person at the time of application (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(9), 4307).
Need. The condition whereby a person’s income, money, property, credit, assets or
other resources available to provide basic necessities for the individual and the
9
individual’s family are less than the maximum levels of assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § §
4301(10), 4308).
Net General Assistance Costs. Those direct costs incurred by a municipality in
providing assistance to eligible persons according to standards established by the
municipal officers. These do not include the administrative expenses of the general
assistance program (22 M.R.S.A.§§ 4301(11), 4311).
Period of Eligibility. The time for which a person has been granted assistance. The
period of eligibility may vary depending on the type of assistance provided, however, in
no event shall this period extend beyond one month (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(1)).
Pooling of Income. “Pooling of income” means the financial relationship among
household members who are not legally liable for mutual support in which there occurs
any commingling of funds or sharing of income or expenses. Municipalities may by
ordinance establish as a rebuttable presumption that persons sharing the same dwelling
unit are pooling their income. Applicants who are requesting that the determination of
eligibility be calculated as though one or more household members are not pooling their
income have the burden of rebutting the presumed pooling of income.
Real Estate. Any land, buildings, homes, mobile homes and any other things affixed to
the land (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(13)).
Recipient. A person who has applied for and is currently receiving general assistance.
Repeat Applicants. All applicants for general assistance that are not initial applicants
are repeat applicants. For purposes of this ordinance repeat and subsequent shall have
the same meaning.
Resident. A person who is physically present in a municipality with the intention of
remaining in that municipality in order to maintain or establish a home and who has no
other residence. A person who applies for assistance in a municipality who is not a
resident of that municipality or any other municipality is the responsibility of the
10
municipality where the person first applies. That municipality must take an application
and grant assistance to the applicant if he/she is eligible, until he/she establishes a new
residence in another municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307).
Resources. Resources include any program, service, or other sources of support which
are an alternative to or supplement for general assistance. There are two kinds of
resources: “available” and “potential”. Potential resources are programs, services,
non-liquid assets, or trusts that typically require people to apply in writing and/or wait a
period of time before eligibility is determined or the potential income is released.
Potential resources include but are not limited to any state or federal assistance
program, employment benefits, governmental or private pension program, available
trust funds, support from legally liable relatives, child support payments, and jointly held
resources where the applicant or recipient share may be available to the individual
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4317). Potential resources include the TANF (previously known as
AFDC) program, Food Stamps, fuel assistance (HEAP), subsidized housing, and similar
programs.
Available resources include resources which are immediately available to the applicant
or which can be conveniently secured by the applicant without delay, such as cash on
hand or in bank accounts, assets for which there is an immediate and available market,
or support from relatives which is being made available at the time of application and for
which the applicant does not have to take any unreasonable steps to secure (e.g.,
relocation beyond the immediate region). At the discretion of the GA administrator a
necessary minimum balance required by a financial institution in order to obtain free
checking or in order to maintain the account shall not be considered an available
resource.
The municipal GA administrator reserves the right to inform GA clients of services,
commodities or facilities made available by private organizations or charities. Although
GA applicants/recipients may be informed of the existence of a charitable resource
11
and/or organization, GA eligibility shall not be based or conditioned on the use of a
private charitable resource(s).
30-Day Need. An applicant’s 30-day need is the sum of the household’s prospective
30-day costs, from the date of application, for the various basic necessities. For the
purpose of this calculation, the 30-day cost for any basic need shall be the household’s
actual 30-day cost for the basic necessity or the maximum 30-day cost for the basic
necessity as established by this ordinance, whichever is less.
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants. Are repeat applicants who have not applied for
assistance within the last twelve months and who have been regularly employed or
receiving support from a public benefit or private source and who have unexpectedly
become unemployed through no fault of their own or whose benefits (e.g., through an
available resource) have ceased through no fault of their own.
Unmet Need. An applicant’s unmet need is the household’s 30-day need as
established by section 6.6 of the ordinance less the household income as calculated
pursuant to section 6.7 of this ordinance, provided such a calculation yields a positive
number. If the household income is greater than the household’s 30-day need, the
household does not have an unmet need.
Work Requirements. Work requirements are those obligations the municipal
administrator places on applicants for general assistance as directed and/or authorized
by 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A to the extent such obligations ensure a continuing potential
eligibility for general assistance when complied with, result in ineligibility when violated,
and are not merely optional, discretionary, or advisory. Work requirements include
registering for work, looking for work in good faith, accepting all suitable job offers,
maintaining employment, performing workfare, and participating in training, educational,
or rehabilitation programs that will assist the participant in securing employment.
12
ARTICLE III
Administrative Rules and Regulations
The following are rules and regulations for the administration of general assistance.
Section 3.1—Confidentiality of Information
Case records and all other information relating to an applicant or recipient of general
assistance are confidential and will not be disclosed to the general public, unless the
applicant or recipient states in writing what information is to be released (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4306).
Release of Information. Applicants, recipients and their legal representatives have the
right to review their case records. No record will be released to a third party, however,
unless the administrator receives a consent form signed by the applicant expressly
authorizing the release of his or her records to the specified parties. Whenever the
administrator releases any information, he/she will make a notation in the applicant’s file
stating to whom the record was released and the date. The administrator may charge a
reasonable fee for the reproduction of any records when appropriate.
Information from Other Sources; Penalty. Information furnished to the municipality by
the Department of Health and Human Services or any other agency or institution
pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4314, is confidential. The general assistance administrator
will also comply with laws relating to the confidentiality of vital statistic records such as
those concerning birth, marriage and death. (22 M.R.S.A. § 2706).
Any representative of a financial institution (except national banks) or any employer of a
general assistance applicant who refuses to provide necessary information to the
administrator in order to verify an applicant’s eligibility must state in writing the reason
for the refusal. Any such person who refuses to provide information, without just cause,
may be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $100. Any person,
including the applicant, who knowingly and willfully makes a false representation of a
13
material fact to the administrator is committing a Class E crime (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4314,
4315).
Misuse of Information. Misuse of any information relating to an applicant or recipient is
a punishable offense (22 M.R.S.A. § 42(2)).
Section 3.2—Maintenance of Records
The general assistance administrator will keep complete and accurate general
assistance records (22 M.R.S.A. § 4306). These records are necessary to:
a) provide a valid basis of accounting for municipal expenditures;
b) document and support decisions concerning an applicant or recipient; and
c) ensure the availability of all relevant information in the event of a fair hearing or
judicial review of a decision by the general assistance administrator.
Case Records. The administrator will establish and maintain a separate case record,
either in paper format or digital format for each applicant or recipient. Each case record
will include at least:
? household applications
? budget sheets
? information concerning the
types and amounts of
assistance provided
? narrative statements
describing the nature of the
emergency situation
whenever general assistance
is granted in amounts greater
than the applicant’s
mathematical eligibility (i.e.,
deficit or unmet need,
whichever is less)
? written decisions
? requests for fair hearings and
the fair hearing authority
decisions
? workfare participation records
? repayments to the
municipality
? narrative writings
documenting the need for
general assistance, the
14
results of home visits,
collateral information,
referrals, changes in status
? client authorization(s) for the
release of GA information
and/or reason(s) for the
release of confidential
information
? adjustments in aid, and
suspension or termination of
eligibility
? physician’s documentation
? Supplemental Security
Income (SSI) interim
assistance reimbursement
authorization forms
? vendor forms
Case records will not include information or material that is irrelevant to either the
applicant’s or recipient’s application or the administrator’s decisions.
Retention of Records. General assistance records shall be retained for a minimum of
three full years. The three year period shall coincide with the State’s fiscal year which
begins July 1 and ends on the following June 30. Records may be destroyed after three
years by one of the two preferred methods of destruction for confidential records, i.e.,
supervised shredding, burning or appropriate digital deletion/destruction process. In the
event a client’s records contain SSI reimbursement forms, the client’s records should be
maintained so that the municipality may seek reimbursement.
15
ARTICLE IV
Application Procedure
Section 4.1—Right to Apply
Who May Apply. Anyone may apply for general assistance. The head of the family,
any other responsible household member, or an authorized representative must apply in
person, except in special emergency situations as provided in section 4.9 of this
ordinance or except when the applicant is a resident of an emergency shelter and the
municipality has made an agreement with that emergency shelter to presume shelter
residents to be eligible for general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. §4304(3)). In such cases,
the administrator may require a representative to present a signed statement
documenting that he/she is in fact authorized to apply for general assistance on behalf
of the named applicant. The applicant or representative must complete a written
application and any other required forms so that the administrator can determine
eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4305, 4308). With notice, all members of the household
receiving general assistance may be required to physically present themselves to the
administrator.
Application Via Telephone. When a person has an emergency but is unable to apply in
person due to illness, disability, lack of child care, lack of transportation or other good
cause, and he/she cannot send an authorized representative, the administrator will
accept an application by telephone. The telephone application process will include the
administrator receiving written verification by mail and visiting the applicant’s home with
his or her permission (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
Written Application Upon Each Request. Each request for assistance will be
administered in accordance with these guidelines. The administrator will make an
independent determination of eligibility for general assistance each time a person
applies (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4308, 4309).
16
Applications Accepted; Posted Notice. Application forms will be available during regular
business hours at the municipal office and when the general assistance administrator is
conducting interviews with applicants. Notice will be posted stating when and where
people may apply for assistance and the name of the administrator available to take
emergency applications at all other times. In addition, the posted notice shall include
the fact that the municipality must issue a written decision on all applications within 24
hours, and the DHHS toll-free telephone numbers for reporting alleged violations or
complaints. Completed applications will be accepted and interviews given only during
the regular hours established and posted by the administrator. In an emergency,
however, the administrator or his or her designee will be available to accept applications
for assistance whenever necessary (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
Section 4.2—Application Interview
Except when it is impractical, the general assistance administrator will interview each
applicant personally before making a decision. The interview will be conducted in
private, although the applicant may be accompanied by a legal representative, friend or
family member.
Section 4.3—Contents of the Application
At a minimum, the application will contain the following mandatory information:
a) applicant’s name, address, date of
birth, Social Security number or
appropriate United States Customs
and Immigration Services (USCIS)
documentation, and phone number;
b) names, date(s) of birth, and Social
Security number(s) or appropriate
USCIS documentation of other
household members for whom the
applicant is seeking assistance;
c) total number of individuals living with
the applicant;
d) employment and employability
information;
17
e) all household income, resources,
assets, and property;
f) household expenses;
g) types of assistance being requested;
h) penalty for false representation;
i) applicant’s permission to verify
information;
j) signature of applicant and date.
In the event an initial applicant is unable to provide identification records (e.g., Social
Security card/number) because the record may have been lost, stolen or misplaced, the
initial applicant may be provided a reasonable amount of time, e.g., five working days, in
order to obtain copies of identification records. Provided the initial applicant makes a
good faith effort to obtain the item/record sought, GA required to cure an immediate
and/or emergency need shall not be withheld. In such cases the municipality may elect
to provide only a prorated amount of GA, e.g., five day’s worth, while the applicant
proceeds to obtain the required information.
Section 4.4—General Assistance Administrator’s Responsibilities at the Time of the
Application
The administrator will make every effort to inform all applicants of their rights and
responsibilities as well as the general program requirements associated with applying
for and receiving general assistance, including application requirements, eligibility
guidelines, applicant rights, and applicant reimbursement obligations.
Application Requirements. The administrator will help the applicant fill out the
application form as described in the preceding section. The administrator will inform the
applicant of any other information or documentation that the applicant will have to
provide in order for the administrator to evaluate the applicant’s eligibility for assistance.
The administrator will fully explain the purpose of any release of information form or
reimbursement agreement before seeking to obtain the applicant’s signature or written
authorization.
18
Eligibility Requirements. The administrator will inform, either verbally or in writing, the
applicant of the eligibility requirements of the program, including:
? the income standard of need;
? the applicant’s ongoing use-of-income, work-related, and resource-related
responsibilities, as described in the section immediately below;
? the financial reduction in assistance that is the consequence of spending
household income on non-basic necessities; and
? the disqualification penalties associated with committing fraud, failing to perform
work-related assignments without just cause, or failing to make a good faith
effort to secure potential resources when the requirement to attempt to obtain
those resources has been explained to the applicant in writing.
Applicant Rights. The administrator will inform all applicants of their rights to:
? review the municipal General Assistance ordinance and Maine General
Assistance law;
? apply for assistance;
? receive a written decision concerning eligibility within 24 hours of applying for
assistance;
? confidentiality;
? contact the DHHS;
? challenge the administrator’s decision by requesting a fair hearing.
Reimbursement/Recovery. The administrator will inform the applicant that he/she must
reimburse the municipality for the amount of general assistance he/she has been
granted in the event of a subsequent ability to pay. The municipality may also, as
appropriate, contact the client’s legal representative to inform him or her of the client’s
obligation to repay the municipality under the GA program. In addition to seeking
repayment from a recipient, the municipality also may recover the amount of assistance
granted to a recipient during the previous 12 months from any relative legally liable for
19
the applicant’s support (spouses, parents of persons under the age of 25, see Article
VIII, “Recovery of Expenses”) (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4318, 4319). Whenever applicable, the
administrator will explain the various liens a municipality may place against a recipient’s
real or personal property, such as the mortgage or capital improvement lien, the
Workers’ Compensation lump sum payment lien, or the SSI “interim assistance
agreement” lien, as these liens are described in Article VIII, “Recovery of Expenses”.
Section 4.5—Responsibilities of the Applicant at the Time of Application
The applicant has the responsibility at the time of each application to provide accurate,
complete and current household information and verifiable documentation concerning:
? Income
? Resources
? Assets
? Employment
? Use of income
? Names and addresses of any relatives legally liable for the applicant’s
support
? Any change in this information from a previous application that would
affect household eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. §4309).
In addition, the applicant must accurately report and provide verifiable documentation
that shows the applicant:
a) has remained employed, if previously employed, and not quit work without
just cause or been discharged from employment for misconduct;
b) has been seeking employment, if previously unemployed or employed on a
part-time basis, has accepted any suitable offer of employment, and has
satisfactorily performed all workfare assignments or had just cause not to
perform those assignments;
20
c) has made use of all available and potential resources when directed in
writing to such a program by the administrator, including, but not limited to,
other government benefit programs or the assistance of liable relatives of
sufficient means; and
d) has participated in any training, retraining, educational or rehabilitative
program when appropriate and when directed in writing to such a program
by the administrator, in order to diminish the applicant’s need for general
assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § §4316-A, 4317).
Section 4.6—Action on Applications
Written Decision. The general assistance administrator will give a written decision to
the applicant concerning his or her eligibility within 24 hours after the applicant submits
a written application. Assistance will be furnished to eligible applicants within that period
except when the municipality is permitted by law (and pursuant to section 5.6 of this
ordinance) to issue assistance conditionally on the successful completion of a workfare
assignment (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4305, 4316-A, 4321). A written decision will be given
each time a person applies, whether assistance is granted, denied, reduced or
terminated.
Content. The written decision will contain the following information:
a) the type and amount of aid the applicant is being granted or the applicant’s
ineligibility;
b) the period of eligibility if the applicant is eligible for assistance;
c) the specific reasons for the decision;
d) the applicant’s right to a fair hearing; and
21
e) the applicant’s right to notify the DHHS if he/she believes the municipality has
acted illegally (22 M.R.S.A. § 4321).
Section 4.7—Withdrawal of an Application
An application is considered withdrawn if:
a) the applicant requests in writing that his or her application be withdrawn; or
b) the applicant refuses to complete or sign the application or any other form
needed by the general assistance administrator.
Section 4.8—Temporary Refusal to Accept Application
Under special circumstances, the general assistance administrator may temporarily
refuse to accept applications. Such circumstances may include, but are not limited to,
the following:
a) When the applicant’s conduct is abusive, disruptive, or harassing, or when the
applicant is under the influence of drugs or alcohol. In these situations, the
applicant will be asked to leave, and if the applicant refuses to leave, the police
may be summoned. The applicant will be informed that an application will only
be accepted when his or her conduct is under control.
b) If the administrator believes that an applicant’s behavior presents a threat to the
health or safety of the public or to a municipal employee, or if such behavior is
violent, or if an applicant has engaged in abusive, disruptive or harassing
behavior and has been required to leave on more than one occasion, then the
applicant may be required to designate a third party to apply for assistance on his
or her behalf and the applicant may be prohibited from entering the municipal
building;
22
c) When a third person applies for assistance on behalf of the applicant that person
may be required to provide written verification that he/she has been duly
authorized to act as a representative for the applicant (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308).
Section 4.9—Emergencies
An emergency is considered to be any life threatening situation or a situation beyond
the control of the applicant which if not alleviated immediately could reasonably be
expected to pose a threat to the health or safety of the applicant or a member of the
household (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(4)). Although they may be considered otherwise
ineligible to receive general assistance, persons who apply for assistance to alleviate an
emergency may be granted assistance, except as provided below, if they do not have
sufficient income and resources to meet an actual emergency need and have not had
sufficient income and resources to avert the emergency (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308).
A municipality may provide emergency assistance when the municipality determines
that an emergency is imminent and that failure to provide assistance may result in
undue hardship and unnecessary costs to either the client or the municipality.
Disqualification. A person who is currently disqualified from receiving General
Assistance due to a violation of sections 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8 or 6.4 of this ordinance is
ineligible to receive emergency assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)(A)). However,
dependents of a disqualified person may be eligible for assistance. For the purposes of
this section, “dependents” are defined as: 1) a dependent minor child; 2) an elderly, ill or
disabled person; or 3) a person whose presence is required to provide care for any child
under the age of 6 years or any ill or disabled member of the household (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4309(3)).
In the event one or more members of a household are disqualified and assistance is
requested for the remaining dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be
calculated as though the household is comprised of the dependents only, except that all
household income will be considered available to them.
23
Assistance Prior to Verification. Whenever an applicant informs the administrator that
he/she needs assistance immediately, the administrator will grant, pending verification,
the assistance within 24 hours, provided that:
a) after interviewing the applicant the administrator has determined that the
applicant will probably be eligible for assistance after a verification of information
is completed; and
b) the applicant submits documentation when possible, to verify his or her need.
The administrator may contact at least one other person to confirm the
applicant’s statements about needing emergency assistance. No further
assistance will be authorized until the applicant’s eligibility is confirmed (22
M.R.S.A. § 4310).
Telephone Applications. If a person has an emergency need and cannot apply in
person due to illness, disability, lack of transportation, or other good cause, and if there
is no authorized representative who can apply on behalf of the applicant, the
administrator shall accept an application over the telephone (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
The administrator will not grant any assistance as the result of a telephone application if
the applicant refuses to allow the administrator to verify the information either by visiting
his or her home or by mail and the administrator cannot determine his or her eligibility
through any other means.
Limitation on Emergency Assistance. Applicants are not automatically eligible for
emergency assistance. If applicants had income which could have been used to
prevent all or part of an emergency, but they spent that income on items which are not
basic necessities, they will not be eligible to receive general assistance to replace the
misspent money (22 MRSA § § 4308(2) & 4315-A).
All applicants have the responsibility to provide the administrator with verifiable
documentation demonstrating that the applicant did not have sufficient income to avert
24
the emergency situation. According to the following criteria, the administrator may limit
emergency assistance to cover only the difference between the amount of money
necessary for the household to avoid the emergency and the amount of income
available to the household during the applicable time period.
a) The applicable time period shall be the 30 days preceding the application for
emergency assistance, except in those cases where the emergency was created
by a negative account balance for a commodity or service (such as rent,
mortgage or utility payments), and the negative account balance was created
over a longer period of time. In such cases, the applicable time period shall be
the consecutive length of time the account balance has been in the negative.
b) The administrator shall seek from the applicant all information pertinent to the
applicant’s ability to provide for his or her basic necessities for the applicable
time period, including evidence of all income and resources received over that
period of time.
c) The administrator shall calculate all costs for the household’s basic necessities
during the applicable time period, per month, in accordance with the maximum
levels established by this ordinance for the specific basic necessity or the actual
monthly cost, whichever is less, including all costs associated with averting the
particular emergency situation for which the applicant is seeking assistance.
d) From the total household costs for basic necessities during the applicable time
period, the administrator shall subtract the total income and lump sum payments
available to the household for the applicable time period as well as the total
general assistance actually received during the applicable time period.
e) The administrator may restrict the issuance of emergency assistance to the
difference yielded by the computation in subsection (d), even when such a grant
will not totally alleviate the emergency situation.
25
f) The administrator may waive this limitation on emergency assistance in life
threatening situations or for initial applicants; that is, persons who have never
before applied for general assistance.
g) Nothing in these criteria may be construed as prohibiting a municipality from
electing to alleviate an emergency situation in the most cost-effective manner
available, provided such a determination of eligibility for emergency assistance is
in conformance with general assistance law.
Section 4.10—Residence
The administrator shall provide general assistance to all eligible persons applying for
assistance who are residents of this municipality. A resident is a person who has no
other residence and is physically present in this municipality and who intends to remain
here and establish a household.
The municipality also recognizes its responsibility to provide assistance to eligible
persons who apply here and who are not residents of this municipality or any other
municipality. If a person who is not a resident of any municipality applies in this
municipality first, the administrator will determine his or her eligibility and, if eligible, will
grant assistance until he/she establishes a residence in another municipality (22
M.R.S.A. § 4307).
Moving/Relocating. The municipality will not consider moving or transporting an
applicant or recipient into another municipality unless the person requests assistance to
relocate to another municipality. If the administrator determines the applicant is eligible
and grants financial assistance to help with the requested relocation, this municipality
will be responsible for providing assistance to the applicant for 30 days after he/she
moves provided the recipient remains eligible.
Institutions. If a resident of this municipality enters an institution located in another
municipality (such as a group home, shelter, rehabilitation center, nursing home, or
26
hospital) and requests assistance while at the institution, he/she will be the
responsibility of this municipality for up to 6 months after he/she enters the institution if
the conditions of 22 M.R.S.A. § 4307 and §4313 are met. The municipality thereafter
retains responsibility for an applicant in an institution only if the applicant has
maintained a home in this municipality to which he/she intends to return. The
municipality also recognizes its responsibility for applicants residing in an institution in
this municipality if such an applicant had no residence prior to entering the institution
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4307(4)).
Temporary Housing. Hotels/motels and similar places of temporary lodging are
considered institutions (-above) if the municipality grants financial assistance for, makes
arrangements for, or advises or encourages an applicant to stay in temporary lodging.
Note: Municipalities which illegally deny housing assistance and, as a result of the
denial, the applicant stays in temporary lodging are responsible for the applicant for up
to 6 months and may be subject to other penalties (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307(4)).
Disputes. When the administrator believes that an applicant is a resident of another
municipality but that municipality disputes its responsibility the administrator will notify
the DHHS in Augusta (287-3654 or 1-800-442-6003). If the applicant applies in this
municipality first, the administrator will determine his or her eligibility and, if eligible, will
grant assistance until the DHHS has concluded which municipality is responsible for
providing assistance. If another municipality was responsible, the DHHS will recover
the amount due from the other municipality. (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4307(5), 4307(6)).
27
ARTICLE V
Eligibility Factors
A person will be eligible for general assistance if he/she is in need and has complied
with the eligibility requirements set forth below.
Section 5.1—Initial Application
Initial Application. For initial applicants, except as provided immediately below, need
will be the sole condition of eligibility. The exception to this general rule, as provided by
law, applies to all applicants, including initial applicants, who are disqualified for a
defined period for quitting employment without just cause or for being discharged from
employment for misconduct (22 M.R.S.A. § 1043 (23)) (see section 5.5 of this
ordinance). An initial applicant is a person who has never before applied for general
assistance in any municipality in Maine (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(1)).
“Need” means that the applicant’s income (including prorated income, where
applicable), property, credit, assets or other resources are less than the overall
maximum level of assistance contained in section 6.8 of this ordinance or the
applicant’s 30-day need, whichever is less, and he/she does not have adequate income
or other resources available to provide basic necessities.
Subsequent Applicants. Persons who are not initial applicants are repeat applicants.
Repeat applicants are people who have applied for general assistance at any time in
the past. Repeat applicants are also people on whose behalf a general assistance
application was made at any time in the past, provided that at such a time the applicant
was not a dependent minor in the household. For repeat applicants to be eligible for
general assistance, they must be in need and meet all other eligibility requirements. The
eligibility of repeat applicants may also be adversely affected to the extent they have not
used their income and resources to secure basic necessities.
28
Section 5.2—Eligibility for Categorical Assistance
Receipt of categorical assistance will not disqualify a person from receiving general
assistance if the applicant is otherwise eligible. Benefits received from other assistance
programs will be considered as income when determining need, with the exception of
Food Stamps, which will not be counted as income or resources or otherwise taken into
consideration when determining need (7 U.S.C. § 2017 (b)).
In addition, any fuel assistance (HEAP/ECIP) received by an applicant will not be
considered as income; that is, the administrator will always compute the heating needs
of an applicant who has received HEAP or ECIP as if that applicant paid all costs
associated with his or her fuel needs (42 U.S.C. §8624(f)). The calculation of general
assistance for heating energy needs when an applicant has received HEAP or ECIP
shall be accomplished in accordance with subsection (c) under “Types of Income” at
section 6.7 of this ordinance.
Applicants or recipients must apply for other program benefits within 7 days after being
advised in writing to do so by the general assistance administrator. Persons who,
without just cause, make no good faith effort to obtain a potential resource will be
disqualified from receiving assistance until they make a good faith effort to obtain the
benefit (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Section 5.3—Personal Property
a) Liquid Assets. No person owning assets easily convertible into cash, including
but not limited to, bank deposits, stocks, bonds, certificates of deposit, retirement
accounts, life insurance policies and other marketable security, will be eligible for
general assistance unless and until he or she uses these assets to meet his or
her basic needs, and thereby exhausts them.
At the discretion of the GA administrator, liquid assets do not mean a reasonable
minimum balance necessary for obtaining free checking. Although one checking
29
account per household may be allowed, any monies over the minimum required
to obtain free checking are to be considered available liquid assets.
b) Tangible Assets. No person owning or possessing personal property, such as
but not limited to: a motor vehicle, or a boat, trailer, recreation vehicle or other
assets that are convertible into cash and are non-essential to the maintenance of
the applicant’s household, will be eligible for general assistance. Exceptions may
be made when a person is making an initial application or is an unforeseeable
repeat applicant as defined in Section 2.2 or when reasonable efforts to convert
assets to cash at fair market value are unsuccessful.
Tools of a trade, livestock, farm equipment and other equipment used for the
production of income are exempt from the above category and are not
considered available assets.
c) Automobile Ownership. Ownership of one automobile per household will not
make a person ineligible for assistance if such vehicle is essential for
transportation to employment or for seeking employment, obtaining medical care,
rehabilitation or training facilities, or for any other reason the GA administrator
determines reasonable for the maintenance of the applicant’s household.
Recipients of general assistance who own an automobile with a market value
greater than $8000 may be required, with written, 7-day notice, to make a good
faith effort to trade that automobile for an automobile with a market value of less
than $8000. Any income received by the applicant by virtue of such a trade
down must be used for his or her basic necessities. Failure to liquidate or trade
down the excess value of any automobile asset can result in disqualification (22
M.R.S.A. § 4317).
The municipality will neither pay nor consider as necessary any car payment or
vehicle maintenance cost including insurance for which the applicant is
responsible. However, provided the vehicle value is $8000 or less and the
applicant is utilizing the vehicle for any of the above mentioned “essential”
30
reasons, the municipality in its discretion may choose to not consider reasonable
car payments, reasonable car insurance and reasonable associated costs of
maintenance as “misspent” income. General assistance for travel-related needs
shall be computed in accordance with section 6.8(F)(7), (8) “Work Related/Travel
Expenses.”
d) Insurance. Insurance that is available to an applicant on a non-contributory basis
or that is required as a condition of employment will not be a factor in determining
eligibility for general assistance. Life insurance with a cash surrender value may,
at the discretion of the GA administrator, be considered as a tangible asset.
e) Transfer of Property. Applicants who transfer assets for less than fair market
value to someone else solely for the purpose of establishing eligibility for general
assistance will not be granted general assistance to replace the uncompensated
value of the transferred asset. Assistance will be denied within a 120-day limit up
to the uncompensated value of the asset which was transferred unless the
transfer of asset is fraudulently misrepresented, in which case a 120-day
disqualification will issue. There will be a presumption that the applicant
transferred his or her assets in order to be eligible for general assistance
whenever property is sold for less than the fair market value or when the transfer
occurred within 30 days prior to applying for general assistance unless the
applicant can demonstrate the existence of a good faith transaction.
Section 5.4—Ownership of Real Estate
a) Principal Residence. For purposes of General Assistance solely, the applicant’s
principal residence, including any adjoining land, is considered an exempt
resource, even if temporarily unoccupied because of employment, job training,
education, illness or disaster, provided there is demonstrated an intent to return.
If the applicant owns land in excess of the minimum lot size for the zone or
district in which the home is located, then that land may be considered a potential
resource if:
31
1. The applicant has received General Assistance for the last 120
consecutive days; and
2. The applicant has the legal right to sell the land (e.g., any mortgagee will
release any mortgage, any co-owners agree to the sale, zoning or other
land use laws do not render the sale illegal or impracticable); and
3. The applicant has the financial capability to put the land into a
marketable condition (e.g., the applicant can pay for any necessary
surveys); and
4. The land is not utilized for the maintenance and/or support of the
household; and
5. A knowledgeable source (e.g., a realtor) indicates that the land in
question can be sold at fair market value, for an amount which will aid
the applicant’s financial rehabilitation; and
6. No other circumstances exist which cause any sale to be unduly
burdensome or inequitable.
If the above conditions are met, then the administrator may condition the receipt
of future assistance on the applicant’s good faith efforts to sell, or render
saleable, land which could be used to provide necessary support for the
applicant (e.g., the applicant owns 100 “excess” acres. Sale of 10 of the acres
would provide for the necessary support and therefore not all the land need be
sold at the present time.) Assistance shall not be denied during the time that the
applicant is making a good faith effort to sell or render saleable the land in
question.
Once the applicant ceases to receive assistance the obligations under this
section shall also cease.
32
b) Other Property. If the applicant or dependents own real property other than that
occupied as the principal residence, continued eligibility will depend on the
applicant making a reasonable effort to:
1. Dispose of the property at fair market value in order to convert the
property into cash which can be applied toward meeting present need; or
2. Obtain a loan against such property which may be used to meet present
need. Applicants who transfer their excess property to a third party in
order to become eligible for general assistance will be ineligible.
If an applicant is granted assistance in the form of a mortgage payment or capital
improvement payment, the municipality may claim a lien against the property.
The lien shall not be enforceable until the time of sale of the property or upon the
death of the recipient (see also section 6.8 of this ordinance) (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4320).
Section 5.5—Work Requirement
All general assistance recipients are required to register for work, look for work, work to
the extent of available employment, and otherwise fulfill the work requirements, unless
the applicant is exempt from such requirements as provided below.
Employment; Rehabilitation. All unemployed applicants and members of their
households who are 16 years of age or older and who are not attending a full-time
primary or secondary school intended to lead to a high school diploma will be required
to accept any suitable job offer and/or meet with job counselors, attend employment
workshops and rehabilitative services, except as provided below (see “Exemptions” ).
Applicants must demonstrate to the administrator that they are available for work and
are actively seeking employment.
A “suitable job” means any job, which the applicant is mentally and physically able to
perform. “Available for work” means that applicants must make themselves available for
33
work during normal business hours prevailing in the area, and show that no
circumstance exists which would prevent them from complying with the work
requirement.
Verification. Unemployed applicants or applicants employed on a part-time basis will
be required to provide verifiable documentation of their pursuit of employment at the
time of each application. At a minimum, such documentation shall consist of a list of the
employers contacted, the date and time of the application contact, and the name of the
employer representative contacted. “Pursuit of employment” means actually submitting
a written application or applying for a job in person when reasonable, or submitting a
written application or letter of inquiry to employers.
For the duration of any repeat applicant’s period of unemployment or partial
employment, the administrator will establish the number of employers per week to
whom each non-exempt applicant shall be required to apply in order to fulfill his or her
work search requirements. The number of weekly employer contacts required by the
administrator shall be reasonably related to the number of potential employers in the
region and the number of hours in the week the applicant has available for work search
activities after considering all time the applicant must devote to existing employment
obligations, workfare obligations, and required classroom or on-site participation in job
training, educational, or rehabilitation programs. Fulfillment of these requirements will
not be expected at the time of the initial application, but will be a condition of eligibility
for subsequent assistance.
Ineligibility. After being granted assistance at the time of initial application, applicants
will be considered ineligible for further assistance for 120 days if they, without just
cause:
a) refuse to register for employment with the Maine Job Service;
b) refuse to search diligently for employment when the search is reasonable and
appropriate; recipients who unreasonably seek work at the same places
34
repeatedly will not be considered to be performing a diligent worksearch and will
be disqualified;
c) refuse to accept a suitable job offer;
d) refuse to participate in an assigned training, education or rehabilitation program
that would assist the applicant in securing employment;
e) fail to be available for work; or
f) refuse to participate or participate in a substandard manner in the municipal work
program (see section 5.6).
Ineligibility Due to Job Quit or Discharge for Misconduct. No applicant, whether an
initial or repeat applicant, who has quit his or her full-time or part-time job without just
cause or who has been discharged from employment for misconduct (see Appendix I,
26 M.R.S.A. § 1043 (23) for the definition) will be eligible to receive general assistance
of any kind for a 120-day period from the date of separation from employment (22
M.R.S.A. § § 4301(8), 4316-A (1-A)).
Just Cause. Applicants will be ineligible for assistance for 120 days if they refuse to
comply with the work requirements of this section without just cause. With respect to
any work requirement, just cause will be considered to exist when there is reasonable
and verifiable evidence that:
a) the applicant has a physical or mental illness or disability which prevents him/her
from working;
b) the work assignment pays below minimum wages;
c) the applicant was subject to sexual harassment;
d) the applicant is physically or mentally unable to perform required job tasks, or to
meet piece work standards;
35
e) the applicant has no means of transportation to or from work or a training or
rehabilitation program;
f) the applicant is unable to arrange for necessary child care or care of ill or
disabled family members; or
g) any reason found to be good cause by the Maine Department of Labor, or any
other verifiable reason the administrator considers reasonable and appropriate
will be accepted as just cause. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(5)).
Applicant’s Burden of Establishing Just Cause. If the administrator finds that the
applicant has violated a work-related rule without just cause, it shall be the responsibility
of the applicant to establish the presence of just cause (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A).
Eligibility Regained. Persons who are disqualified for 120 days because they violated a
work requirement may regain their eligibility if and only when they become employed or
otherwise satisfy the administrator that they are complying with the work requirement by
fulfilling the work requirement or requirements they violated.
For the purpose of regaining eligibility by becoming employed, “employment” shall mean
employment by an employer as defined in 26 M.R.S.A. § § 1043 et seq., or the
performance of a service for an employer who withholds from the employee a social
security tax pursuant to federal law.
The special provisions regarding the opportunity to regain eligibility after a
disqualification for workfare violations are detailed in section 5.6 of this ordinance, under
“Eligiblity Regained”.
Dependents. Failure of an otherwise eligible person to comply with the work
requirements shall not affect the eligibility of any member of the person’s household
who is not capable of working, including:
a) a dependent minor child;
b) an elderly, ill, or disabled person; and
36
c) a person whose presence is required in order to provide care for any child
under 6 years of age or for any ill or disabled member of the household
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)).
In the event one (or more) member(s) of a household is disqualified and
assistance is requested for those remaining members of the household who are
dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be calculated as though the
household is composed of the dependents only, except that all household
income will be considered as available to them.
Exemptions. The above work requirements do not apply to any person who is elderly,
physically or mentally ill or disabled. Any person whose presence is required to care for
any pre-school age child or for any ill or disabled member of the household is also
exempt from these requirements.
The requirements of this section will not be imposed so as to interfere with an
applicant’s existing employment, ability to pursue a bona fide job offer, ability to attend
an interview for possible employment, classroom participation in a primary or secondary
educational program intended to lead to a high school diploma, classroom or on site
participation in a training program which is either approved by the Department of Labor
or determined by the Department of Labor to be expected to assist the applicant in
securing employment, or classroom participation in a degree-granting program operated
under the control of the Department of Labor.
Section 5.6—Municipal Work Program
Each applicant and any member of the household who is capable of working may be
required to perform work for the municipality, including work for a non-profit
organization, as a condition of receiving assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)).
As part of the municipal work program, the municipality can require recipients to
participate in training, education, or rehabilitative programs that will assist the recipient
37
in securing employment. The work requirement provisions found in section 5.5
regarding just cause, dependents, and exemptions also apply to the municipal workfare
program.
Consent. Persons assigned to the work program are required to sign a form stating that
they understand the requirements of general assistance and the work program. Prior to
signing the form, the administrator will read it to the applicants or the applicants will read
it themselves. The form will also state the number of hours the applicants must work
and the hourly rate by means of which the duration of the work assignment is
calculated. In addition, the consent form shall describe the consequences of failing to
adequately perform part or all of the workfare or workfare-first assignment.
Subtracting Value of Workfare Performed from Client’s GA Debt. Pursuant to 22 MRSA
§ 4318 individuals owing the municipality funds for general assistance provided to them
are obligated to repay the municipality when and if they become able (see Article VIII).
However, persons performing workfare shall have the value of the workfare performed
deducted from any and all GA debt including GA liens (e.g., Workers’ Compensation
Settlement, SSI Retroactive Payment, Capital Improvement, Home Mortgage) that
might exist against their settlements, payments or other such property.
Limitations. The work requirement is subject to the following limitations (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4316-A(3)).
1) No person shall, as a condition of eligibility, be required to do any amount of work
that exceeds the value of the net general assistance that the person receives
under municipal general assistance standards. Any person performing work
under this subsection shall be provided with net general assistance, the value of
which is calculated at a rate of at least the prevailing minimum wage under state
or federal law at the time the workfare was performed.
2) No workfare participant shall be required to work for a nonprofit organization if
that work would violate the participant’s basic religious beliefs.
38
3) In no case shall eligible persons performing work under this subsection replace
regular municipal employees.
4) In no case will work performed under this subsection interfere with an eligible
person’s:
a) existing employment;
b) ability to follow up on a bona fide job offer;
c) attendance at an interview for possible employment;
d) classroom participation in a primary or secondary educational program
intended to lead to a high school diploma; or
e) classroom or on site participation in a training program which is approved by
the Department of Labor or determined by the Department of Labor to be
reasonably expected to assist the person in securing employment, or
classroom participation in a degree-granting program administered by the
DHHS or the Department of Labor.
5) In no case may an eligible person be required to work more than 40 hours per
week. An eligible person who has full or part-time employment shall be exempt
from the work requirement to the extent that the work requirement in combination
with his or her regular employment would result in the person working more than
40 hours per week.
6) In no case will an eligible person be required to perform work beyond his or her
capabilities. However, when an illness or disability is claimed, an eligible person
may be required as a condition of receiving assistance to present a doctor’s
statement detailing the extent of the disability or illness (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309).
If the administrator requires a doctor’s statement to verify an applicant’s illness or
disability and the applicant is not currently under the care of a provider, the
municipality may pay for the doctor’s evaluation if the applicant has no means to
pay for the exam. However in such a case the administrator will choose the
doctor. If there is a no-cost or low-cost health care option, the municipality may
elect to refer the client to such a resource. The administrator will not require
39
verification of medical conditions which are apparent or which are of such short
duration that a reasonable person would not ordinarily seek medical attention (22
M.R.S.A. § 4316(5)).
7) In no case may an eligible person with an immediate need (i.e., a person in an
emergency situation who has not been disqualified from receiving assistance for
committing a program violation) be required to perform work under this
subsection prior to receiving general assistance. The administrator shall meet
immediate needs upon receiving written assurance from the eligible person that
he/she is willing to work to maintain eligibility for general assistance. When the
recipient has no immediate need, workfare participation may be required prior to
receiving general assistance in accordance with the following “workfare first”
policy.
“Workfare First” Policy. Under the authority of 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)(D), the
administrator may, in accordance with the following guidelines, require a recipient of
general assistance to perform a workfare assignment prior to the actual issuance of the
general assistance benefit conditionally granted.
1) In no circumstance will emergency general assistance for which an applicant is
eligible be withheld pending the satisfactory performance of workfare.
2) All workfare participants under this policy will be provided a written decision, as
otherwise required by law, within 24 hours of submitting an application for
general assistance and prior to performing any workfare for the municipality
associated with that request for assistance. That written decision must include:
a) a specific description of the amount of general assistance being
conditionally granted to the household, and for which basic needs;
b) the period of eligibility for which the general assistance grant is being
issued (in days or weeks, but not to exceed 30 days);
40
c) the rate, at a dollar-per-hour basis (but not less than the prevailing
minimum wage), upon which the duration of the workfare assignment
is calculated;
d) the actual duration of the workfare assignment that must be performed,
in hours, before the general assistance grant will be actually issued;
e) the specifics of the workfare assignment(s), including the general
nature of the type of work being assigned, location(s) of work-site,
date(s) and time(s) of assigned workfare, workfare supervisors’ names
and contact telephone numbers; and
f) any other pertinent information related to the workfare assignment(s)
the recipient will be expected to perform.
3) As previously provided in this section, all workfare participants under this policy
must sign a consent form that informs the participant of his or her workfarerelated
rights and responsibilities, including the consequences of failing to
perform all or part of the workfare assigned without just cause.
4) If a portion of the workfare-first assignment is satisfactorily performed but there
has been a failure to perform the remainder of the assignment, without just
cause, the administrator shall issue a grant of general assistance in the amount
of the number of workfare hours satisfactorily performed times the hourly rate
used to calculate the duration of the workfare assignment. In addition to any
disqualification penalty that may apply, the remaining value of the conditionally
issued general assistance grant shall be terminated, and notice of the partial
termination, and the reasons therefore, will be issued to the workfare participant
in accordance with section 6.10 of this ordinance.
5) Any amount of the workfare assignment that is not performed because the
workfare participant was temporarily unable to perform the assignment for just
41
cause reasons shall be reassigned or excused at the discretion of the GA
administrator.
Work-Related Expenses. A participant’s expenses related to work performed under this
section will be added to the amount of net general assistance to be provided to the
person (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316.2(E)). The municipality will provide any special clothes or
equipment the recipient needs to perform his or her work assignment.
Disqualification. Any person who either willfully fails to perform or willfully performs
below average standards the work assigned by the municipality, will be ineligible for
assistance for 120 days (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(1)). As soon as the administrator
knows that a recipient failed to fulfill the work assignment, the administrator will notify
the recipient in writing that he/she is disqualified for 120 days starting from the last date
of authorized assistance unless the recipient can show just cause. The burden of
demonstrating a just cause failure to perform a workfare assignment falls on the
workfare participant.
Eligibility Regained. Recipients who are disqualified from receiving assistance because
they have violated the requirements of the municipal work program may regain their
eligibility under the following conditions.
Recipients who fail to complete the first municipal work assignment they have been
given will be disqualified from receiving assistance during the next 120 days, although
dependents in the household may be eligible (see section. 5.5, “Dependents”) .
If during the 120-day disqualification period the recipient requests an opportunity to
perform the work assignment which he or she, without just cause failed to perform, the
disqualified recipient will be given one opportunity to regain eligibility. The administrator
will give the recipient a work assignment as soon as possible.
42
If under such a set of circumstances the recipient has an emergency need and the
administrator is unable to schedule a work assignment in time to alleviate the
emergency, the administrator will provide sufficient assistance to the recipient to avert
the emergency. However, the provision of such emergency assistance will not bar the
administrator from subsequently enforcing the previously issued 120-day disqualification
if the recipient fails to regain eligibility by satisfactorily performing the work assignment.
The amount of emergency assistance granted will be considered in the computation of
the total number of hours the recipient must work.
Recipients who have asked for the opportunity to regain their eligibility during a 120 day
disqualification period and who agreed to fulfill the assignment which they previously
failed to perform and who, without just cause, fail to fulfill their municipal work
assignment will be considered to have acted in bad faith. In such a circumstance, the
administrator will enforce the 120-day disqualification for the term of its initial duration.
If a workfare participant regains eligibility under this section but is subsequently
disqualified within the initial 120-day period of ineligibility for failing to comply with the
municipal work program, that participant will be ineligible for a new 120-day period
beginning with the new disqualification date, but will be provided no opportunity to
requalify.
Any recipient who intentionally causes damage to property, harasses or harms other
employees or who otherwise conducts themselves in a disruptive manner and is
discharged by the work supervisor will not be entitled to regain eligibility by returning to
the work program. Eligibility may be regained by otherwise becoming employed and
meeting the definition of need.
Reports. The administrator will itemize the assistance that has been provided to
persons who work for the municipality in reports to the DHHS (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-
A(2)).
43
Section 5.7—Use of Resources
Each applicant has the responsibility to make a good faith effort to utilize every available
or potential resource that may reduce his or her need for general assistance (see
section 2.2 for definition of “Resources”). People who refuse or fail to make a good faith
effort to secure a potential resource after receiving written notice to do so are
disqualified from receiving assistance until they make an effort to secure the resource.
Applicants are required to prove that they have made a good faith effort to secure the
resource (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Minors. A minor under the age of 18 who has never married and is applying
independently for general assistance and who is pregnant or has a dependent child or
children will be eligible to receive general assistance only if the minor is residing in the
home of his or her parent, legal guardian or other adult relative, in which case the entire
household will be evaluated for eligibility. Exceptions to this limitation on eligibility will
be made when:
1) the minor is residing in a foster home, maternity home, or other adult-supervised
supportive living arrangement; or
2) the minor has no living parent or the whereabouts of the both parents are
unknown; or
3) no parent will permit the minor to live in the parent’s home; or
4) the minor has lived apart from both parents for at least one year before the birth
of any dependent child; or
5) the DHHS determines that the physical or emotional health or safety of the minor
or the minor’s dependent child or children would be jeopardized if the minor and
his or her child or children lived with a parent; or
6) the DHHS determines, in accordance with its regulation, that there is good cause
to waive this limitation on eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(4)).
44
Any person under the age of 25 who is applying independently from his or her parents
for general assistance will be informed that until he or she reaches the age of 25, the
applicant’s parents are still legally liable for his or her support and the municipality has
the right to seek recovery from the parents of the cost of all assistance granted to such
a recipient to the extent his or her parents are financially capable of repaying the
municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319).
With regard to such application, the municipality may seek verification of the applicant’s
need for general assistance by contacting his or her parents. If the applicant’s parents
declare a willingness to provide the applicant with his or her basic needs directly, and
there is no convincing evidence that the applicant would be jeopardized by relying on
his or her parents for basic needs, the administrator may find the applicant not to be in
need of general assistance for the reason that his or her needs can be provided by a
legally liable relative.
Mental or Physical Disability. Any applicant who has a mental or physical disability
must make a good faith effort to utilize any medical or rehabilitative services which have
been recommended by a physician, psychologist or other professional retraining or
rehabilitation specialist when the services are available to the applicant and would not
constitute a financial burden or create a physical risk to the individual.
Written Notice; Disqualification. The administrator will give each applicant written notice
whenever the applicant is required to utilize any specific potential resource(s). Any
applicant who refuses to utilize potential resources, without just cause, after receiving
written 7-day notice will be ineligible for further assistance until he/she has made a good
faith effort to utilize or obtain the resources. General assistance will not be withheld
from the applicant pending receipt of a resource if the applicant has made, or is in the
process of making, a good faith effort to obtain the resource.
45
Forfeiture of Benefits. Any applicant who forfeits receipt of or causes a reduction in
benefits from another public assistance program due to fraud, misrepresentation, a
knowing or intentional violation of program rules or a refusal to comply with that
program’s rules without just cause will be ineligible to receive general assistance to
replace the forfeited benefits. To the extent the forfeited benefits can be considered
income under general assistance law, the worth of the forfeited benefits will be
considered income that is available to the applicant for the duration of the forfeiture.
To the extent the forfeited benefits were provided not in the form of income but, rather,
in the form of a specific, regularly issued resource of a calculable value, that resource,
up to its forfeited value, need not be replaced with general assistance for a period of
120 days from the date of the forfeiture—unless the municipality is prohibited by federal
or state law from considering the forfeited resource as available with respect to local
public assistance programs (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Section 5.8—Period of Ineligibility
No one will have his or her assistance terminated, reduced, or suspended prior to being
given written notice and an opportunity for a fair hearing (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4321-4322).
Each person will be notified in writing of the reasons for his or her ineligibility, and any
person disqualified for not complying with the ordinance will be informed in writing of the
period of ineligibility.
Work Requirement. Applicants/recipients who do not comply with a work requirement
are disqualified from receiving assistance for a period of 120 days (unless they regain
their eligibility) (see sections 5.5, 5.6). If an applicant/recipient is provided assistance
and does not comply with the work requirement, the applicant/recipient shall be
disqualified for 120 days following the end of the period covered by the grant of
assistance. The administrator shall give recipients written notice that they are
disqualified as soon as the administrator has sufficient knowledge and information to
render a decision of ineligibility.
46
Fraud. People who commit fraud are disqualified from receiving assistance for a period
of 120 days (see section 6.4, “Fraud”). The administrator shall give recipients written
notice that they are ineligible as soon as the administrator has sufficient knowledge and
information to render a decision. If the disqualification for fraud is issued before the
expiration of a grant of assistance, the period of ineligibility shall commence on the day
following the end of the period covered by the grant of assistance. If fraud is discovered
after the period covered by the grant of assistance has expired, the period of ineligibility
will commence on the day of the written notice of ineligibility.
47
ARTICLE VI
Determination of Eligibility
Section 6.1—Recognition of Dignity and Rights
Any determination or investigation into an applicant’s eligibility will be conducted in a
manner that will not violate the applicant’s privacy or personal dignity or violate his or
her individual rights.
Section 6.2—Determination; Redetermination
The administrator will make an individual, factual determination of eligibility each time a
person applies or reapplies for general assistance. The administrator will make a
redetermination of eligibility at least monthly but may do so as often as necessary to
administer the program efficiently and meet the needs of the applicants. Upon any
application, the administrator will determine the applicant’s eligibility on the basis of a
30-day prospective analysis, but may elect to disburse that applicant’s assistance
periodically, e.g., weekly, throughout a 30-day period of eligibility pursuant to that initial
eligibility determination.
The administrator may redetermine a person’s eligibility at any time during the period he
or she is receiving assistance if the administrator is notified of any change in the
recipient’s circumstances that may alter the amount of assistance the recipient may
receive. Once a recipient has been granted assistance, the administrator may not
reduce or rescind the grant without giving prior written notice to the recipient explaining
the reasons for the decision and offering the recipient an opportunity to appeal the
decision to the fair hearing authority (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309).
48
Section 6.3—Verification
Eligibility of applicant; duration of eligibility. The overseer shall determine eligibility each
time a person applies or reapplies for general assistance. The period of eligibility will
not exceed one month. At the expiration of this period applicants/recipients may
reapply for assistance and the person's eligibility will be redetermined.
Applicant's responsibilities. Applicants and recipients for general assistance are
responsible for providing to the overseer all information necessary to determine
eligibility. If further information or documentation is necessary to demonstrate eligibility,
the applicant must have the first opportunity to provide the specific information or
documentation required by the overseer. When information required by the overseer is
unavailable, the overseer must accept alternative available information, which is subject
to verification.
Each applicant and recipient has the responsibility at the time of application and
continuing thereafter to provide complete, accurate and current information and
documentation concerning his/her:
? Need
? Income
? Employment
? Use of income
? Expenses
? Assets & liabilities
? Use of available resources
? Household composition
Initial Applicants. A person who has not applied for assistance in this or any other
municipality are considered initial applicants and must have their eligibility determined
solely on the basis of need. Initial applicants are not subject to eligibility conditions
placed on repeat applicants (see below). However, such applicants are still responsible
for providing the GA administrator with reasonably obtainable documentation adequate
49
to verify that there is a need for assistance. In addition, initial applicants must also
comply with both lump sum and relevant work rules (i.e. job quit).
Repeat Applicants. All applicants for general assistance that are not initial applicants
are repeat applicants. The eligibility of repeat applicants must be determined on the
basis of need and all other conditions of eligibility established by law and this municipal
ordinance.
The administrator will require documentation of a repeat applicant’s income, use of
income, assets and resources plus actual bills and receipts for rent, utilities, fuel,
telephone, medical services and other basic necessities. In addition, repeat applicants
instructed to seek employment shall verify their work search results, e.g., provide a list
of the employers contacted, the date and time of the application contact, and the name
of the employer representative contacted, as required by the GA administrator.
Repeat applicants are also responsible for providing any changes of information
reported on previous applications including changes in his/her household or income that
may affect his/her eligibility.
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants. Unforeseen repeat applicants are applicants who have
not applied for assistance within the last twelve months and who have been regularly
employed or receiving support from a public benefit or private source who have
unexpectedly become unemployed through no fault of their own or whose income
and/or benefits (e.g., through an available resource) have ceased through no fault of
their own. Such unforeseen repeat applicants may be considered initial applicants for
purposes of verification requirements and misspent income if the administrator finds that
imposing the general verification requirements and misspent income rules imposed on
repeat applicants would be unreasonable or inappropriate.
Overseer's responsibilities. In order to determine an applicant's eligibility for general
assistance, the overseer first must seek information and documentation from the
applicant. Once the applicant has presented the necessary information, the overseer is
50
responsible for determining eligibility. The overseer will seek verification necessary to
determine eligibility. In order to determine eligibility, the overseer may contact sources
other than the applicant for verification only with the specific knowledge and consent of
the applicant, except that the overseer may examine public records without the
applicant's knowledge and consent.
Appropriate sources, which the overseers may contact, include, but are not limited to:
? DHHS and any other
department/agency of the
state or non-profit
organizations
? financial institutions
? creditors
? utility companies
? employers
? landlords
? physicians
? persons with whom the
applicant/recipient is a
cohabitant
? legally and non-legally liable
relatives
Assistance will be denied or terminated if the applicant is unwilling to supply the
overseer with necessary information, documentation, or permission to make collateral
contacts, or if the overseer cannot determine that eligibility exists based on information
supplied by the applicant or others.
Redetermination of eligibility. The overseer may redetermine a person's eligibility at any
time during the period that person is receiving assistance if the overseer is informed of
any change in the recipient's circumstances that may affect the amount of assistance to
which the recipient is entitled or that may make the recipient ineligible, provided that
once a determination of eligibility has been made for a specific time period, a reduction
in assistance for that time period may not be made without prior written notice to the
recipient with the reasons for the action and an opportunity for the recipient to receive a
fair hearing upon the proposed change.
51
Penalty for Refusing to Release Information. Any person governed by 22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4314 who refuses to provide necessary information to the administrator after it has
been requested must state in writing the reasons for the refusal within 3 days of
receiving the request. Any such person who refuses to provide the information, without
just cause, commits a civil violation and may be subject to a fine of not less than $25
nor more than $100 which may be adjudged in any court of competent jurisdiction. Any
person who willfully renders false information to the administrator is guilty of a Class E
crime (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4314(5), 4314(6), 4315).
Section 6.4—Fraud
It is unlawful for a person to make knowingly and willfully a false representation of a
material fact to the administrator in order to receive general assistance or cause
someone else to receive general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315). False
representation shall consist of any individual knowingly and willfully:
a) making a false statement to the general assistance administrator, either
orally or in writing, in order to obtain assistance to which the applicant or
the applicant’s household is not entitled;
b) concealing information from the general assistance administrator in order
to obtain assistance to which the applicant or applicant’s household is not
entitled; or
c) using general assistance benefits for a purpose other than that for which
they were intended.
No person may be denied assistance solely for making a false representation prior to
being given an opportunity for a fair hearing.
Period of Ineligibility. When the general assistance administrator finds that a person
has knowingly and willfully misrepresented material facts for the purpose of making
52
himself or herself eligible for general assistance, the administrator shall notify that
applicant in writing that he or she has been disqualified from receiving assistance for
120 days. For the purpose of this section, a material misrepresentation is a false
statement about eligibility factor in the absence of which some or all of the assistance
would not be or would not have been granted.
The notification of ineligibility issued by the administrator shall inform the applicant of his
or her right to appeal the administrator’s decision to the fair hearing authority (FHA)
within 5 working days of receipt. The period of ineligibility shall commence on the day
following the end of the period covered by the grant of assistance fraudulently received
or upon the date of notification of ineligibility, whichever is later.
Right to a Fair Hearing. Any applicant who is denied assistance for making a false
representation will be afforded the opportunity to appeal the decision to the fair hearing
authority (FHA) in accordance with Article VII of this ordinance. No recipient shall have
his or her assistance reduced or revoked during the period of eligibility before being
notified and given the opportunity to appeal the decision. Any person who is dissatisfied
with the decision of the FHA may appeal that decision to the Superior Court pursuant to
Rule 80-B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)).
Reimbursement. If a recipient does not appeal the decision or if the fair hearing
authority determines that a recipient did make a false representation, the recipient will
be required to reimburse the municipality for any assistance received to which he/she
was not entitled.
Dependents. In no event will the ineligibility of a person under this section serve to
disqualify any eligible dependent in that household (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)). In the
event one or more members of a household are disqualified and assistance is
requested for the remaining dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be
53
calculated as though the household is comprised of the dependents only, except that
the entire household income will be considered available to them.
Section 6.5—Period of Eligibility
The administrator will grant assistance to all eligible persons for a period that is
sufficient to meet their need but in no event may a grant of assistance cover a period in
excess of one month (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309). Upon receiving a completed and signed
application the administrator will determine the applicant’s eligibility on the basis of a
30-day prospective analysis.
When an applicant submits an incomplete or unsigned application, due to the 24-hour
decision requirement placed on the GA administrator, the GA administrator shall render
a notice of “ineligibility” and advise the applicant that he or she has a right to reapply as
soon as he or she has the necessary information and/or as soon as is practicable for
the applicant.
Although eligibility is determined on a 30-day basis, for reasons of administrative
efficiency the administrator may elect to disburse an applicant’s assistance for shorter
periods of time, such as weekly, throughout the 30-day period of eligibility. When the
administrator elects to disburse general assistance for a period of time less than 30
days, subsequent grants of assistance during that 30-day period may be issued
pursuant to the initial determination of need unless the applicant’s financial situation
changes substantially enough to warrant a redetermination of eligibility.
Section 6.6—Determination of Need
The period of time used to calculate need will be the next 30-day period from the date of
application (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)). The administrator will calculate applicants’
expenses according to the actual expense of the basic necessity or the maximum levels
for the specific necessities allowed in section 6.8, whichever is less. The sum of these
54
expenses, as calculated for a prospective 30-day period, is the applicant’s 30-day need.
Applicants will not be considered eligible if their income and other resources exceed
this calculation except in an emergency (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)) (see section 4.9 of this
ordinance).
Applicants will also not be considered in need of general assistance if their income,
property, credit, assets or other resources available to provide basic necessities for their
household are greater than the applicable overall maximum level of assistance set forth
in the beginning of section 6.8 (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(10), 4305(3-B)). The difference
between the applicant’s income and the overall maximum levels of assistance
established by this ordinance is the applicant’s deficit.
Once an applicant’s deficit has been determined, the specific maximum levels of
assistance for each basic necessity (see Appendixes A-H of this ordinance) shall be
used by the administrator to guide the distribution of assistance for which the applicant
is eligible. The specific maximum levels of assistance for each basic necessity are
intended to be reasonable and sufficient to help recipients maintain a standard of health
and decency (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(3-A)).
Income for Basic Necessities. Applicants are required to use their income for basic
necessities. Except for initial applicants, no applicant is eligible to receive assistance to
replace income that was spent within the 30-day period prior to an application for
assistance on goods and services that are not basic necessities. All income spent on
goods and services that are not basic necessities will be considered available to the
applicant and combined with the applicant’s prospective 30-day income for the
purposes of computing eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315-A). Applicants who have
sufficient income to provide their basic necessities but who use that income to purchase
goods or services which are not basic necessities will not be considered eligible for
assistance. Persons who exhaust their income on basic necessities and who still need
55
assistance with other basic necessities will be eligible, provided that their income does
not exceed the overall maximum level of assistance.
Use-of-Income Requirements. The administrator may require that anyone applying for
general assistance provide documentation of his or her use of income. This
documentation can take the form of cancelled checks and/or receipts which
demonstrate that the applicant has exhausted all household income received over the
last 30-day period. Except as is deemed appropriate by the GA administrator for
“unforeseen” repeat applicants (See Section 6.3 of this ordinance), repeat applicants
may be required to verify that expenditure of income was for basic necessities. Income
expended that cannot be verified will generally be considered available and in such
case will be added to the 30-day prospective income.
Allowable expenditures include reasonable shelter costs (rent/mortgage); the cost of
heating fuel, electricity, and food up to the ordinance maximums; telephone costs at the
base rate if the household needs a telephone for medical reasons, the cost of
nonelective medical services as recommended by a physician which are not otherwise
covered by medical entitlement, Hospital Free Care or insurance; the reasonable cost of
essential clothing and non-prescription drugs, and the costs of any other commodity or
service determined essential by the administrator.
Items not considered to be basic necessities and thus will not be allowed in the budget
computation include:
? Internet services
? Cable or satellite television
? Cellular phones
? Cigarettes/alcohol
? Gifts purchased
? Pet care costs
? Costs of trips or vacations
? Paid court fines
? Repayments of unsecured
loans
? Legal fees
? Late fees
? Credit card debt.
56
The municipality reserves the right to apply specific use-of-income requirements to any
applicant, other than an initial applicant, who fails to use his or her income for basic
necessities or fails to reasonably document his or her use of income (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4315-A). Those additional requirements will be applied in the following manner:
1) The administrator may require the applicant to use some or all of his or her
income, at the time it becomes available, toward specific basic necessities. The
administrator may prioritize such required expenditures so that most or all of the
applicant’s income is applied to housing (i.e., rent/mortgage), energy (i.e.,
heating fuel, electricity), or other specified basic necessities;
2) The administrator will notify applicants in writing of the specific use-of-income
requirements placed on them;
3) If upon subsequent application it cannot be determined how the applicant’s
income was spent, or it is determined that some or all of the applicant’s income
was not spent as directed and was also not spent on basic necessities, the
applicant will not be eligible to receive either regular or emergency general
assistance to replace that income; and
4) If the applicant does not spend his or her income as directed, but can show with
verifiable documentation that all income was spent on basic necessities up to
allowed amounts, the applicant will remain eligible to the extent of the applicant’s
eligibility and need.
Calculation of Income and Expenses. When determining eligibility, the administrator will
subtract the applicant’s net income from the overall maximum level of assistance found
at the beginning of section 6.8. If income is greater than the overall maximum level of
assistance, the applicant will not be eligible except in an emergency (see section 4.9) .
If income is less than the overall maximum level of assistance, the applicant has a
deficit.
57
The municipality will provide assistance in an amount up to the deficit to the extent the
applicant also has an unmet need and is in need of basic necessities. The municipality
will not grant assistance in excess of the maximum amounts allowed in section 6.8 of
this ordinance for specific basic necessities except in an emergency or when the
administrator elects to consolidate the applicant’s deficit, as provided immediately
below.
Consolidation of Deficit. As a general rule and to the extent of their deficit, applicants
will be eligible for assistance for any basic necessity up to, but not exceeding, the
maximum amount allowed for that necessity in this ordinance or the actual 30-day cost
of the necessity, whichever is less. Under certain circumstances, however, and in
accordance with the following conditions, the administrator may consolidate the
applicant’s deficit and apply it toward a basic necessity in an amount greater than the
ordinance maximum for that necessity.
1) The practice of consolidating the deficit and applying it toward a basic necessity
in amounts greater than the ordinance maximum shall be the exception rather
than the rule;
2) The total general assistance grant cannot exceed the total deficit unless the
applicant is in an emergency situation; and
3) The need for the application of the recipient’s consolidated deficit toward a basic
necessity was not created by the recipient misspending his or her income or
resources in violation of the use-of-income requirements of this ordinance.
Section 6.7—Income
Income Standards. Applicants whose income exceeds the overall maximum level of
assistance provided in section 6.8 shall not be eligible for general assistance except in
an emergency. The administrator will conduct an individual factual inquiry into the
applicant’s income and expenses each time an applicant applies.
58
Calculation of Income. To determine whether applicants are in need, the administrator
will calculate the income they will receive during the next 30-day period commencing on
the date of application, and identify any assets or resources that would alleviate their
need. For all applicants other than initial applicants, the administrator will also consider
as available income any income that was not spent during the previous 30-day period
on basic necessities, as well as any income that was spent on basic necessities in
unreasonable excess of the ordinance maximums for specific basic necessities. If a
household’s income exceeds the amount of the household’s need for basic necessities,
up to the maximum levels contained in section 6.8, applicants will not be considered in
need.
Exceptions will be made in emergency situations, which may necessitate that the
maximum levels be exceeded (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308) (see section 4.9 of this ordinance).
To calculate weekly income and expenses, the administrator will use actual income
received or actual anticipated income.
Types of Income. Income that will be considered in determining an applicant’s need
includes:
a) Earned income. Income in cash or in kind earned by the applicant through
wages, salary, commissions, or profit, whether self-employed or as an employee,
is considered earned income. If a person is self-employed, total income will be
computed by subtracting reasonable and actual business expenses from gross
income. When income consists of wages, the amount computed will be the
income available after taxes, social security and other payroll deductions
required by state, federal, and local law. Rental income and profit from produce
that is sold is considered earned income. Income that is held in trust and
unavailable to the applicant or the applicant’s dependents will not be considered
as earned income.
59
Note: Actual work-related expenses such as union dues, transportation to and
from work, special equipment or work clothes, and child care costs will be
deducted from an applicant’s income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)).
b) Income from Other Assistance or Social Services Programs. State/federal
categorical assistance benefits, SSI payments, Social Security payments, VA
benefits, unemployment insurance benefits, and payments from other
government sources will be considered as income, unless expressly prohibited
by federal law or regulation. Federal law prohibits Food Stamps and fuel
assistance payments made by the Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP
and EPIC) from being considered income. The value of the food stamps or fuel
assistance will not be used to reduce the amount of general assistance the
applicant is eligible to receive. Although applicants may have only a limited or
reduced need for general assistance for heating fuel or electricity if a recently
received HEAP/ECIP benefit has sufficiently credited their account or otherwise
prevented the fuel-related costs for the prospective 30-day period.
The administrator’s obligation is to always compute the heating needs of an
applicant who has received HEAP or ECIP as if that applicant paid for his or her
total fuel costs. Accordingly, in such cases, the administrator will budget for the
household’s heating energy needs according to actual usage, up to the
ordinance maximums, but the administrator may, with written notice to the
applicant, hold in reserve the heating energy portion of the applicant’s deficit until
such a time during the period of eligibility that the applicant has a demonstrable
need for the disbursement of heating energy assistance; that is, the applicant’s
fuel tank can accept a minimum fuel delivery or the applicant no longer has a
positive credit balance with his or her utility company. The municipality is not
obligated to divert any recipient’s heating energy allowance toward non-heating
purposes solely on the basis of the recipient’s receipt of HEAP/ECIP.
60
Other programs whose income cannot be counted for purposes of GA eligibility
include:
? Family Development Accounts (22 M.R.S. § 3762)
? Americorp VISTA program benefits (42 USCS § 5044 (f))
? Property tax rebates issued under the Maine Residents Property Tax
Program (so-called “Circuitbreaker” program) (36 M.R.S.A. § 6216)
c) Court-Ordered Support Payments. Alimony and child support payments will be
considered income only if actually received by the applicant. The general
assistance administrator will refer cases where support payments are not actually
received to the State Department of Health and Human Services’ Child Support
Enforcement Unit. In order to be eligible for future GA, applicants being referred
to DHHS for such enforcement services shall be required to follow-through with
such services. Because child support payments are considered a resource,
applicants must make a good faith effort to secure such payments.
d) Income from Other Sources. Payments from pensions and trust funds will be
considered income. Payments from boarders or lodgers will be considered
income as will cash or in-kind contributions provided to the household from any
other source, including relatives (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)).
e) Earnings of a Son or Daughter. Earned income received by sons and daughters
below the age of 18 who are full-time students and who are not working full-time
will not be considered income. The unearned income of a minor in the household
will be considered available to the household.
f) Income from Household Members. Income from household members will be
considered available to the applicant, whether or not the household member is
legally obligated for the support of the applicant, if the household members pool
61
or share their income and expenses as a family or intermingle their funds so as
to provide support to one another.
g) The Pooling or Non-Pooling of Income. When two or more individuals share the
same dwelling unit but not all members of the household are applying for general
assistance, the administrator shall make a finding under a rebuttable
presumption that the entire household is pooling income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(12-
A)).
One or more applicants for assistance can successfully rebut the presumption
that all household income is being pooled by providing the administrator with
verifiable documentation affirmatively demonstrating a pattern of non-pooling for
the duration of the shared living arrangement. Such documentation would
include evidence of the entire household expenses as well as bank statements,
cancelled checks, receipts, landlord statements or other vendor accounts clearly
supporting a claim that the applicant has been and is presently solely and entirely
responsible for his or her pro-rata share of household costs.
If the applicant is unable to successfully rebut the municipality’s presumption that
all household income is being pooled, eligibility of the entire household will be
determined based on total household income. If the applicant successfully
rebuts the municipality’s presumption that all household income is being pooled,
the applicant’s eligibility will be determined on the basis of his or her income and
his or her pro-rata share of actual household expenses.
h) Lump Sum Income. A lump sum payment received by any GA applicant or
recipient prior to the date of application for general assistance will be considered
as income available to the household. However, verified required payments (i.e.,
any third party payment which is required as a condition of receiving the lump
sum payment, or any payments of bills earmarked for the purpose for which the
62
lump sum payment was made) and any amount of the lump sum payment which
the applicant can document was spent on basic necessities, as described below,
will not be considered available income.
Where a household receives a lump sum payment at any time prior to the date of
application for general assistance, the administrator will assess the need for
prorating an applicant’s eligibility for general assistance according to the
following criteria (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7), (8-A)):
1) identify the date the lump sum payment was received;
2) subtract from the lump sum payment all required payments;
3) subtract from the lump sum any amount the applicant can demonstrate was
spent on basic necessities, including all basic necessities as defined by the
general assistance program such as: reasonable payment of funeral or
burial expenses for a family member; any reasonable travel costs related to
the illness or death of a family member; repair or replacement of essentials
lost due to fire, flood or other natural disaster; repair or purchase of a motor
vehicle essential for employment, education, training or other day-to-day
living necessities. Repayments of loans or credit, the proceeds of which
can be verified as having been spent on basic necessities; and payment of
bills earmarked for the purpose for which the lump sum is paid must also be
subtracted. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7), (8-A));
4) add to the remainder all income received by the household between
the date of receipt of the lump sum payment and the date of
application for general assistance; and
5) divide the sum created in subsection (4) by the greater of the verified
actual monthly amounts for all of the household's basic necessities or
150% of the applicable federal poverty guidelines. 22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4305(3-B)
63
This dividend represents the period of proration determined by the
administrator to commence on the date of receipt of the lump sum payment.
The prorated sum for each month must be considered available to the
household for 12 months from the date of application or during the period of
proration, whichever is less.
The household of an initial applicant that is otherwise eligible for emergency
assistance may not be denied emergency assistance to meet an immediate
need solely on the basis of the proration of a lump sum payment. (22 MRSA
§ 4308)
Section 6.8—Basic Necessities; Maximum Levels of Assistance
Overall Maximum Levels of Assistance. Notwithstanding any of the maximum levels of
assistance for specific basic necessities listed in Appendices B-H of this ordinance, an
applicant’s eligibility for general assistance will be first determined by subtracting his or
her income from the overall maximum level of assistance designated in Appendix A for
the applicable household size (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305 (3-B)). The difference yielded by
this calculation shall be the applicant’s deficit.
Applicants will be eligible for general assistance up to the calculated deficit to the extent
the applicant is unable to otherwise provide the basic necessities essential to maintain
themselves or their families. Applicants with no deficit shall be found ineligible for
general assistance unless they are in an emergency, in which case eligibility for
emergency general assistance will be determined according to section 4.9 of this
ordinance.
Maximum Levels of Assistance for Specific Basic Necessities. The municipality will
grant assistance to eligible applicants for basic necessities according to the maximum
levels for specific types of assistance set forth below. The administrator, in consultation
with the applicant, may apply the amount of the applicant’s deficit toward assistance
64
with any one or combination of necessities not to exceed the total deficit. These
maximum levels will be strictly adhered to unless the administrator determines that
there are exceptional circumstances and an emergency is shown to exist, in which case
these absolute levels will be waived in order to meet immediate needs. In all cases
either the actual expenses the applicant incurs for basic necessities or the maximum
amount allowed in each category, whichever is less, will be used in determining need.
In roommate situations, the applicant’s need for common living expenses for rent, fuel,
electricity, etc., will be presumed to be reduced by an amount equal to the other
household members’ proportionate fair share of the common living expenses. No
applicant will be allowed to claim a need for any expense which has been or will be paid
by another person. In addition, as a general rule the municipality will not provide a
benefit toward a basic need by paying a bill that is issued to a person not living with the
applicant’s household or that has otherwise been incurred by a person who has not
been found eligible to receive assistance.
Temporary exceptions to this general rule may be made by the administrator in the
following circumstances: (1) a recent, unplanned separation has occurred in the
household resulting in the sustained or permanent absence of a former household
member in whose name the bill was customarily issued; (2) the applicant and members
of the applicant’s household were or will be the sole recipients of the commodities or
services covered by any bill to be paid or partially paid with general assistance; and (3)
the applicant will make a good faith effort to direct the vendor to issue future bills in the
name of the applicant or other responsible person residing in the household.
A) Food. The administrator will provide food assistance to eligible persons up to the
allowed maximum amounts designated by the U.S.D.A. Thrifty Food Plan for the
appropriate household size.
For this purpose, the municipality hereby incorporates by reference the U.S.D.A.
Thrifty Food Plan, as distributed by the Maine Department of Health and Human
65
Services on or about October of each year. See Appendix B of this ordinance for
the current year’s food maximums.
In determining need for food the administrator will not consider the value of the food
stamps an applicant receives as income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.7(A); 7 U.S.C.
§2017(b)). The municipality will authorize vouchers to be used solely for approved
food products.
The administrator will exceed the maximums when necessary for households having
members with special dietary needs. The administrator may require a doctor’s
statement verifying there is a special dietary need requiring an expenditure for food
that is greater than the ordinance maximums.
B) Housing. The administrator will provide assistance with rent or mortgage payments
that are reasonable and/or within the allowed maximum levels. See Appendix C of
this ordinance for the current year’s housing maximums. It is the applicant’s
responsibility to find suitable housing, although the administrator may help the
applicant find housing when appropriate. The administrator will inform the applicant
of the allowed housing maximums to assist the applicant in his or her search for
housing. The allowed maximum for any applicant will be the categorical housing
maximum representing the minimum dwelling unit space necessary to adequately
shelter the applicant household. Applicants requesting assistance for housing that
contains more bedrooms than are necessary for the number of household members
will be provided assistance according to the maximum level for the number of rooms
actually needed.
Rental Payments to Relatives. The municipality may elect to not issue any rental
payment to an applicant’s relatives unless the rental relationship has existed for at
least three months and the applicant’s relative(s) rely on the rental payment for their
basic needs. For the purpose of this section, a “relative” is defined as the applicant’s
66
parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren, siblings, parent’s siblings, or any of
those relative’s children (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319(2).
Rental Payments to Non-Relatives. When applicants are living in private homes
with the owner or sharing dwelling units with people who are not pooling income or
who are not legally liable relatives, the amount allowed as the applicant’s shelter
expense will be the applicant’s pro rata share of the actual, total shelter cost, up to
the ordinance maximum (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(6)).
Any housing assistance issued to a recipient in such a circumstance will be issued,
whenever reasonably possible, to the landlord or property owner with the most
superior interest in the property; i.e., to a landlord before a tenant, or to a mortgagee
before a mortgagor.
When the municipality issues in aggregate more than $600 in rental payments to any
landlord in any calendar year, a 1099 form declaring the total amount of rental
payments issued during the calendar year will be forwarded to the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) pursuant to IRS regulation (see section 6041(a) of Internal Revenue
Code).
Any landlord wishing to regularly receive rental payments from the municipality on
behalf of applicants renting rooms from the landlord’s own residence must, at a
minimum, make a good faith effort to obtain a lodging license from the Department
of Health and Human Services, Division of Health Engineering, pursuant to 10-144A
Code of Maine Regulations, Chapter 201, as a condition of that landlord receiving
future general assistance payments on behalf of his or her tenants.
Mortgage Payments. In the case of a request for assistance with a mortgage
payment, the general assistance administrator will make an individual factual
determination of whether the applicant has an immediate need for such aid. In
67
making this determination, the administrator will consider the extent and liquidity of
the applicant’s proprietary interest in the housing. Factors to consider in making this
determination include:
(1) the marketability of the shelter’s equity;
(2) the amount of equity;
(3) the availability of the equity interest in the shelter to provide the applicant
an opportunity to secure a short-term loan in order to meet immediate
needs;
(4) the extent to which liquidation may aid the applicant’s financial
rehabilitation;
(5) a comparison between the amount of mortgage obligations and the
anticipated rental charges the applicant would be responsible for if he/she
were to be dislocated to rental housing;
(6) the imminence of the applicant’s dislocation from owned housing because
of his or her inability to meet the mortgage payments;
(7) the likelihood that the provision of housing assistance will prevent such
dislocation; and
(8) the applicant’s age, health, and social situation.
These factors shall be considered when determining whether the equity in the
shelter is an available asset which may be substituted for the assistance the
municipality would otherwise be required to provide.
The administrator shall consider issuing a benefit in response to the applicant’s
request for mortgage assistance to the extent the applicant is otherwise eligible for
general assistance if after reviewing the above criteria the administrator determines
that:
68
(1) the monthly mortgage obligation is in accordance with the maximum levels
of assistance available for housing appropriate to the applicant’s
household size;
(2) there is no capacity in the accumulated equity in the property, when
considered in the context of the applicant’s borrowing capacity with the
mortgagee or the general lending community, to suspend the mortgage
obligation temporarily or reamortize the mortgage in such a way as to
suspend or reduce the mortgage obligation; and
(3) the failure to provide a mortgage payment in a timely manner could
jeopardize the applicant’s continued right of possession of the property.
If a mortgage payment is necessary, the administrator will pay the actual amount
due, up to the amount allowed according to the maximum levels listed below. After
an initial application, assistance with such payments will be given only after the
applicant has made all reasonable efforts to borrow against the equity of his or her
home. If there is not sufficient equity in the home with which to secure a loan, and if
the monthly mortgage payments are not realistically in line with the rental rates for
similar housing in the area that could meet the applicant’s needs, the administrator
will inform the applicant that he/she is responsible for finding alternative housing
within his or her ability to pay and will be obligated to make all reasonable efforts to
secure such housing.
Liens. The municipality may place a lien on the property in order to recover its costs
of granting assistance with mortgage payments In addition, a municipality may claim
a lien against the owner of real estate for the amount of money spent by it to make
capital improvements to the real estate. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4320). No lien may be
enforced against a recipient except upon his or her death or the transfer of the
property. Further, no lien may be enforced against a person who is currently
receiving any form of public assistance, or who would again become eligible for
general assistance if the lien were enforced.
69
If the municipality determines that it is appropriate to place a lien on a person’s
property to recover its costs of providing general assistance for a mortgage payment
or capital improvement it must file a notice of the lien with the county registry of
deeds where the property is located within 30 days of making the mortgage
payment. That filing shall secure the municipality’s or the state’s interest in an
amount equal to the sum of that mortgage or capital improvement payment and all
subsequent mortgage or capital improvement payments made on behalf of the same
eligible person, plus interest and costs.
Not less than 10 days prior to filing the lien in the registry, the municipal officers
must send notice to the owner of the real estate, the general assistance recipient,
and any record holder of the mortgage by certified mail, return receipt requested,
that a lien on the property is going to be filed with the registry. This notice must
clearly inform the recipient of the limitations upon enforcement plus the name, title,
address and telephone number of the person who granted the assistance. The
municipal officers must also give written notice to the recipient each time the amount
secured by the lien is increased because of an additional mortgage payment. This
notice must include the same information that appeared on the original intent-to-file
notice sent to the recipient.
The municipality may charge interest on the amount of money secured by the lien.
The municipal officers will establish the interest rate not to exceed the maximum rate
of interest allowed by the State Treasurer to be charged against delinquent taxes.
The interest will accrue from the date the lien is filed.
Property Taxes. In the event an applicant requests assistance with his or her
property taxes, the administrator will inform the applicant that there are two
procedures on the local level to request that relief: the poverty abatement process
(36 M.S.R.A. § 841(2)) and General Assistance. If the applicant chooses to seek
70
property tax assistance through General Assistance, or if the applicant is denied a
poverty tax abatement, the administrator may consider using general assistance to
meet this need only if:
a) the property tax in question is for the applicant’s place of residence;
b) there is a tax lien on the property which is due to mature within 60 days of the
date of application;
c) as a matter of municipal policy or practice, or on the basis of information
obtained from the applicant’s mortgagee, if any, it is reasonably certain that a
tax lien foreclosure will result in subsequent eviction from the residential
property; and
d) the applicant, with sufficient notice, applies for property tax relief through the
Maine Resident Property Tax Program, when available.
Housing Maximums. The maximum levels of housing assistance contained in this
ordinance have been derived either from a locally accomplished fair market rental
survey or the fair market rental values developed by the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). If the maximum levels of housing are
derived from the HUD values made effective as of every October 1, and adjusted to
disregard the current and averaged utility allowances as developed by the Maine
State Housing Authority, those levels are hereby incorporated by reference. See
Appendix C of this ordinance for the current year’s housing maximums.
If and when the maximum levels of housing contained in this ordinance are derived
from a locally developed fair market rental survey, a record of that survey will be
submitted to the DHHS, General Assistance Unit, and the maximum levels of
housing assistance will be incorporated into this ordinance pursuant to the ordinance
adoption and amendment procedures found at 22 M.R.S.A. § 4305.
71
C) Utilities. Expenses for lights, cooking, and hot water will be budgeted separately if
they are not included in the rent. Applicants are responsible for making
arrangements with the utility company regarding service, including entering into a
special payment arrangement if necessary.
Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis of their most recent bill.
The municipality is not obligated to pay back bills or utility security deposits.
Exceptions may be made in emergency situations pursuant to section 4.9.
Disconnection of utility service will not be considered an emergency in all cases.
The administrator will make an individual, factual analysis to determine if the
termination of utility service constitutes an emergency. The administrator will
consider the household composition, the time of year, the age and health of the
household members, and other appropriate factors in reaching a decision.
Applicants who had sufficient income, money, assets or other resources to pay their
utility bill when it was received, but who spent all or part of their income on items
which were not basic necessities, will not be eligible to receive general assistance to
replace those funds.
Applicants have the burden of providing evidence of their income and use of income
for the applicable time period (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)) (see section 4.9 and 6.3).
The administrator will notify applicants in writing that they must give the
administrator prompt notice if their utility service is to be terminated or if their fuel
supply is low. It is the applicant’s responsibility to attempt to make arrangements
with the utility company to maintain their service and to notify the administrator if
assistance is needed with a utility bill prior to service being terminated.
Electricity Maximums for Households Without Electric Hot Water. See Appendix D of
this ordinance for the current year’s electricity maximums.
72
Electricity Maximums for Households that Use Electrically Heated Hot Water. See
Appendix D of this ordinance for the current year’s electricity maximums.
Non-Electric Utilities. The allowed amount for water and sewer utility service will be
budgeted at a 30-day reasonable usage rate.
D) Fuel. Expenses for home heating will be budgeted according to the actual need for
fuel during the heating season (September through May) provided such expenses
are reasonable, and at other times during the year when the administrator
determines the request for fuel assistance is reasonable and appropriate.
Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis of their most recent bill.
The municipality is not responsible for back bills except in an emergency as provided
in section 4.9. Applicants are responsible for monitoring their fuel supply and
requesting assistance prior to depleting their fuel supply. When applicants who have
been informed of this responsibility run out of fuel nonetheless, and can show no just
cause for failing to give the administrator timely notice of their need for fuel, the
administrator shall find that the emergency was not beyond the applicants’ control,
and process the emergency request accordingly, pursuant to section 4.9 of this
ordinance.
See Appendix E of this ordinance for the current year’s fuel maximums.
E) Personal Care and Household Supplies. Expenses for ordinary personal and
household supplies will be budgeted and allowed according to the applicant’s actual
need for these items, up to the maximums below. Personal and household supplies
include: hand soap, toothpaste, shampoo, shaving cream, deodorant, dish
detergent, laundry supplies and costs, household cleaning supplies, razors, paper
products such as toilet paper, tissues, paper towels, garbage/trash bags light bulbs
73
and supplies for children under 5 years of age. See Appendix F of this ordinance for
the current year’s personal care and household supplies maximums.
F) Other Basic Necessities. Expenses falling under this section will be granted when
they are deemed essential to an applicant’s or recipient’s health and safety by the
general assistance administrator and, in some cases, upon verification by a
physician. Assistance will be granted only when these necessities cannot be
obtained through the utilization of available resources.
1) Clothing. The municipality may assist a household with the purchase of
adequate clothing. Before assistance will be granted for clothing, the general
assistance administrator must be satisfied that the applicant has utilized all
available resources to secure the necessary clothing. In some circumstances,
clothing will be a postponable item. Exceptions to this would be, for example, if
fire, flood or unusually cold weather makes extra clothing an immediate
necessity, special clothing is necessary for the applicant’s employment, or a
household member is without adequate clothing.
2) Medical. The municipality will pay for essential medical expenses, other than
hospital bills (see below), provided that the municipality is notified and approves
the expenses and services prior to their being made or delivered. Medical
expenses include prescriptions, devices, treatments, or services that are
determined to be ‘medically necessary’ by a licensed physician. The
municipality will grant assistance for medical services only when assistance
cannot be obtained from any other source and the applicant would not be able
to receive necessary medical care without the municipality’s assistance. The
applicant is required to utilize any resource, including any federal or state
program, that will diminish his or her need to seek general assistance for
medical expenses. The municipality will grant assistance for non-emergency
medical services only if a physician verifies that the services are essential.
74
Provided there is no cost to the applicant, the administrator may require a
second medical opinion from a physician designated by the municipality to
verify the necessity of the services.
Generally, the municipality will issue general assistance at the established
Medicaid rates for all medical services, prescriptions, or other medical
commodities. Before authorizing general assistance for any medical expenses,
the administrator will inform the pharmacy or medical service provider of the
municipality’s intention to pay for the medical service at the Medicaid rate, and
ask to be billed accordingly.
Ordinary medical supplies/non-prescription drugs will be budgeted at the actual
amount when the applicant can demonstrate a need for such items. Allowable
supplies include bandages, aspirin, cough syrup, and other generic brand, nonprescription
medicines. In addition, the basic monthly rate for telephone
service will be budgeted when a telephone is essential to the health and safety
of the household. In order for telephone service to be considered an allowable
expense the applicant must provide a written statement from a physician
certifying that the telephone is essential.
3) Hospital Bills. In the event of an emergency admission to the hospital, the
hospital must notify the administrator within 5 business days of the admission.
Notification must be by telephone, confirmed by certified mail, or by certified
mail only. If a hospital fails to give timely notice to the administrator, the
municipality will have no obligation to pay the bill.
Any person who cannot pay his or her hospital bill must apply to the hospital for
consideration under the Hospital’s Free Care Program as provided in Title 22
M.R.S.A. § 396-F(1). Anyone who is not eligible for the hospital’s free care
program may apply for general assistance. Applicants must apply for
75
assistance within 30 days of being discharged from the hospital and provide a
notice from the hospital certifying that they re not eligible for the hospital’s free
care program.
Before the administrator will consider whether to allow a hospital bill as a
necessary expense, the applicant must enter into a reasonable payment
arrangement with the hospital. The payment arrangement will be based upon
the Medicaid rate. In determining an applicant’s eligibility, the municipality will
budget the monthly payment to the hospital the applicant has agreed to pay.
The applicant’s need for assistance with a hospital bill will be considered each
time he/she applies by including the amount of the bill in the applicant’s monthly
budget, but the recipient will be responsible for making any necessary
payments to the hospital pursuant to the use-of-income requirements found at
section 6.6 of this ordinance.
4) Dental. The municipality will pay for medically necessary dental services only.
As is the case with medical services generally, the municipality will issue
general assistance for dental services at the established Medicaid rates for
those services, and before authorizing the general assistance benefit for dental
services, the administrator will inform the dentist or dental surgeon of the
municipality’s intention to pay at the Medicaid rate. If full mouth extractions are
necessary, the municipality will pay for dentures provided the applicant has no
other resources to pay for the dentures. The applicant will be referred to a
dental clinic in the area whenever possible. The administrator will expect the
applicant to bear a reasonable part of the cost for dental services, including
extractions and dentures, taking into account the applicant’s ability to pay.
5) Eye Care. In order to be eligible to receive general assistance for eyeglasses,
an applicant must have his or her medical need certified by a person licensed
to practice optometry. The general assistance administrator will provide
76
assistance for eyeglasses to eligible persons only after the applicant has
exhausted all other available resources and generally only at the Medicaid rate.
6) Telephone Charge. A payment for basic telephone will only be allowed if a
telephone is necessary for medical reasons as verified by a physician. At the
discretion of the GA administrator, minimum/basic telephone services may be
allowed for households with children, for households where job search or job
related reasons exist and/or for any other reasons the administrator deems
necessary.
7) Work-Related Expenses. In determining need, reasonable and actual workrelated
expenses will be deducted from earned income. These expenses
include childcare costs, work clothes, supplies and transportation at the actual
costs not to exceed the ordinance maximum (see Appendix G for this year’s
maximum mileage allotment) . The applicant is required to provide
documentation substantiating the costs and that the expenses were necessary.
8) Travel Expenses. In determining need, necessary travel which is not workrelated
will be budgeted if the applicant can satisfy the administrator that the
prospective need for travel is necessary. For applicants in rural areas, weekly
transportation to a supermarket will be considered, as will any medically
necessary travel. See Appendix G for the current rate at which such necessary
travel will be budgeted. This rate shall be construed to subsidize all costs
associated with automobile ownership and operation, including gas/oil, tires,
maintenance, insurance, financing, licensing/registration, excise tax, etc.
9) Burials, Cremations. Under the circumstances and in accordance with the
procedures and limitations described below (see section 6.9), the municipality
recognizes its responsibility to pay for the burial or cremation of eligible
persons. See Appendix H for the current maximums.
77
10) Capital Improvements. The costs associated with capital improvements/repairs
(e.g., heating/water/septic system repair) will generally not be budgeted as a
basic necessity. Exceptions can be made only when the capital
improvement/repair has been pre-approved by the administrator as a
necessary expense and the monthly cost of the capital improvement/repair has
been reduced as far as reasonably possible; for example, by means of the
applicant entering into an installment payment arrangement with the
contractor. The administrator may grant general assistance for capital
improvements when:
1) the failure to do so would place the applicant(s) in emergency
circumstances;
2) there are no other resources available to effect the capital repair; and
3) there is no more cost-effective alternative available to the applicant or
municipality to alleviate an emergency situation.
In some cases, the entire immediate cost of the capital improvement can be
mitigated by the applicant entering into an installment payment arrangement
with a contractor. The municipality reserves the right to place a lien on any
property pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4320 when general assistance has been
used to effect a capital improvement. The lien process shall be accomplished
in the same manner as for mortgage payments, as described in subsection
(B) “Liens”, above.
Section 6.9—Burials; Cremations
Funeral Director Must Give Timely Notice. In order for the municipality to be liable for a
burial or cremation expense, the funeral director must notify the administrator prior to
the burial or cremation or by the end of three business days following the funeral
director’ receipt of the body, whichever is earlier (22 M.R.S.A. §4313(2)). This contact
by the funeral director shall begin the process of developing an application for
78
burial/cremation assistance on behalf of the deceased. It is the funeral director’s
responsibility to make a good-faith effort to determine if the family or any other persons
are going to pay all or part of the burial expenses. If family members or others are
unable to pay the expenses, and the funeral director wants the municipality to pay all or
part of the expenses, the funeral director must make timely contact to the municipal
administrator. In addition, the funeral director may refer legally liable relatives to the
administrator so that a timely determination of financial capacity may be accomplished.
Application for Assistance Shall be Calculated on Behalf of the Deceased. For the
purposes of determining residency, calculating eligibility and issuing general assistance
for burial or cremation purposes, an application for assistance shall be completed by the
administrator on behalf of the deceased.
With regard to residency, the municipality of responsibility for burial expenses shall be
the municipality in which the eligible deceased person was a resident at the time of
death as residency is determined under section 4.10 of this ordinance.
Although legally liable relatives may be asked to provide information regarding their
income, assets, and basic living expenses, that information will not be construed as an
application for general assistance inasmuch as living persons are not eligible for burial
assistance. To clarify this point of law, although legally liable relatives have a financial
responsibility to pay for the burial or cremation of their relatives, that financial
responsibility only exists to the extent the legally liable relatives have a financial
capacity to do so. Therefore, legally liable relatives who are eligible for general
assistance, by virtue of their eligibility, have no legal obligation to pay for the burial or
cremation of their relatives. For these reasons, all general assistance issued for burial
or cremation purposes shall be issued on behalf of, and in the name of, the deceased.
The Financial Responsibility of Certain Family Members. Grandparents, parents,
siblings, children and grandchildren of the deceased, who live in Maine or own property
79
in Maine, are financially responsible for the burial or cremation of the deceased to the
extent those relatives, individually or as a group, have a financial capacity to pay for the
burial or cremation either in lump sum or by means of a budgeted payment arrangement
with the funeral home. Accordingly, at the request of the administrator, all legally liable
relatives must provide the municipal administrator with any reasonably requested
information regarding their income, assets, and basic living expenses.
Consideration of the Financial Responsibility of Family Members. Generally, when the
administrator can make a finding that one or more of the deceased’s legally liable
relatives have an obvious and demonstrable financial capacity to pay for the burial or
cremation, by lump sum payment or by means of a reasonable payment arrangement,
the municipality will not grant the requested burial or cremation assistance. When the
administrator is unable to make such a finding, the following proration of familial
responsibility will be implemented.
Proration of Familial Responsibility. A proration of familial financial responsibility will be
used when no legally liable relative possesses an obvious and demonstrable capacity to
pay for the burial or cremation, but one or more of the financially liable relatives is found
to have a financial capacity to make a partial financial contribution, or the administrator
is unable to determine the financial capacity of one or more of said relatives.
Under these circumstances, each legally liable relative is considered to be responsible
for his or her pro rata share of the total municipal contribution that would exist if no
legally liable relatives had a financial capacity to contribute. Furthermore, and as long
as all other eligibility factors have been satisfied, the municipality will provide as a burial
or cremation benefit the aggregate of all pro rata shares less the share of any legally
liable relative who refuses to cooperate with the administrator by providing information
or documentation reasonably necessary to determine that relative’s financial capacity,
and less any share or part of a share attributable to a legally liable relative who can
80
financially contribute or partially contribute toward the burial or cremation to the extent
of that relative’s share.
Eight Days to Determine Eligibility. The administrator may take up to 8 days from the
date of contact by the funeral director to issue a written decision regarding the amount
of the municipal contribution toward the burial or cremation. The 8-day eligibility
determination period from the date of contact by the funeral director shall be used as
necessary to make third-party collateral contacts, verify the listing of legally liable family
members and determine their respective financial capacities to contribute to the burial
or cremation, contact the personal representative of the deceased’s estate, if any, and
other related administrative tasks. The administrator shall not use this 8-day period
allowed by law to unreasonably delay the municipality’s decision.
The Municipal Obligation to Pay When Legally Liable Relatives or Others Can
Contribute. The figures provided in this section are the maximum benefits provided by
the municipality when no contributions toward the burial or cremation are available from
any other source. To the extent any legally liable relatives of the deceased have a
financial capacity to pay for the burial or cremation, that financial capacity shall be
deducted from the maximum burial costs allowed by this section. In addition, any other
benefits or resources that are available, such as Social Security burial benefits,
veterans’ burial benefits, or contributions from other persons, will be deducted from the
maximum amount the municipality will pay, except there will be no deduction from the
municipal benefit level with respect to any contribution provided for the purpose of
publishing an obituary notice up to an aggregate contribution limit for this purpose of
$75 when a paid receipt demonstrating the purchase of an obituary notice is provided to
the administrator.
Burial Expenses. The administrator will respect the wishes of family members with
regard to whether the deceased is interred by means of burial or cremated. See
Appendix H for the maximum levels of assistance granted for the purpose of burials.
81
Cremation Expenses. In the absence of any objection by any family members of the
deceased, or when neither the administrator nor the funeral director can locate any
family members, the administrator may issue general assistance for cremation
services. See Appendix H for the maximum levels of assistance granted for the
purpose of cremations.
Section 6.10—Notice of Decision
Written Decision. The administrator will give a written decision to each applicant after
making a determination of eligibility each time a person applies. The decision will be
given to the applicant within 24 hours of receiving a completed and signed application
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(3)) (see Article IV, section 4.6) .
When an applicant submits an incomplete or unsigned application, due to the 24-hour
decision requirement placed on the GA administrator, the GA administrator may decide
to render a notice of “ineligibility” and provide the applicant with another application to
submit as soon as is practicable for the applicant.
In order to ensure that applicants understand their rights, it is the responsibility of the
general assistance administrator to explain the applicants’ right to a fair hearing in the
written notice of decision.
Contents. After an application has been completed, applicants will be given written
notice of any decision concerning their eligibility for assistance. In addition to the
contents of a written decision listed in section 4.6 of this ordinance, the notice will state
that applicants:
a) have the right to a fair hearing and the method by which they may obtain a fair
hearing and;
82
b) have the right to contact the DHHS if they believe the municipality has violated
the law. The decision will state the method for notifying the department.
Disbursement of General Assistance. Except when determined impractical by the
administrator, all general assistance will be provided in the form of a voucher or
purchase order payable to a vendor or through direct municipal payment to a provider of
goods or services. General assistance will not be issued in the form of a cash payment
to an applicant unless there is no alternative to making such a cash payment, in which
case the administrator shall document the circumstances for issuing general assistance
in the form of cash (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(6)).
83
ARTICLE VII
The Fair Hearing
Section 7.1—Right to a Fair Hearing
Within 5 working days of receiving a written notice of denial, reduction or termination of
assistance, or within 10 working days after any other act or failure to act, the applicant
or his or her authorized representative has the right to request a fair hearing (22
M.R.S.A. § 4322). The right to review a decision of the general assistance administrator
is a basic right of the applicant to a full evidentiary hearing and is not limited solely to a
review of the decision.
Section 7.2—Method of Obtaining a Fair Hearing
Upon receiving notification of the decision of the general assistance administrator, all
claimants will be informed of the method of obtaining a fair hearing. All complaints that
are not clear requests for a fair hearing will be answered by a personal interview or in
writing by the general assistance administrator. If the client is satisfied with the
adjustment or explanation, the administrator will make an entry in the case record and
file any correspondence involved.
Written Request. To obtain a fair hearing, the claimant, or his or her authorized
representative, must make a written request within 5 working days of receiving the
administrator’s decision to grant, deny, reduce or terminate assistance, or within 10
working days after any other act or failure to act. The administrator will make available
a printed form for requesting a fair hearing and will assist the claimant in completing it if
necessary. On the printed form, the claimant will give the following information:
a) the decision on which review is sought;
b) the reason(s) for the claimant’s dissatisfaction and why the claimant believes
he/she is eligible to receive assistance; and
84
c) the relief sought by the claimant.
The administrator cannot deny or dismiss a request for a hearing unless it has been
withdrawn (in writing) by the claimant.
Scheduling the Fair Hearing. Upon receipt of the completed written request the fair
hearing authority must meet and hold the hearing within 5 working days. The
administrator will notify the claimant in writing when and where the hearing will be held
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). In addition to the date, time and place of the hearing, the notice
of fair hearing sent to the claimant shall include, at a minimum, the claimant’s rights to:
a) be his or her own spokesperson at the fair hearing, or be represented by legal
counsel or other spokesperson at the hearing, at the claimant’s own expense;
b) confront and cross-examine any witnesses presented at the hearing against the
claimant; and
c) present witnesses on his or her own behalf.
Arrangements for the date, time, and place of the hearing will take into consideration the
convenience of the claimant and hearing authority. The claimant will be given timely
notice to allow for preparation and will also be given adequate preliminary information
about the hearing procedure to allow for effective preparation of his or her case.
Section 7.3—The Fair Hearing Authority
The municipal officers will appoint a fair hearing authority (FHA) that will determine,
based on all the evidence presented at the fair hearing, whether the claimant(s) were
eligible to receive assistance at the time they applied for GA. The FHA is charged with
the responsibility of ensuring that general assistance is administered in accordance with
the state law and local ordinance.
85
The fair hearing authority may consist of the municipal officers, one or more persons
appointed by the municipal officers to act as the FHA , or, if designated, the board of
appeals created under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691 (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). In determining the
organization of the fair hearing authority, the municipal officers will use the following
criteria. The person(s) serving as FHA must:
a) not have participated in the decision which is the subject of the appeal;
b) be impartial;
c) be sufficiently skilled in interviewing techniques to be able to obtain evidence and
the facts necessary to make a fair determination; and
d) be capable of evaluating all evidence fairly and realistically, explaining to the
claimant the laws and regulations under which the administrator operated, and
interpreting to the administrator any evidence of unsound, unclear, or inadequate
policies, practices or actions.
Section 7.4—Fair Hearing Procedure
When a claimant requesting a fair hearing is notified of the date, time, and place of the
hearing in writing, he/she will also be given adequate preliminary information about the
hearing procedure to allow for effective preparation of his or her case. The claimant
shall be permitted to review his or her file prior to the hearing. At a minimum, the
claimant will be told the following information, which will govern all fair hearings. All fair
hearings will:
a) be conducted privately, and will be open only to the claimant, witnesses, legal
counsel, or others whom the claimant wants present, and the general assistance
administrator, his or her agents, counsel and witnesses;
b) be opened with a presentation of the issue by the fair hearing authority;
c) be conducted informally, without technical rules of evidence, but subject to the
requirements of due process;
86
d) allow the claimant and the administrator the option to present their positions for
themselves or with the aid of others, including legal counsel;
e) give all participants an opportunity to present oral or written testimony or
documentary evidence, offer rebuttal; question witnesses presented at the
hearing; and examine all evidence presented at the hearing;
f) result in a decision, based exclusively on evidence or testimony presented at the
hearing; and
g) be tape recorded, and result in a written decision that is given to the claimant and
filed with evidence introduced at the hearing. The fair hearing authority will allow
the claimant to establish all pertinent facts and circumstances, and to advance any
arguments without undue interference. Information that the claimant does not
have an opportunity to hear or see will not be used in the fair hearing decision or
made part of the hearing record. Any material reviewed by the fair hearing
authority must be made available to the claimant or his or her representative. The
claimant will be responsible for preparing a written transcript if he/she wishes to
pursue court action.
The fair hearing authority shall admit all evidence if it is the kind of evidence upon which
reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs (22
M.R.S.A. § 4322).
Claimant’s Failure to Appear. In the event the claimant fails to appear, the FHA will
send a written notice to the claimant that the GA administrator’s decision was not
altered due to the claimant’s failure to appear. Furthermore, the notice shall indicate
that the claimant has 5 working days from receipt of the notice to submit to the GA
administrator information demonstrating “just cause,” for failing to appear.
For the purposes of a claimant’s failure to appear at a fair hearing, examples of “just
cause” include:
a) a death or serious illness in the family;
87
b) a personal illness which reasonably prevents the party from attending the
hearing;
c) an emergency or unforeseen event which reasonably prevents the party from
attending the hearing;
d) an obligation or responsibility which a reasonable person in the conduct of his or
her affairs could reasonably conclude takes precedence over the attendance at
the hearing; or
e) lack of receipt of adequate or timely notice; excusable neglect, excusable
inadvertence, or excusable mistake.
If the claimant (or their attorney) establishes just cause, the request for the hearing will
be reinstated and a hearing rescheduled.
In the event a claimant who is represented by legal counsel fails to appear at a fair
hearing, legal counsel shall not testify in place of the claimant on matters of ‘fact’ but
may cross examine witnesses and make ‘legal’ arguments on behalf of the claimant.
Section 7.5—The Fair Hearing Decision
The decision of the fair hearing authority will be binding on the general assistance
administrator, and will be communicated in writing to the claimant within 5 working days
after completion of the hearing. Written notice of the decision will contain the following:
a) a statement of the issue;
b) relevant facts brought out at the hearing;
c) pertinent provisions in the law or general assistance ordinance related to the
decision; and
d) the decision and the reasons for it.
A copy of the notice of the decision will be given to the claimant. The hearing record and
the case record will be maintained by the general assistance administrator.
88
The written notice of the decision will state that if the claimant is dissatisfied with the fair
hearing decision, he/she has a further legal right to appeal the decision pursuant to the
Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B. To take advantage of this right, the claimant
must file a petition for review with the Superior Court within 30 days of receipt of the fair
hearing decision.
When the decision by the fair hearing authority or court authorizes assistance to the
claimant, the assistance will be provided within 24 hours.
89
ARTICLE VIII
Recovery of Expenses
Recipients. The municipality may recover the full amount of assistance granted to a
person from either the recipient or from any person liable for the recipient, or his or her
executors or administrators in a civil action. However, prior to recovering assistance
granted, the municipality shall “offset” the value of any workfare performed by a GA
recipient, at a rate not less than minimum wage.
Prior to taking a recipient to court to recover the amount of assistance, the municipality
will seek voluntary repayment from the recipient by notifying him/her in writing and
discussing it with the recipient. The municipality shall not attempt to recover such costs
if, as a result of the repayment, the person would again become eligible for general
assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318).
Recipients Anticipating Workers’ Compensation Benefits. The municipality shall claim a
lien for the value of all general assistance payments made to a recipient on any lump
sum payment made to that recipient under the Workers’ Compensation Act or similar
law of any other state (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318, 39-A M.R.S.A. § 106). After issuing any
general assistance on behalf of a recipient who has applied for or is receiving Workers’
Compensation, the municipality shall file a notice of the municipal lien with the general
assistance recipient and the Office of Secretary of State, Uniform Commercial Code
division.
The notice of lien shall be filed on a UCC-1 form which must be signed by the recipient
of general assistance who has applied for or is receiving Workers’ Compensation. Any
general assistance applicant who has applied for or who is receiving Workers’
Compensation benefits and who refuses to sign a properly prepared UCC-1 form will be
found ineligible to receive general assistance until he or she provides the required
90
signature. The municipality shall also send a photocopy of that filing to the recipient’s
Worker’s Compensation attorney, if known, the applicant’s employer or the employer’s
insurance company, and, at the administrator’s discretion, to the Workers’
Compensation Board. The lien shall be enforced at the time any lump sum Workers’
Compensation benefit is issued.
Recipients of SSI. All applicants who receive general assistance while receipt of their
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) assistance is pending or suspended, and which
therefore may be retroactively issued to the applicant at a later date, will be required to
sign a statement on an Interim Assistance Agreement form distributed by the DHHS that
authorizes the Social Security Administration to direct a portion of any retroactive SSI
payment to the municipality and/or the state in repayment for the general assistance
granted. Any general assistance applicant who has applied for or who may be applying
for SSI, or who may be required to apply for SSI pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4317, and
who refuses to sign the Interim Agreement SSI authorization form will be found ineligible
to receive general assistance until he or she provides the required signature (22
M.R.S.A. § 4318).
Relatives. The spouse of an applicant, and the parents of any applicant under the age
of 25, are liable for the support of the applicant (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319). In addition,
grandchildren, children, siblings, parents and grandparents are liable for the burial costs
of each other. The municipality considers these relatives to be available resources and
liable for the support of their relatives in proportion to their respective ability. The
municipality may complain to any court of competent jurisdiction to recover any
expenses made on the behalf of a recipient if the relatives fail to fulfill their responsibility
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4319).
91
ARTICLE IX
Severability
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid,
such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the ordinance.
Prepared by MMA 9/09
Appendix A
Effective: 10/01/09-10/01/10
GA Overall Maximums
Metropolitan Areas
Persons in Household
COUNTY 1 2 3 4 5*
Bangor HMFA:
Bangor, Brewer, Eddington, Glenburn, Hampden,
Hermon, Holden, Kenduskeag, Milford, Old Town,
Orono, Orrington, Penobscot Indian Island
Reservation, Veazie
596 695 887 1126 1273
Penobscot County HMFA:
Alton, Argyle UT, Bradford, Bradley, Burlington,
Carmel, Carroll plantation, Charleston, Chester,
Clifton, Corinna, Corinth, Dexter, Dixmont, Drew
plantation, East Central Penobscot UT, East
Millinocket, Edinburg, Enfield, Etna, Exeter,
Garland, Greenbush, Howland, Hudson, Kingman
UT, Lagrange, Lakeville, Lee, Levant, Lincoln,
Lowell town, Mattawamkeag, Maxfield, Medway,
Millinocket, Mount Chase, Newburgh Newport,
North Penobscot UT, Passadumkeag, Patten,
Plymouth, Prentiss UT, Seboeis plantation,
Springfield, Stacyville, Stetson, Twombly UT,
Webster plantation, Whitney UT, Winn, Woodville
609 611 734 917 1125
Lewiston/Auburn MSA:
Auburn, Durham, Greene, Leeds, Lewiston,
Lisbon, Livermore, Livermore Falls, Mechanic
Falls, Minot, Poland, Sabattus, Turner, Wales
492 616 752 954 1056
Portland HMFA:
Cape Elizabeth, Casco, Cumberland, Falmouth,
Freeport, Frye Island, Gorham, Gray, North
Yarmouth, Portland, Raymond, Scarborough, South
Portland, Standish, Westbrook, Windham,
Yarmouth; Buxton, Hollis, Limington, Old Orchard
Beach
793 942 1220 1537 1647
York/Kittery/S.Berwick HMFA:
Berwick, Eliot, Kittery, South Berwick, York
1000 1007 1206 1758 1915
Cumberland County HMFA: Baldwin,
Bridgton, Harpswell, Harrison, Naples, New
Gloucester, Pownal, Sebago
665 776 1000 1194 1530
Brunswick 667 798 1030 1305 1565
Prepared by MMA 9/09
COUNTY 1 2 3 4 5*
Sagadahoc HMFA:
Arrowsic, Bath, Bowdoin, Bowdoinham,
Georgetown, Perkins UT, Phippsburg, Richmond,
Topsham, West Bath, Woolwich
785 787 943 1201 1632
York County HMFA:
Acton, Alfred, Arundel, Cornish, Dayton,
Kennebunk, Kennebunkport, Lebanon, Limerick,
Lyman, Newfield, North Berwick, Ogunquit,
Parsonsfield, Shapleigh, Waterboro, Wells
718 746 948 1134 1239
Biddeford, Saco, Sanford 732 816 1029 1305 1543
*Note: Add $75 for each additional person.
Non-Metropolitan Areas
Persons in Household
COUNTY 1 2 3 4 5*
Aroostook County 464 572 685 894 1000
Franklin County 575 621 756 902 1172
Hancock County 628 724 901 1187 1221
Kennebec County 497 596 743 1013 1082
Knox County 569 751 858 1162 1340
Lincoln County 688 738 890 1075 1226
Oxford County 480 638 735 979 1228
Piscataquis County 596 680 842 1068 1143
Somerset County 479 593 703 992 1053
Waldo County 669 717 866 1062 1129
Washington County 575 622 742 919 1002
* Please Note: Add $75 for each additional person.
Prepared by MMA 9/09
Appendix B
Effective 10/01/09-10/01/10
Food Maximums
Please Note: The maximum amounts allowed for food are established in accordance with the
U.S.D.A. Thrifty Food Plan. Through October 1, 2010, those amounts are:
Number in Household Weekly Maximum Monthly Maximum
1 46.51 200
2 85.35 367
3 122.33 526
4 155.35 668
5 184.42 793
6 221.40 952
7 244.65 1,052
8 279.53 1,202
Note: For each additional person add $150 per month.
Appendix C
Effective 10/01/09 – 10/01/10
GA Housing Maximums
(Heated & Unheated Rents)
NOTE: NOT ALL MUNICIPALITIES SHOULD ADOPT THESE SUGGESTED
HOUSING MAXIMUMS! Municipalities should ONLY consider adopting the following
numbers, if these figures are consistent with local rent values. If not, a market survey should be
conducted and the figures should be altered accordingly. The results of any such survey must be
presented to DHHS prior to adoption. Or, no housing maximums should be adopted and
eligibility should be analyzed in terms of the Overall Maximum—Appendix A. (See Instruction
Memo for further guidance.)
Non-Metropolitan FMR Areas
Aroostook County
Bedrooms
0
1
2
3
4
Unheated
Weekly Monthly
66 284
80 343
90 385
120 517
120 517
Heated
Weekly Monthly
83 359
103 441
121 521
160 686
172 738
Franklin County
Bedrooms
0
1
2
3
4
Unheated
Weekly Monthly
94 405
97 415
114 489
134 576
170 732
Heated
Weekly Monthly
108 463
114 489
138 592
164 704
214 921
Hancock County
Bedrooms
0
1
2
3
4
Unheated
Weekly Monthly
104 449
117 503
130 557
190 819
190 819
Heated
Weekly Monthly
118 506
134 578
154 663
221 952
221 952
Kennebec County
Bedrooms
0
1
2
3
4
Unheated
Weekly Monthly
79 339
93 399
113 484
159 685
159 685
Heated
Weekly Monthly
91 392
109 468
135 580
187 805
195 840
Non-Metropolitan FMR Areas
Knox County
Bedrooms
0
1
2
3
4
Unheated
Weekly Monthly
94 404
126 540
137 589
191 820
209 899
Heated
Weekly Monthly
103 457
142 609
159 685
219 940
250 1074
Lincoln County
Bedrooms
0
1
2
3
4
Unheated
Weekly Monthly
119 512
123 528
144 618
172 741
172 741
Heated
Weekly Monthly
131 565
139 597
166 714
200 861
201 863
Oxford County
Bedrooms
0
1
2
3
4
Unheated
Weekly Monthly
74 318
100 431
109 470
150 646
182 783
Heated
Weekly Monthly
87 376
117 501
133 573
180 774
226 972
Piscataquis County
Bedrooms
0
1
2
3
4
Unheated
Weekly Monthly
95 409
103 441
123 527
157 675
157 675
Heated
Weekly Monthly
111 479
125 539
154 663
196 844
205 881
Somerset County
Bedrooms
0
1
2
3
4
Unheated
Weekly Monthly
74 317
91 390
103 441
153 658
153 658
Heated
Weekly Monthly
87 375
108 465
127 544
183 786
189 813
Non-Metropolitan FMR Areas
Waldo County
Bedrooms
0
1
2
3
4
Unheated
Weekly Monthly
115 495
118 509
139 596
170 729
170 729
Heated
Weekly Monthly
127 548
134 577
161 692
197 849
205 882
Washington County
Bedrooms
0
1
2
3
4
Unheated
Weekly Monthly
93 401
95 410
108 465
134 575
134 575
Heated
Weekly Monthly
107 458
113 485
133 571
165 708
175 751
Metropolitan FMR Areas
Bangor HMFA
Bedrooms
0
1
2
3
4
Unheated
Weekly Monthly
93 409
106 454
132 568
169 728
176 756
Heated
Weekly Monthly
110 471
126 542
161 691
205 882
228 980
Penobscot County HMFA
Bedrooms
0
1
2
3
4
Unheated
Weekly Monthly
98 421
98 421
100 429
125 538
145 622
Heated
Weekly Monthly
114 491
114 491
131 565
164 707
201 865
Lewiston/Auburn MSA
Bedrooms
0
1
2
3
4
Unheated
Weekly Monthly
78 334
97 417
115 493
147 631
149 641
Heated
Weekly Monthly
90 387
113 486
137 589
175 751
190 816
Metropolitan FMR Areas
Portland HMFA
Bedrooms
0
1
2
3
4
Unheated
Weekly Monthly
141 608
165 713
213 918
270 1161
274 1178
Heated
Weekly Monthly
154 661
182 782
234 1014
298 1281
314 1352
York/Kittery/S. Berwick
HMFA
Bedrooms
0
1
2
3
4
Unheated
Weekly Monthly
169 725
169 725
191 820
287 1236
299 1285
Heated
Weekly Monthly
181 778
181 778
213 916
315 1356
400 1460
Cumberland County HMFA
Bedrooms
0
1
2
3
4
Unheated
Weekly Monthly
111 478
131 562
167 718
197 849
249 1072
Heated
Weekly Monthly
123 531
147 631
189 814
225 969
290 1247
Sagadahoc County HMFA
Bedrooms
0
1
2
3
4
Unheated
Weekly Monthly
140 601
140 601
155 666
186 798
270 1165
Heated
Weekly Monthly
152 654
152 654
177 762
213 918
312 1340
York County HMFA
Bedrooms
0
1
2
3
4
Unheated
Weekly Monthly
126 540
126 540
156 671
185 795
188 807
Heated
Weekly Monthly
138 593
140 604
178 767
213 915
228 982
Appendix D
Effective 10/01/09 – 10/01/10
Electric Utility Maximums
Without electric hot water
The maximum amounts allowed for utilities for lights, cooking, and other electric uses,
excluding electric hot water are:
Number in Household Weekly Monthly
1 $14.00 $60.00
2 $15.70 $67.50
3 $17.45 $75.00
4 $19.20 $82.50
5 $21.00 $90.00
6 $22.70 $97.50
*Add $7.50 a month for each additional family member.
With electric hot water
The maximum amount allowed for electric utilities for dwelling units that have electrically
heated hot water shall be $70 per month for the first member of the household, with an additional
$10 per month for each additional household member.
Number in Household Weekly Monthly
1 $16.30 $ 70.00
2 $18.60 $ 80.00
3 $21.00 $ 90.00
4 $23.30 $100.00
5 $25.60 $110.00
6 $27.90 $120.00
Note: For electrically heated households, the maximum amount allowed for electrical
utilities per month shall be the sum of the appropriate maximum amount under this subsection
and the appropriate maximum amount for fuel as provided In Appendix E.
In accordance with the following conditions, the administrator may allow as a budgetable
expense the amount of an applicant’s summer-loaded special payment arrangement (SPA) or
budget payment arrangement (BPA), as calculated by the electric utility and entered into by the
applicant, even when the arranged payment amount exceeds the above maximums or actual
usage.
1) The SPA or BPA, when annualized, does not exceed the above monthly maximums, when
annualized, for non-electrically heated dwelling units.
2) The SPA or BPA, when annualized, does not exceed the above monthly maximums and the
fuel assistance maximums, when annualized, for electrically heated dwelling units.
3) The administrator determines, in consultation with the utility, that the payment arrangement
does not include in any part the installment payment of past debt unless the municipality
guaranteed to the utility the allowance of such an arrangement as a condition of averting a
disconnection.
Pursuant to the use-of-income requirements in section 6.6 of this ordinance, whenever the
administrator budgets for SPA’s or BPA’s under this section, the recipient will be required to pay
the SPA or BPA him or herself to the extent of the income capacity of the household.
Appendix E
Effective: 10/01/09-10/1/10
Heating Fuel
When considering requests for heating fuel, eligible applicants will be granted assistance with
the actual amount necessary up to the following maximums:
Month Gallons Month Gallons
September 50 February 225
October 100 March 225
November 200 April 125
December 200 May 50
January 225
When the dwelling unit is heated electrically, the maximum amount allowed for heating
purposes will be calculated by multiplying the number of gallons of fuel allowed for that month
by the current price per gallon.
When fuels such as wood, coal and/or natural gas are used for heating purposes, they will be
budgeted at actual rates, if they are reasonable. However, no eligible applicant shall be
considered to need more than:
? 7 tons of coal per year
? 8 cords of wood per year
? 126,000 cubic feet of natural gas per year, or
? 1000 gallons of propane.
Appendix F
Effective: 10/01/09-10/1/10
PERSONAL CARE & HOUSEHOLD SUPPLIES
(Appendix F, as Revised 09/2007)
Number in Household Weekly Amount Monthly Amount
1-2 $10.50 $45.00
3-4 $11.60 $50.00
5-6 $12.80 $55.00
7-8 $14.00 $60.00
NOTE: For each additional person add $1.25 per week or $5.00 per month.
SUPPLEMENT FOR HOUSEHOLDS WITH CHILDREN UNDER 5
When an applicant can verify expenditures for the following items, a special supplement will be
budgeted as necessary for households with children under 5 years of age for items such as cloth
or disposable diapers, laundry powder, oil, shampoo, and ointment up to the following amounts:
Number of Children Weekly Amount Monthly Amount
1 $12.80 $55.00
2 $17.40 $75.00
3 $23.30 $100.00
4 $27.90 $120.00
Appendix G
Effective: 10/01/09-10/1/10
2008-2009 Mileage Rate
This municipality adopts the State of Maine travel expense reimbursement rate as set by the
Office of the State Controller. The current rate (until June 30, 2009) for approved employment
and necessary medical travel etc. is 42 cents (42¢) per mile.
Please refer to the Office of State Controller for changes to this rate: Telephone: 626-8420 or
visit: http://www.state.me.us/osc/
Appendix H
Effective: 10/01/09-10/1/10
Funeral Maximums
Burial Maximums
The maximum amount of general assistance granted for the purpose of burial is $1,125.
Additional costs may be allowed by the GA administrator, where there is an actual cost, for:
? the wholesale cost of a cement liner if the cemetery by-laws require one;
? the opening and closing of the grave site; and
? a lot in the least expensive section of the cemetery. If the municipality is able
to provide a cemetery lot in a municipally owned cemetery or in a cemetery
under municipal control, the cost of the cemetery lot in any other cemetery
will not be paid by the municipality.
The municipality’s obligation to provide funds for burial purposes is limited to a reasonable
calculation of the funeral director’s direct costs, not to exceed the maximum amounts of
assistance described in this section. Allowable burial expenses are limited to:
? removal of the body from a local residence or institution
? a secured death certificate or obituary
? embalming
? a minimum casket
? a reasonable cost for necessary transportation
? other reasonable and necessary specified direct costs, as itemized by the
funeral director and approved by the municipal administrator.
Cremation Maximums
The maximum amount of assistance granted for a cremation shall be $785. Additional costs may
be allowed by the GA administrator where there is an actual cost, for:
? a cremation lot in the least expensive section of the cemetery
? a reasonable cost for a burial urn not to exceed $50
? transportation costs borne by the funeral director at a reasonable rate per mile
for transporting the remains to and from the cremation facility.
Appendix I
Effective: 10/01/09-10/1/10
26 MRSA §1043 (23)
Misconduct. “Misconduct” means a culpable breach of the employee’s duties or obligations
to the employer or a pattern of irresponsible behavior, which in either case manifests a disregard
for a material interest of the employer. This definition relates only to an employee’s entitlement
to benefits and does not preclude an employer from discharging an employee for actions that are
not included in this definition of misconduct. A finding that an employee has not engaged in
misconduct for purposes of this chapter may not be used as evidence that the employer lacked
justification for discharge. [1999, c. 464, §2 (rpr).]
A. The following acts or omissions are presumed to manifest a disregard for a material
interest of the employer. If a culpable breach or a pattern of irresponsible behavior is shown,
these actions or omissions constitute “misconduct” as defined in this subsection. This does
not preclude other acts or omissions from being considered to manifest a disregard for a
material interest of the employer. The acts or omissions included in the presumption are the
following:
(1) Refusal, knowing failure or recurring neglect to perform reasonable and proper
duties assigned by the employer;
(2) Unreasonable violation of rules that are reasonably imposed and communicated and
equitably enforced;
(3) Unreasonable violation of rules that should be inferred to exist from common
knowledge or from the nature of the employment;
(4) Failure to exercise due care for punctuality or attendance after warnings;
(5) Providing false information on material issues relating to the employee’s eligibility
to do the work or false information or dishonesty that may substantially jeopardize a
material interest of the employer;
(6) Intoxication while on duty or when reporting to work or unauthorized use of alcohol
while on duty;
(7) Using illegal drugs or being under the influence of such drugs while on duty or when
reporting to work;
(8) Unauthorized sleeping while on duty;
(9) Insubordination or refusal without good cause to follow reasonable and proper
instructions from the employer;
(10) Abusive or assaultive behavior while on duty, except as necessary for self-defense;
(11) Destruction or theft of things valuable to the employer or another employee;
(12) Substantially endangering the safety of the employee, coworkers, customers or
members of the public while on duty;
(13) Conviction of a crime in connection with the employment or a crime that reflects
adversely on the employee’s qualifications to perform the work; or
(14) Absence for more than 2 work days due to incarceration for conviction of a crime.
[1999, c. 464, §2 (new).]
Appendix I
Effective: 10/01/09-10/1/10
B. “Misconduct” may not be found solely on:
(1) An isolated error in judgment or a failure to perform satisfactorily when the
employee has made a good faith effort to perform the duties assigned;
(2) Absenteeism caused by illness of the employee or an immediate family member if
the employee made reasonable efforts to give notice of the absence and to comply with
the employer’s notification rules and policies; or
(3) Actions taken by the employee that were necessary to protect the employee or an
immediate family member from domestic violence if the employee made all reasonable
efforts to preserve the employment.
[1999, c. 464, §2 (new).]
Amended August 1999
ORDINANCE PROHIBITING CAMPING ON
PUBLIC STREETS AND IN MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS
TOWN OF FREEPORT
CHAPTER 47
1. Definitions. As used in this Ordinance, the following terms have
the following meaning:
a. “Camp” means: to occupy a recreational vehicle as temporary
living quarters. “Camp” also means to park a recreational
vehicle on a street or in a municipal parking lot for three
or more consecutive hours between the hours of 11:50 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. the following day unless the recreational
vehicle is unoccupied the entire time it is parked there.
b. “Municipal Parking Lot” mean: any parking area, publicly
owned.
c. “Recreational Vehicle” means: a vehicular-type portable
structure, without permanent foundation, which can be
towed, hauled or driven over the road and which is
primarily designed as a temporary living accommodation for
recreational, camping and travel use, including, but not
limited to, travel trailers, truck campers, camping
trailers, and self propelled motor homes.
d. “Street” means: any public way, private way or driveway,
except a private way or driveway providing access only to a
single family or two family dwelling.
2. Camping on Streets and in Municipal Parking Lots Prohibited. No
person shall camp or permit any other person to camp on any
street or in any municipal parking lot within the Town of
Freeport.
3. Penalties and Persons Liable. Any person who violates this
Ordinance commits a civil violation punishable by a civil
penalty in the amount of $100.00. The following persons shall
be liable for the penalty, provided that the Town shall not
collect more than one penalty for any single violation.
a. Any person above the age of majority who is occupying the
recreational vehicle at the time of violation;
b. The driver who parked the recreational vehicle;
c. Any person who owns or controls a street and gives permission
to any person to camp thereon.
4. Enforcement. This Ordinance may be enforced by any police
officer.
Amended June 5, 2018
1
CHAPTER 48 TRAFFIC AND PARKING ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I DEFINITIONS
Section 48-101 The word "stopped" as used herein shall mean allowing a vehicle
to remain stationary in a way or street, with or without a driver, with or without
the engine operating.
Section 48-102 The word "standing" as used herein shall mean allowing a
vehicle to remain stationary in a way or street with a driver in the vehicle and
with the engine operating.
Section 48-103 The word "parked" as used herein shall mean allowing a vehicle
to remain stationary in a way or street without a driver in the vehicle and
without the engine operating.
Section 48-104 The term "double parking" as used herein shall mean allowing a
vehicle to be stopped on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped upon a
highway or at the edge of the curb of a street.
ARTICLE II GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
Section 48-201 No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions
of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
1. on a sidewalk
2. in front of a public or private driveway;
3. within an intersection
4. on a crosswalk;
5. within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant;
6. on a bridge;
7. at any place where a police officer prohibits stopping;
8. within twenty (20) feet of a street corner;
9. within a travel lane where it is defined by a white line at the outside edge.
Section 48-202 Whenever a vehicle is stopped, standing or parked at a marked
crosswalk or at any intersection, to permit any pedestrian to cross the roadway,
no operator of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall overtake and
pass such stopped, starting or parked vehicle.
Amended June 5, 2018
2
Section 48-203 No vehicle shall stop or park with its left-hand side to the curb.
This rule shall not apply on one-way streets where parking is permitted on the
left-hand side.
Section 48-204 No vehicle shall be allowed to double park on Maine and Bow
Streets.
Section 48-205 All vehicles standing, stopped, or parked in any street or way
shall be placed parallel and close to the edge of the street or roadway, except
where otherwise designated
Section 48-206 Rules restricting the time shall not apply to a physician while
making a professional call, provided the vehicle of a said physician bears the
distinguishing mark of a green cross on a white background conspicuously
displayed.
Section 48-207 No person shall break, deface, or move any official sign post or
signaling devise placed on a highway for the direction of traffic.
Section 48-208 Parking is prohibited on all town streets from 11:00 P.M. to 7:00
A.M. from November 1 to April 15. This provision shall be in effect all year on
both sides of Harraseeket Road between Main Street and Dixon Road, and on
both sides of South Freeport Road between Main Street and Park Street.
Section 48-209 No vehicle shall be parked at any time on any public street or
way so as to interfere with or hinder the removal of snow from said street or way
by the Town by plowing or loading and hauling. The Police Department may
cause any vehicle so parked on any street or way so as to interfere with or hinder
the removal of snow by the Town by plowing or loading and hauling to be
removed from the street and placed in a suitable parking space off the street, at
the expense of the owner of such vehicle.
Section 48-210 The driver of a vehicle entering or emerging from an alley,
driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto
the sidewalk or into sidewalk area.
Section 48-211 The driver of any vehicle other than one upon official business
shall not follow closer than five hundred (500) feet to any fire or emergency
apparatus, traveling in response to a fire alarm or other emergency signal, or
attempt to pass such apparatus while so traveling.
Section 48-212 No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire
Department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any
Amended June 5, 2018
3
fire or alarm of fire without the consent of the Fire Department Official in
command.
Section 48-213 No vehicle shall stand, stop or park within ten (10) feet of a
railway grade crossing.
Section 48-214 No U turn shall be made by any vehicle on Main Street between
West Street and Maple Avenue except the square, so called.
Section 48-215 Vehicles shall pass in but one direction as indicated in the
following named streets: Mill Street southeasterly from Main Street to the
entrance and exit of the parking structure of Freeport Village station; Grove
Street southeasterly from Main Street to Depot Street; Mechanic Street
southeasterly from Main Street to Middle Street.
Section 48-216 Any person riding upon a motorcycle, bicycle, coaster, sled,
roller skates, or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself to any
moving vehicle on any roadway.
Section 48-217 The operator of a motorcycle or bicycle, when upon a street, shall
not carry any other person upon the handlebar, frame, or tank of any such
vehicle, nor shall any person so ride upon such vehicle.
Section 48-218 No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon any street or way
so as to make any loud, unusual or unnecessary noise by spinning tires, racing
engines, or blowing horns within the Town of Freeport.
Section 48-219 No person shall direct or operate any vehicle on any street or
way within the built-up portion of Freeport Village and South Freeport Village at
a rate of speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour and fifteen(15) miles
per hour in school zones and Holbrook Street and School Lane (Howard Place) in
conformance with Maine Revised Statutes Annotated Title 29, Section 1252.
Section 48-220 The Police Department may cause any vehicle parked for a
period of twenty-four (24) or more consecutive hours on a public way in
violation of the parking provisions of the Traffic Ordinance to be removed from
the street at the expense of the registered owner of such vehicle(s).The twentyfour
(24) hour provision will not apply to sections of this Ordinance which state,
“illegally parked vehicles will be towed.”
Section 48-221 The Chief of Police or his designee shall have the authority to
close streets, driveways, parking lot entrances, etc. in cases where an emergency
situation is deemed to exist.
Amended June 5, 2018
4
Section 48-222 No vehicle shall make a left turn onto Mill Street from Main
Street.
Section 48-223 Mill Street will be open only to traffic traveling north on Main
Street.
Section 48-224 Commercial vehicles making deliveries are prohibited from
accessing Howard Place between 9 a.m. and 9 p.m. Before 9 a.m. and after 9 p.m.
commercial vehicles shall enter Howard Place only from the south on Main
Street and shall exit Howard Place only to the north on Main Street.
Section 48-225 No vehicles shall make a left turn onto Main Street from Howard
Place after 9:00 a.m. and before 9:00 p.m.
Section 48-226 Perpendicular parking shall be allowed on the east side of
Independence Drive from a point 25 feet south of CMP pole #26.1 (near the
intersection with the unnamed connector road to U.S. Route 1 near Double L
Street) for a distance of 207 feet to the south.
Section 48-227 Perpendicular parking shall be allowed on the east side of South
Freeport Road from a point 185 feet south of Main Street for a distance of
approximately 210 feet, ending at the boundary with the Soule School property.
Section 48-228 Only Motorcycles are allowed to park on the southern side of
Bow Street from a distance of 40 feet west of Depot Street for the next 20 feet to
where regular vehicle parking begins.
ARTICLE III PARKING PROVISIONS
Section 48-301 No Parking Zones
No vehicle shall stand, stop, or park at any time in any of the following specified
locations. Any vehicle stopped, standing, or parked in a designated "no parking"
area shall be considered a hindrance to the normal movement of traffic and will
be removed from the way and placed in a suitable parking place, at the expense
of the person in whose name such vehicle is registered.
1. On the western most side of Main Street from the northern corner of Tax
Assessor Map 11, Lot 40-ETC in a northerly direction for a distance of
ninety (90) feet.
Amended June 5, 2018
5
2. On the western most side of Main Street from the opening of Morse
Street to the opening of Holbrook Street.
3. On the western and eastern most side of U.S. Route 1 opposite the Tri-
Town Little League Ball Park between Central Maine Power Company
poles number J22 and 37.1, a distance of approximately three-tenths of a
mile.
4. On the southern most side of Mill Street from Main Street to Depot Street.
5. On the western most side of Depot Street for one hundred (100) feet south
of Mill Street within 25 feet of Grove Street, for 45 feet north of the
driveway from Town Hall, and between the Town Hall driveway and
West Street.
6. On the eastern most side of Depot Street from Mill Street to West Street.
7. On the southwestern most side of Bow Street from Main Street to and
including the first driveway on Bow Street.
8. On the southern and eastern most sides of Bow Street from Depot Street
towards the northwest for a distance of 60 feet, from Depot Street to the
railroad tracks, and from South Street to and including the property
referenced to Freeport's Assessment Map 13, Lot 84.
9. On the western and northern most side of Bow Street from and including
the properties located by referenced to Freeport's Assessment Map 13, Lot
40 to, but not including Lot 81A.
10. On the northern most side of Bow Street from Main Street to Middle
Street.
11. On the eastern most side of Park Street in Freeport Village from Bow
Street to Spring Street.
12. On the western most side of Middle Street from Mechanic Street to School
Street.
13. On the northern most side of School Street from Park Street to Main Street.
14. On the southern most side of School Street from Middle Street to the
railroad tracks.
Amended June 5, 2018
6
15. On the southern most side of Elm Street from Main Street in a westerly
direction for a distance of three hundred feet (300').
16. On the northern most side of Elm Street from Main Street in a westerly
direction to Guptil Avenue.
17. On both sides of Justin’s Way from Main Street to the end of Justin’s Way.
Illegally parked vehicles will be towed.
18. On both sides of Howard Place from Main Street to the parking lot.
19. On the northwestern most side of Harraseeket Road from Main Street in
South Freeport Village in a southerly direction for a distance of one
hundred feet (100').
20. On the southwestern most side of Main Street in South Freeport Village
for a distance of one hundred feet (100') south of Harraseeket Road in a
southerly direction to and including the first two driveways on the hill
leading to the Municipal Wharf, a total distance of three hundred and
ninety feet (390').
21. On the northeastern most side of Main Street in South Freeport Village
from a distance of one hundred feet (100') south of the intersection of
Main Street and Harraseeket Road in a southerly direction to and
including the first driveway on the hill leading to the Municipal Wharf, a
total distance of three hundred and seventy feet (370').
22. On the northwestern most side of the Wolf's Neck Road from the entrance
to the Wolf's Neck State Park in a northerly direction for a distance of six
hundred and fifty feet (650').
23. On the south side of School Street for fifty (50) feet west of Middle Street.
24. On the northern most side of Bow Street from Main Street to the railroad
tracks.
25. On the southerly most side of Bonney Street from Route 1 to the end of the
street.
26. On the north side of Morse Street from Cross Street to the end of Morse
Street and on the south side of Morse Street from Cross Street to the bus
entrance to the Morse Street School. Illegally parked vehicles will be
towed.
Amended June 5, 2018
7
27. On the west side of Main Street from Independence Drive to the Desert
Road.
28. On the east side of Main Street from Grove Street to Pine Street.
29. On the west side of Main Street from Mallet Drive extending 210 feet in a
southerly direction.
30. On the west side of Main Street from Mallet Drive to Maple Avenue.
31. On the east side of Main Street from Davis Avenue to Chapel Street.
32. On the east side of Main Street from Davis Avenue to School Street.
33. On the north side of Mill Street from Main Street to Depot Street.
34. On Lavers Road, the sharp bend located near the Lincoln driveway from
Pole #1 to Pole #16.
35. On the south side of Holbrook Street from Main Street to the High School
parking lot.
36. On the north side of Grove Street east from Main Street for 140 feet
37. On both sides of West Street from Main Street to the railroad tracks.
38. On the north side of Holbrook Street from Main Street for a distance of 400
feet; and from that point to the Freeport High School property line,
parking is prohibited from 6 am to 4 pm Monday through Friday between
September 1 and July 1.
39. On the south side of Mallet Drive from McDonald's driveway to Main
Street.
40. On the north side of Mallet Drive from the first driveway to Main Street.
41. On both sides of Chapel Street from Main Street for a distance of three
hundred and seventy-five feet (375').
42. On Wolf's Neck Road from the park entrance in a southerly direction to
the end of the park.
Amended June 5, 2018
8
43. On Nathan Nye on both sides of the entire street. Illegally parked vehicles
will be towed.
44. On the east side of Main Street in a southerly direction (described as Map
11, Lot 91 of the Freeport Property Maps) for a distance of sixty feet (60').
45. U.S. Route 1, southbound from the Old County Road overpass to Pole
#116 and northbound from Pole #116 to Pole #106.
46. At the end of Holbrook Street, the high school driveway except in the area
designated "Visitor Parking" on the east side of the driveway.
47. On the east side of Main Street from West Street to Chapel Street except
where permitted by other sections of this Ordinance. Illegally parked
vehicles will be towed.
48. On the west side of Main Street from West Street to Mallet Drive except
where permitted by other sections of this Ordinance. Illegally parked
vehicles will be towed.
49. On Cross Street both sides of the entire street. Illegally parked vehicles
will be towed.
50. On either side of West Street Extension from Main Street to the end of the
street. Illegally parked vehicles will be towed.
51. On U.S. Route 1 on both sides from CMP Pole #139 to CMP Pole #131.
Violators will be towed.
52. On South Freeport Road on both sides from U.S. Route 1 to Old South
Freeport Road. Violators will be towed.
53. On the east side of Royal Avenue from School Street to the end of the
street.
54. On the north side of Mechanic Street from Main Street to Middle Street.
55. On both sides of School Street from Park Street to the end.
56. On the south side of School Street from Main Street to extend one hundred
feet (100') in an easterly direction, and from Middle Street for fifty feet
(50’) in a westerly direction..
Amended June 5, 2018
9
57. On the west side of Cottage Street from West Street to Forest Street.
58. On the east side of Depot Street from West Street to Mill Street.
59. On the both sides of Varney road beginning at Lower Main Street for a
distance of 210 feet.
60. On the west side of Dennison Avenue from l0:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
61. No vehicle shall park within ten feet (10') of pavement placed in front of
the apartment building located on Tax Map 18, Lot 43.
62. No vehicle shall park on the northside of Holbrook Street from the
entrance of Freeport High School in an easterly direction to the boundary
of the Freeport High School property line from 7 a.m. to 3 p.m. daily.
63. On the easterly side of Depot Street from Bow Street extending southerly
135 feet.
64. On the Town-owned property known as Dunning Boatyard except as
allowed pursuant to the Rules for Dunning Boatyard, Chapter 18 of the
Freeport Code.
65. On both sides of the Snow Road beginning from the southerly most side
of the access road to the athletic field, proceeding in a northerly direction
to Justin’s Way. The signs shall indicate that violators will be ticketed.
66. On the west side of Main Street from the northerly corner of West Street
extending north 120 feet.
67. On the Northeastern-most side of Harraseeket Road from Main Street in
South Freeport Village in a southerly direction for a distance of two
hundred and ten feet (210’).
68. On the westerly side of Main Street beginning at Maple Avenue and
continuing north for 100 feet.
69. On the west side of Depot Street from Bow Street to Mill Street.
70. On the south side of East Street for 300 feet east of Main Street.
71. On the south side of Pownal Road for about 700 feet from Hedgehog
Mountain Road to CMP pole #47.
Amended June 5, 2018
10
72. On the west side of Hedgehog Mountain Road from the intersection with
Pownal Road for a distance of 80 feet.
73. On the western side of South Freeport Road from Pine Street south for 210
feet, and from Church Road north for 280 feet.
74. On the eastern side of South Freeport Road within 45 feet of Park Street
and Main Street.
75. On the west side of Hedgehog Mountain Road from the landfill gate
(approximately 1400 feet from Pownal Road) to the north for a distance of
250 feet.
76. On the south side of Old Freeport Road, for a distance of 80 feet east of the
YMCA driveway, and from the YMCA driveway to US Route 1.
77. On the north side of Old Freeport Road, starting 140 feet east of Route 1,
running east for a distance of 330 feet (to the end of the guard rail).
78. On both sides of Maple Street from Main Street for a distance of 135 feet.
79. On the north side of east Street, starting 360 feet east of Maine Street (just
east of the nursing home driveways,) running east for a distance of 60 feet,
from December 1 to March 31.
80. On both sides of Old County Road Extension starting 500 feet from the
beginning of the street to the end, from November 1 to April 15.
81. On both sides of Hunter Road from the access road into the Hunter Road
recreational fields for a distance of 670 feet to the east, and a distance of
300 feet to the west.
82. On both sides of the access road into the Hunter Road recreational fields
from Hunter Road for a distance of 700 feet.
83. On Pine Street as follows: On the south side, from South Freeport Road to
the westerly boundary of the Sayles Field property, shown on Tax
Assessment Map 23 Lot 13D, for a distance of about 700 feet. On the north
side, starting 90 feet from South Freeport Road to the same ending point
as on the south side, for a distance of about 610 feet.
Amended June 5, 2018
11
Section 48-302 Three-Hour Parking Zones
No vehicle shall stop, stand or park for a longer period than three (3) hours from
9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. in the following specified locations:
1. On the south side of Grove Street from a point 70 feet south of Main Street
to Depot Street, and on the north side of Grove Street from a point 140 feet
south of Main Street to a point 85 feet north of Depot Street.
2. On the east side of Independence Drive where perpendicular parking is
allowed under Section 48-228.
3. On the west side of Depot Street from 25 feet north of Grove Street to a
point one hundred (100) feet south of Mill Street, and from 25 feet south
of Grove street to a point 45 feet north of the driveway from Town Hall.
4. On the south side of Mechanic Street from a point one hundred (100) feet
south of Main Street to Middle Street.
Section 48-303 One Hour Parking Zones
No vehicle shall stop, stand or park for a longer period than one (1) hour from
9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. in the following specified locations:
1. On the southerly most side of Bow Street from the first driveway below
Main Street to Depot Street.
2. On the south side of Mechanic Street from Main Street for a distance of
one hundred (100) feet.
3. On the southern most side of School Street starting at 100' from the
intersection with Main Street to a point fifty (50) feet west of Middle
Street.
4. On the southerly most side of Main Street, South Freeport, from the
Municipal Wharf for one hundred fifty feet (150') to the driveway entrance
in a northerly direction between the dates of Memorial Day and Columbus
Day each year.
5. On the easterly side of Depot Street from a point 135 feet south of Bow
Street, to the parking lot entrance at Map 10, Lot 24.
Amended June 5, 2018
12
Section 48-304 No vehicle, except Freeport Department of Education vehicles,
shall stop, stand or park between the hours of 8:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. in days when
school is in session in the following specified locations:
1. On the south side of Morse Street north of the Morse Street School
property unless otherwise allowed by Section 48-307.5.
2. On the northern side of Holbrook Street adjacent to the Freeport High
School property.
Section 48-305 Thirty Minute Parking Zones
No vehicle shall stop, stand or park for a longer period than thirty (30) minutes
from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. in the following specified locations:
1. On the south side of Bow Street from the railroad tracks to South Street.
2. On the western side of Middle Street from Bow Street to Mechanic Street.
3. On the east side of Middle Street from Bow Street to School Street except
where designated as "Accessible Parking".
Section 48-306 Taxi Stand Parking Zone
One space on the western most side of Main Street from Justin’s Way in an
northerly direction shall be designated for a parking area for a vehicle providing
a taxi service, said space to be so designated only at such time as a taxi service is
operating in Town.
The Bus Loading and Unloading Zones identified in Section 48-312 will also be
designated as Taxi Standing Zones, with a ten minute standing limit.
Section 48-307 Fifteen Minute Parking Zones
No vehicle shall stop, stand or park for a longer period than fifteen minutes from
9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. or as otherwise defined in the following specified locations:
1. On the east side of Main Street from the northerly corner of Mechanic
Street and Main Street extending northerly 115 feet.
2. On the west side of Main Street from the northerly corner of Main Street
and Justin’s Way extending in a northerly direction 170 feet.
Amended June 5, 2018
13
3. On the west side of Main Street from the Post Office driveway (Map 12,
Lot 26) extending in a northerly direction 320 feet.
4. On the west side of Main Street from the end of the no parking zone north
of West Street extending north 100 feet.
5. On the south side of Morse Street adjacent to the school, from the bus
entrance to the end of Morse Street between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m., when school is in session.
Section 48-308 South Freeport and Town Wharf
1. Night parking restrictions as described in Section 48-208 of this Ordinance
shall be in effect at all times on both sides of Main Street, South Freeport
from the Municipal Wharf in a northwesterly direction for a distance of
three-hundred (300) feet.
2. Day parking shall be allowed at a diagonal angle on Main Street, South
Freeport for one hundred and thirty (130) feet in a northwesterly direction
from the Municipal Wharf on the southerly most side and for onehundred
(100) feet in a northwesterly direction on the northerly most side.
3. Parallel parking shall be allowed during the day for two hundred and
twenty (220) feet in a northwesterly direction from the end of the diagonal
parking on the northerly most side.
4. No vehicle shall be allowed to stop or park abutting to or on the
Municipal Wharf.
5. One parking space at the northeast corner of the Municipal Wharf shall be
reserved and designated for parking by the Harbormaster only.
6. The Harbor Master will monitor loading and unloading at the wharf and
has the authority to limit loading and unloading time as needed to
eliminate traffic congestion.
Section 48-309 Parking at Leased Lot in South Freeport
The Town may lease the parking lot located on land identified as Tax Map 2, Lot
52 between June 24 and October 1 each year. Under such a lease, the following
parking restrictions shall be in effect:
1. Parking shall be restricted to Freeport residents and property owners only.
Parking Stickers shall be required annually.
2. No overnight parking is allowed unless a permit is obtained through the
Town’s Brewer Parking lot rules approved by the Town Council.
3. No commercial activities or uses are allowed.
Amended June 5, 2018
14
Section 48-310 Parking on both sides of Main Street from the Municipal Building
(Map 9, Lot 16) to Mallett Drive will be restricted to "Auto's Only" except where
other types of vehicles are specifically permitted..
Section 48-311 Accessible Parking
The following locations shall be designated as accessible parking:
1. On the east side of Main Street in the first parking space north of the
intersection with Mechanic Street. (One space)
2. On the east side of Main Street beginning twelve and one half feet (12
1/2) north of the southerly property line of May 11, Lot 121 and
continuing northerly for forty-four (44) feet (Two spaces).
3. For regular church services, accessible parking will be allowed in front
of church buildings. Hours will include from 5:00 p.m. to midnight on
Saturdays and 8:30 a.m. to l:00 p.m. on Sundays.
4. On the eastern side of Middle Street in front of the Pharmacy Building
(Map 13, Lot 1).
5. For regular church services, temporary accessible (ADA) parking spots
will be allowed in front of South Freeport Congregational Church on
South Freeport Road and in 3 existing parking spots along the circular
Drive at the Soule School property. Temporary accessible parking will be
limited from 5:00 p.m. to midnight on Saturdays and 8:30 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.
on Sundays. The Soule School property owner or lessees have priority
parking in the Soule School spots during school events.
Section 48-3l2 Bus Loading and Unloading Zones
The following locations shall be designated as bus loading and unloading zones:
1. On the east side of Main Street from Bow Street to Mechanic Street.
2. On the west side of Main Street across from the Bow Street intersection to
Justin’s Way.
Amended June 5, 2018
15
Section 48-313 Parking for Church Activities
As long as churches remain located on Main Street and South Freeport Road,
parking immediately in front of church buildings will be allowed for weddings,
funerals and other special events. Church leaders will notify the police
department at least twelve hours prior to the scheduled activity and will be
allowed to use portable municipal signs to mark parking areas.
Section 48-314 Tour Bus Parking Area
The following area shall be designated as Town Parking Areas:
1. South side of Mallet Drive from 30 feet east of the Masonic Hall driveway
to the "Stop Sign Ahead" sign located west of MacDonald's driveway.
Section 48-315 Fire Lanes
Fire lanes are established for the purpose of promoting public health,
safety, and welfare by recognizing that there exist, and will in the future exist,
buildings and other areas within the Town in which the public will have use of.
These buildings or other areas must be provided prompt emergency services
including access by firefighters and firefighting equipment and other emergency
personnel and equipment in order to accomplish said purpose and effect the
saving of life and property in emergency situations.
1. Maintenance and Identification of Fire Lanes
Fire lanes established under the National Fire Protection Code shall be kept
free of ice and snow and rubbish containers or other obstruction by the
owner, or agent, or occupant of any premises to which this article is
applicable shall cause to be erected, installed and maintained by their own
expense, permanent, adequate signs bearing the words “FIRE LANE - NO
PARKING - VEHICLES WILL BE TOWED AT OWNER’S EXPENSE” in or
adjacent to said fire lane. The painting and striping of fire lanes shall be
installed and maintained regularly by owner, agent or occupant of
premises.
2. Parking Prohibited
A. No person shall park or be permitted to stand a motor vehicle in any
fire lane established in accordance with this article (except when
Amended June 5, 2018
16
actually picking up or discharging passengers or actively engaged in
loading or unloading a motor vehicle).
B. Whenever any vehicle shall be found parking in violation of the
regulations as established above, any Police Officer, Parking Ticket
Officer, Fire Department Chief or officer in charge may attach to such a
vehicle a notice (parking ticket) to the owner or operator thereof that
such vehicle has been parked in violation of the regulations. Such
owner or operator shall pay to the town a sum of thirty dollars ($30),
payment of which shall be due within five (5) business days of the
issuance of the parking violation. For each subsequent violation the fine
will double, not to exceed one hundred and twenty dollars ($120). Any
motor vehicle found parked or standing in a fire lane that has been
established in accordance with this article, in addition to the foregoing,
may be towed upon the direction of a Police Officer, Fire Chief or officer
in charge; all expenses of such towing and any subsequent storage shall
be borne by the registered owner or operator of such vehicle.
Section 48-316 -Forty-Eight Hour Parking Zones
No vehicle shall stop, stand or park for a longer period than forty-eight (48)
hours from November 1 to April 15 in the following specified locations.
1. The Municipal Park and Ride lot on U.S. Route One near Pine Street.
Vehicles will be towed at Owner’s Expense.
Section 48-317 - No Nighttime Parking
No vehicle shall park at any time between sunset to sunrise in any of the
following specified locations.
1. At the end of Sandy Beach Road in the public waterfront access area.
2. At the end of Cove Road in the public waterfront access area.
3. At the Dunning Boatyard public-use areas.
Section 48-318 – Commercial Loading Zones
No vehicle shall stop, stand or park in the following locations except for the
purpose of commercial loading and unloading, and for no longer than fifteen (15)
minutes.
Amended June 5, 2018
17
1. On the easterly side of Main Street in front of Derosier’s Market (Tax Map
11, Lot 93 on the Freeport Property Maps) from the existing driveway
entrance and continuing in a southerly direction for a distance of 30 feet
south to a designated parking space.
2. On the easterly side of Main Street from the north side of the crosswalk
that is about 70 feet north of Mill Street for a distance of 80 feet to a
location that is about 20 feet south of CMP pole #13.
3. On the easterly side of Main Street beginning 56 feet north of the southerly
property line of the lot at Tax Map 11, Lot 121 and continuing in a
northerly direction for a distance of about 80 feet to the marked crosswalk.
4. On the easterly side of Main Street beginning 10 feet north of the
southern driveway at the property referenced to Freeport Property Tax
Map 13, Lot 19 and continuing in a northerly direction for a distance of
70 feet.
Section 48-319 – Parking at Train Platform Parking Lot
At the Town-owned lot referenced as Tax Map 10, Lot 24-1, the following
parking restrictions shall be in effect:
1. The northernmost spaces on both the east and west side of the lot will be
restricted to accessible parking (2 spaces total).
2. The two (2) spaces south of the accessible parking space on the east side of
the lot will be restricted to parking for taxi vehicles.
3. No overnight parking (10 p.m. to 6 a.m.) is allowed on the east side of the
lot.
4. Parking by RVs or trailers is prohibited.
5. The area west of the platform and north of the designated perpendicular
parking area for a distance of 120 feet shall be restricted to loading and
unloading only, with a 5 minute limit.
6. At the southerly end of the vehicle parking spaces on the east side of the
lot, parking will be restricted to motorcycles only for up to 8 motorcycle
spaces.
7. No parking is allowed at other locations in the lot.
ARTICLE IV TRAFFIC FEES AND FINES
Amended June 5, 2018
18
Section 48-401 Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every
person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be
punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Persons
charged with violations of the following parking regulations may waive all court
action by payment to the Town Treasurer of the following specified fees within
ten (10) days of notice of the violation.
If, after ten (10) days and before a court summons is issued, an additional civil
penalty of $5.00 per offense will be paid to the Town of Freeport.
1. Vehicle on crosswalk $30.00
2. Vehicle on sidewalk 30.00
3. Obstructing driveway 30.00
4. Obstructing traffic 30.00
5. Parked to near intersecting street 30.00
6. Restricted place 30.00
7. Damaged traffic sign 30.00
8. Double parking 30.00
9. Parked on wrong side of street 30.00
10. Parked in loading zone 30.00
11. Overtime parking 30.00
12. Improperly parking according to white lines 30.00
13. All night parking 30.00
14. Parked too close to fire hydrant 30.00
15. Parking diagonally in a parallel zone 30.00
16. Other violation 30.00
17. Accessible Area 200.00
18. Parking in Bus Zone 30.00
19. Tour Bus Violation 100.00
20. Commercial Vehicles entering or exiting
Howard Place between 9 a.m. and 9 p.m. 100.00
21. Commercial Vehicles exiting Howard Place
to the south on Main Street and entering
Howard Place from the north from Main Street
between 9 p.m. and 9 a.m. 100.00
22. Fire Lane Violation 30/60/120.00
The provisions of this section were adopted as an ordinance on
August 21, 1973; subsequent amendments have been incorporated
into the text.
Amended June 5, 2018
19
ARTICLE V LEASED PARKING STANDARDS
The Town of Freeport hereby orders that the Freeport Traffic and Parking
Ordinance be amended by enacting the following new Article V:
Section 48-501 The priorities, terms and conditions for leased parking spaces in
the Village Commercial I District, as established by the Freeport Zoning
Ordinance, are established by this Article.
The Town may lease parking spaces to applicants who require leased parking
spaces from the municipality in order to satisfy the parking requirements of the
Freeport Zoning Ordinance. The leased parking spaces shall be located either in
a lot which is owned in fee by the Town of Freeport or owned in fee by a person
or organization who has entered into a lease agreement with the Town to
provide parking spaces as regulated by this Article. All parking lots regulated in
this article shall be located in the Village Commercial I District.
Section 48-502 Leased parking spaces shall be allocated according to the
following priorities:
1. Applicants with existing buildings who want to expand or change their
use within the existing footprint of the building;
2. Applicants with existing buildings who want to expand the footprints of
the existing buildings, to create additional square footage for existing or
changed uses.
3. Applicants who want to build a new building after the date of adoption of
this Article.
Section 48-503 The terms and conditions for all leased parking
spaces shall include the following:
1. Non-Municipal owners of parking lots shall enter into a lease agreement
with the Town which contains the following provisions:
a. Proof of adequate public liability insurance equal to that of the Town
shall be submitted by the owner;
Amended June 5, 2018
20
b. Notarized agreement to maintain the parking lots, including but not
limited to paving, striping, landscaping, signs, stormwater facilities
and other amenities, shall be submitted by the owner;
c. Statement that the parking spaces offered for lease are not required to
satisfy pending and/or approved development plans on the same or
abutting lot;
d. Notice of termination of this lease shall be sent by registered mail to the
Town and to all leaseholders of the premises a minimum of one year
before the lease expires;
e. The Town may set any other provisions it deems appropriate.
2. Applicants for parking spaces shall be the owners and not the lessees of
premises requiring parking spaces.
3. The schedule of parking fees shall be established by the lot owner.
4. The Town shall bill the leaseholder and charge the lot owner 5% of the
yearly lease fee to cover its administrative costs. On a case by case basis,
the Town Council may, by order, exempt a non-profit lot owner from this
5% fee, provided that the lot owner agrees to bill the lease holder(s)
directly and report the payment status of all leases to the Finance
Department on a quarterly basis. The Town Council shall have the
authority, by order, to revoke any such exemption for just cause.
5. The Town shall decide, based on the priorities established by
Section 48-502, which applicant is next eligible for a lease. The applicant
may choose to lease whichever spaces are available. If the applicant
chooses not to enter into a priority list becomes eligible for a lease and the
previous applicant may remain on the list.
6. Applicants for parking spaces shall provide a notarized statement which
states that continued occupancy of part or all of the premises requiring
leased parking spaces is contingent on continued leasing of parking spaces.
7. Failure by the owner of a premises to continue to provide the required
parking spaces shall result in the revocation of its Certificate of
Occupancy.
Amended June 5, 2018
21
ARTICLE VI PARKING CREDITS
The Town of Freeport hereby orders that the Freeport Traffic and Parking
Ordinance be amended by enacting the following new Article VI:
Section 48-504 The requirements for parking in the Village Commercial Districts
I-IV, are established by the Section 514 of the Freeport Zoning Ordinance.
The Town may issue parking credits to property owners on a case by case basis.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, a parking credit is in lieu of providing an
actual parking space. Parking credits may be issued by the Town Manager if
parking spaces are lost in situations when: two or more parking lots are
connected, pedestrian or bicycle access or circulation is improved, if vehicular
traffic or circulation is improved, or if a specialized parking need such as
recreational vehicles or motorcycles will be met. Parking credits may be issued
for other reason not listed if the request is reviewed and approved by the Town
Council and the Town Council makes a determination that the loss of parking
spaces results in a significant public benefit. In determining if a project results in
a significant public benefit, the project must be consistent with the Vision
Statement of the Comprehensive Plan.
A written record shall be maintained of all parking credits. A parking credit is in
effect for the duration of the improvement that credit was issued for is in use.
For example, if a parking credits were issued for spaces that were lost when two
parking lots were connected and the parking lots are separated at a later date, the
parking credit is removed. Parking credits go with the building they are
associated with, not the owner. Parking credits cannot be leased or transferred to
another building.
This Article shall apply to all previously approved parking credits.
Amended June 5, 2018: Section 48-311, 48-313 and amend language from handicapped
to accessible
Amended 04/02/2018
1
CHAPTER 49
VEHICLE TOWING ORDINANCE
SECTION I PURPOSE
In order to protect persons who operate motor vehicles within the corporate limits of the
Town of Freeport, to insure that the streets and public ways of the Town remain open and
free of hazard to the public and to further effectuate the efficient enforcement of the
Town of Freeport's traffic, parking, snow removal and other regulatory ordinances, it is
determined necessary to insure by licensing the regulation of persons engaged in the
business of providing vehicle wrecker or towing and required repair services, to establish
rates for such service, and to regulate the storage and disposition of vehicles to be towed.
SECTION II DEFINITIONS
The following words and terms as used in this chapter, "Definitions", shall have the
meaning ascribed thereto, unless the context otherwise indicates:
(a) Chief of Police means the executive head of the Police Department of the
Town of Freeport, or their designee.
(b) Town means the Town of Freeport.
(c) Towing List means a list maintained by the Police Department containing
the names of those "wreckers" licensed by the Town to respond to requests
for the towing of vehicles made by the Police Department. The towing list
itself shall consist of two lists:
1. The primary list shall include “wreckers” licensed by the Town of
Freeport as detailed in Sec. IV of this Ordinance where the main
business activities of the wrecker company are headquartered in
Freeport as evidenced by its office location, auto storage area, wrecker
storage space, payment of wrecker excise taxes and identification as
such on official business filings with the Secretary of State, State
Treasurer and Internal Revenue Service. Primary list companies shall
receive the first call for wrecker services for all rotation calls.
2. When a primary wrecker service is unavailable or does not respond
to a call for service, or when there are no “wreckers” on the “primary
list”, the dispatcher shall call the “wrecker” pursuant to the Town of
Brunswick Towing Policy and Guidelines. The towing company shall
Amended 04/02/2018
2
be allowed to apply the towing fees as outlined in the Town of
Brunswick Towing Policy Guidelines.
(d) Wrecker means a person engaged in the business of, or offering the services
of, a vehicle wrecker or towing service, whereby motor vehicles are or may be
towed or otherwise removed from one place to another by the use of a motor
vehicle adapted to and designated for that purpose.
(e) Auto storage area means a location where a vehicle is stored after being
towed. This area will be fenced in with lighting and a locked gate to protect
vehicles stored there from damage or pilferage. Other security measures such
as a camera and alarm system are recommended. The area(s) must be able to
contain at least 5 vehicles. Vehicles impounded for evidentiary purposes will
be stored at a location designated by the Chief of Police.
SECTION III APPLICATION FOR WRECKER SERVICE LICENSE
Any person desiring to perform towing work at police request shall submit an
"Application for Wrecker Service License" to the Chief of Police. Application forms
shall be obtained from the Office of the Chief of Police. These forms shall include the
name of the owner, home and business address, home phone and name under which the
person does or will trade, the location, size and security features of the auto storage area
lot on which towed vehicles will be stored, the location to which the public must come to
claim stored vehicles, a statement of willingness to provide wrecker service on a
continuous 24-hour-a-day basis each day of the year, a list of the towing equipment, its
size and capacity, a complete listing of the insurance policies, carriers and agents, the
owner would place into effect upon license approval, and such other information as the
Chief of Police shall require.
SECTION IV INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
Within thirty (30) days after receipt of such application, the Chief of Police shall conduct
an investigation to determine the truth, accuracy and adequacy of the information
contained in said application; the ability of the applicant to furnish the required service
and to abide by the regulations and provisions set forth herein or established pursuant to
Section V hereof; the applicant's past record of performance in wrecker or towing
business and the adequacy of the applicant's equipment and auto storage facilities. Upon
completion of said investigation, the Chief shall either grant or deny said license and
notify the applicant in writing of such decision, and the findings and reasons, if any, for
denial of said license. Upon issuance of said license, the chief shall forward to the
licensee a copy of this chapter and any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and shall
Amended 04/02/2018
3
place the licensee's name at the end of the towing list. The license issued hereunder is
non-transferable.
Insurance Required: No wrecker shall be issued a license until the applicant has
deposited with the Chief of Police an insurance certificate for the following insurance
coverage:
(a) Garage Keeper’s Legal Liability covering at the least Comprehensive with a
minimum $30,000 limit and Collision with a minimum $30,000 limit, and
(b) Garage Liability covering the operation of the licensee’s business, equipment
or other vehicles for any bodily injury or property damage. This policy shall
be in the minimum amount of $500,000 per occurrence with a $1,000,000
aggregate or; $500,000 for any one person injured or killed, and a minimum
of $1,000,000 for more than one person injured or killed in any accident and a
minimum of $500,000 for property damage.
The insurance certificate shall show thirty (30) days notice is provided to both the Town
and the insured in the event of any change in coverage limits or cancellation of the policy
for anything other than nonpayment.
The lapsing or cancellation of any policy as required hereinabove shall result in the
immediate termination of the wrecker's license without any action on the part of the
Town.
Terms of License Each license issued hereunder shall be effective for the period of
January 1 until December 31 of each year, or any remaining portion thereof, unless
earlier revoked, suspended or terminated in accordance with this chapter.
License Fee The annual fee for the license issued pursuant to Section IV hereof or for
any renewal thereof shall be $50.00. Such fee shall be pro-ratable at a rate of $25.00 per
half year or any portion thereof, for those applying after July 1. Such fee will be paid
prior to issuance of any license. No part or portion of any fee shall be returnable after
issuance of for any reason including (but not limited to) suspension, revocation or
termination.
SECTION V REGULATIONS
The following minimum regulations will be met on a continuous basis by all licensees:
(a) Licensees shall operate and maintain storage facilities as outlined in
Section II, C-1 and e.
(b) All vehicles licensed under this ordinance must comply with the
inspection requirement of Title 29A. M.R.S.A. All vehicles must be
Amended 04/02/2018
4
equipped with all equipment necessary to safely and effectively tow
vehicles. All equipment must be in good working order.
(c) Licensees shall permit the Chief of Police to conduct one regular and two
random inspections of each auto storage area during the term of the
license;
(d) Licensees shall maintain such records as required by the regulations
promulgated by the Chief of Police pursuant to Section VI hereinafter, and
shall permit their inspection by the Chief or designee during normal
business hours;
(e) Licensees shall arrive on the scene within thirty (30) minutes of receipt of
a request for service from the police.
(f) Vehicles must be towed, not driven to storage lots;
(g) Licensees must provide a secure storage area at their place of business as
described in Section II.
(h) Licensees must fill out a vehicle damage form of the type prescribed by
the Chief of Police prior to towing any vehicle pursuant hereto;
(i) Licensees shall clean the accident area of all debris resulting from the
accident, if there be any;
(j) Licensees shall not make any repairs to a vehicle without the consent of
the owner;
(k) Vehicles shall be released from the auto storage area in accordance with
regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police pursuant to Section VI
hereinafter;
(l) The licensee shall hold the Town harmless from all claims for damages to
property and injuries to persons resulting from the licensee's negligence in
the towing or storage of vehicles pursuant hereto.
SECTION VI REGULATIONS MAY BE PROMULGATED BY CHIEF OF
POLICE
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to promulgate regulations not inconsistent
herewith to carry out the intent of this chapter. All licenses issued pursuant to this
chapter shall be subject to such regulations as are adopted hereunder either prior to or
after the date of the issuance thereof.
Amended 04/02/2018
5
SECTION VII RATES FOR SERVICES REGULATED HEREUNDER
Maximum rates for services regulated by this chapter shall be established by the
Municipal Officers after written notice to licensees and a public hearing thereon.
Vehicle Tows: Day $75.00
Night $85.00
Snow Tow* Range: Day $85.00
Night $95.00
*Snow Tow means any vehicle that is towed for snow removal reasons.
Recovery – Same rates as tow, depending upon time of day. After first hour $70.00 per
additional hour plus any special equipment.
Call out fee, to come to shop during non-business hours $35.00 plus towing fees.
Vehicle Storage, per day, including non-business days $25.00 (storage rates begin 24
hours after the vehicle is towed).
MINIMAL CALL OUT: In the event that an operator has been requested for service and
upon arrival the situation has changed and services are no longer required, a minimum
fee of $15.00 must be assessed for daytime and $20.00 for nighttime calls. Fees to be
paid by the vehicle owner/operator.
DEFINITION OF HOURS:
DAYS: 07:00 a.m. to 07:00 p.m.
NIGHTS: 07:00 p.m. to 07:00 a.m.
SECTION VIII DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES
(a) The licensee shall comply with the procedures set forth in Title 29-A M.R.S.A
Abandoned Vehicles.
(b) In the event of an unclaimed or abandoned vehicle, the licensee’s sole remedy
shall be as outlined in Title 29-A M.R.S.A. regarding unclaimed and
abandoned vehicles.
Amended 04/02/2018
6
SECTION IX SOLICITATION OF BUSINESS
No wrecker may respond to the scene of a crash or emergency for the purpose of towing
vehicles unless specifically called there by the Police or person involved in the crash of
emergency. This section is intended to prohibit wrecker owners from soliciting business
at the scenes of crashes and emergencies and shall not be construed to prohibit any
wrecker from contracting with any person, firm, or corporation providing the wrecker
owner, his agents and employees do not solicit towing contracts at the scenes of crashes
or emergencies.
SECTION X REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSES
The Chief of Police may revoke or suspend any license under the following conditions:
(a) the license was secured by fraud or by the concealment of a material fact by
the wrecker owner, and such fact, if known, would have caused the refusal to
issue a license; or
(b) the wrecker owner has violated any of the requirements or regulations
established herein or by the Chief of Police under this Ordinance; or
(c) the Town is not satisfied with the general services of the wrecker owner
and/or employees or with the cooperation it has received while rendering
service.
SECTION XI APPEAL
Any licensee or former licensee aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police pursuant to
Sections IV and X above may appeal to the Municipal Officers in writing within ten (10)
days of such action. After hearing thereon, the Municipal Officers may reverse, modify,
or uphold the decision of the Chief of Police.
SECTION XII REMOVAL OF TOWED VEHICLES
OR PARTS THEREOF FROM WRECKER'S LOT
Removal of any towed vehicle or any accessory part thereof from the auto storage area of
the wrecker without written permission pursuant to the regulations of the Chief of Police
shall, if not otherwise punishable under State Law, be considered a civil violation. This
shall apply to any person not the wrecker or owner of the storage area and shall include
the owner of such vehicle.
Amended July 1, 2008
CHAPTER 50
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT PERMITS
Article I. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the issuance of special amusement
permits for music, dancing, or entertainment in facilities licensed by the state to sell
liquor as authorized by 28-A M.R.S.A. § 1054.
Article II. Definition.
For the purposes of this article, the word “entertainment” means any amusement,
performance, exhibition, or diversion for customers of the licensed premises whether
provided by professional entertainers or by employees of the operator of the licensed
premises.
Article III. Permit required.
(a) A licensee for the sale of liquor to be consumed on the licensed premises
shall not permit any live music, dancing, or entertainment of any kind on the premises
until the licensee has first obtained a special amusement permit issued by the Town
Clerk.
(b) The licensee must file a written application for the permit with the town
council including the name, date and place of birth, and residence address of the
applicant; the name, address and nature of the business; and any additional information
required by the council necessary to the processing of the application.
Article IV. Inspection.
As soon as an application for a special amusement permit has been received by
the town council, the Codes Enforcement Officer shall inspect the licensed premises to
determine whether they are in compliance with all pertinent law. The Codes
Enforcement Officer shall make a written report to the Town Council with his findings in
that regard.
Article V. Public hearing.
Before granting a permit, and after seven (7) days notice published in a newspaper
having general circulation in the town, the town council shall hold a public hearing to
determine whether issuance of the permit would be detrimental to the health, safety, or
general welfare of the public, or would be in violation of any provision of this Code or
town ordinance. After the hearing, the council shall issue the permit unless it finds that to
Amended July 1, 2008
2
do so would be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public, or
would be in violation of a municipal ordinance.
Article VI. Denial of permit.
If the application for a special amusement permit is denied, the town council shall
give the applicant a written statement of the reasons for the denial.
Article VII. Conditional issuance.
The town council may attach conditions to any special amusement permit which
are necessary for the protection of the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
Article VIII. Permit fee.
The fee for a special amusement application permit is one hundred and twentyfive
dollars ($125.00) which is nonrefundable if the application for the permit is denied.
Article IX. Term of permit.
The permit is valid for one year from the date of issuance.
Article X. Periodic inspection.
Whenever an inspection of the premises used for the operation of a business by
the holder of a special amusement permit is provided for by law, or is reasonably
necessary in order to determine whether there is compliance with any pertinent law, the
licensee shall permit the health officer or any official or employee of the codes
enforcement office to make the inspection at any reasonable time, on written request.
Article XI. Suspension or revocation of a permit.
After seven (7) days notice published in a newspaper having general circulation in
the town, and public hearing, the town council may suspend or revoke a special
amusement permit if it determines that the music, dancing, or entertainment being
provided at the licensed premises constitutes a detriment to the public health, safety, or
welfare; or violates any law; or if the health officer or any official or employee of the
codes enforcement office has been refused admission to make an inspection of the
premises after written request.
Article XII. Penalty.
A person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be punished by a
fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Amended July 1, 2008
3
Article XIII. Qualifications.
In order to be eligible for this license, an applicant shall meet any qualifications
established by law and shall pay any arrearages for taxes, fees, or any other obligation to
the town.
Article XIV. Live Entertainment Regulation.
No licensee shall permit entertainment on the licensed premises, whether provided by
professional entertainer(s), employees of the licensed premises, or any other person,
when the entertainment involves:
(a) The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse, masturbation,
sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts which are
prohibited by law.
(b) The actual or simulated touching, caressing, or fondling of breasts, buttocks, anus,
or genitals;
(c) The actual or simulated displaying of the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, anus, or
any portion of the female breasts at or below the areola thereof;
(d) The permitting of any licensee of any person to remain in or upon the licensed
premises who exposes to any public view any portion of his or her genitals or
anus or female breasts below the areola thereof;
For the purposes of this section, the words "displaying" and "exposes" shall mean being
unclothed or uncostumed or not covered by fully opaque cloth or textile material, or
employing any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or to
simulate the genitals, public hair, buttocks, anus or the portions of the female breasts at or
below the areola thereof.
Amended August 10, 2004
1
CHAPTER 51
ORDINANCE CONTROLLING NUDITY IN BUSINESSES
Article I. Purpose
Section 51.101 - Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to regulate nudity as a form of commercial exploitation
and to regulate dress as a form of conduct and not to impede the free exchange and
expression of ideas. The conduct regulated is that which the community and Town
Council in public meetings have clearly found to be offensive to the general welfare,
public safety, order and morals of the Town of Freeport and its citizens.
Article II - Definitions
Section 51.201 - Theater.
As used in this Ordinance, "theater" means (a) a building, playhouse, hall or other place
having a permanent stage upon which movable scenery and theatrical or vaudeville or
similar performances are given and permanently affixed seats so arranged that a body of
spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage, or (b) a building, room, hall, or
other place whose primary function is to present movies or motion pictures and which has
a permanent movie screen and permanently affixed seats so arranged that a body of
spectators can have an unobstructed view of said screen, or (c) an open-air or "drive-in"
movie having a permanently affixed movie screen and permanently affixed devices for
broadcasting the soundtracks of movies or motion pictures inside of the patrons' vehicles.
Section 51.202 - Sales Person, Waiter, Waitress and Entertainer.
A person shall be deemed a sales person, waiter, waitress or entertainer if such person
acts in that capacity, without regard to whether or not such person is paid any
compensation by the management of the business in which the activity is performed.
Section 51.203 - Expose.
"Expose" or "exposed" means unclothed or uncostumed or not covered by fully opaque
cloth or textile material, or employing any device or covering which is intended to give
the appearance of or to simulate the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anus or a
portion of the female breasts at or below the areola thereof.
Article III - Prohibitions
Section 51.301 It shall be unlawful for a person who, while acting as a sales person,
waiter, waitress, entertainer or in any other capacity as an owner, manager, or employee
in a business to expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum or anus or to
expose any portion of the female breasts at or below the areola thereof.
Amended August 10, 2004
2
Section 51.302. It shall be unlawful for a person to cause, permit, procure, counsel, or
assist any person to expose himself or herself as prohibited by Section 51.30
1 of this Ordinance.
Section 51.303. It shall be unlawful for a person operating a business to, at said place of
business, display or cause or permit the display of photographs, covers of magazines,
newspapers or other printed matter which expose or show genital, pubic hair, buttocks,
perineum, anus, or female breasts at or below the areola thereof, in such manner that such
photographs, covers of magazines, newspapers or other printed matter are visible to
children or unwilling adults using the sidewalks, streets or highways.
Article IV - Exceptions
Section 51.401. Sections 51.201 and 51.202 of this Ordinance do not apply to a theater or
similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances or the
presentation of movies.
Section 51.402. This Ordinance does not apply to any act authorized or prohibited by
any statute of the State of Maine.
Article V - Penalty
Section 51.501. Any act made unlawful by this Ordinance and any violation of this
Ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 (five hundred) for each
offense. Each day that such unlawful act or violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
Section 51.502. In addition to any other penalty provided by the law, the commission of
acts prohibited by this Ordinance shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the
town seeking an injunction to prohibit further and continued violation thereof.
Article VI - Severability
Section 51.601. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is
for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this Ordinance.
Approved March 7, 2006
Amended 03/06/07
Fees updated 06/04/08
CHAPTER 52
TOWN OF FREEPORT
IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE
Approved March 7, 2006
Amended 03/06/07
Fees updated 06/04/08
i
Chapter I – General Provisions .............................................................................................................. 1
Authority ............................................................................................................................................ 1
Purpose ............................................................................................................................................... 1
Definitions .......................................................................................................................................... 1
Use of Impact Fees ............................................................................................................................. 1
Segregation of Impact Fees from General Revenues ......................................................................... 1
Collection of Impact Fees .................................................................................................................. 2
Payment of Impact Fees ................................................................................................................. 2
Deferral of Impact Fees .................................................................................................................. 2
Refund of Unused Impact Fees .......................................................................................................... 2
Amendment of Fees ........................................................................................................................... 2
Inflation Adjustment .......................................................................................................................... 3
Severability ......................................................................................................................................... 3
Chapter II – Pavement Maintenance Impact Fee ................................................................................... 4
Use of Pavement Maintenance Impact Fees....................................................................................... 4
Calculation and Collection of Pavement Maintenance Impact Fees .................................................. 4
Exemptions ......................................................................................................................................... 5
Approved March 7, 2006
Amended 03/06/07
Fees updated 06/04/08
1
CHAPTER 52
TOWN OF FREEPORT
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE
CHAPTER I
General Provisions
1. Authority.
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authority of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4354 and 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 3001.
2. Purpose.
The Freeport Town Council has determined that new development creates demands on municipal
government to provide new public facilities and to expand, improve or replace existing public
facilities and/or infrastructure. The Town Council concludes that in order to provide an equitable
source of funding for such new, expanded, improved or replacement facilities and/or infrastructure, it
is appropriate to establish a program of development impact fees and to charge a proportionate share
of the costs of new, expanded, improved or replacement facilities and/or infrastructure to the
developers and/or occupants of the developments which make the new, expanded, improved or
replacement infrastructure necessary.
3. Definitions.
Unless otherwise defined in this ordinance, terms used in this ordinance shall have the same
meanings as defined terms in Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Freeport, Maine (“Zoning
Ordinance”). The following terms shall have the following meanings:
Affordable Housing Dwelling Unit: A dwelling unit developed by a governmental agency or by a
non-profit housing corporation (as defined in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5002) which is permanently restricted
by recorded deed restriction or covenant and/or regulatory restriction to occupancy only by lower
income households, as that term is defined in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5002.
4. Use of Impact Fees.
Impact fees collected by the Town pursuant to this ordinance may be used only for financing facility
improvements which the Town Council has determined are made necessary by new development.
The Town Council has determined that fees imposed by schedules in subsequent chapters of this
ordinance are reasonably related to the demands created by new development and are reasonably
related to the portion or percentage of existing infrastructure used by new development. Impact fees
collected pursuant to this ordinance shall be used exclusively for capital improvements, and shall not
be used for operational expenses. The Town of Freeport shall expend funds collected from impact
fees solely for the purposes for which they were collected.
5. Segregation of Impact Fees from General Revenues.
Impact fees collected pursuant to this ordinance shall be maintained by the Town Treasurer in a
separate impact fee account and shall be segregated from the Town’s general revenues. The
Town Treasurer shall deposit impact fees in special non-lapsing accounts dedicated for funding of the
improvements for which the fee is collected.
Approved March 7, 2006
Amended 03/06/07
Fees updated 06/04/08
2
6. Collection of Impact Fees.
a. Payment of Impact Fees
No person shall commence construction of any building requiring a building permit under the
Zoning Ordinance or commence construction of a road until such person has paid any impact
fees required by this ordinance or has recorded an agreement for deferral of impact fees
pursuant to Chapter 1, Section 6, Subsection (b) below. Upon collecting such impact fee, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall remit the funds to the Town Treasurer who shall deposit the
funds as required in Section 5 above. The Town Treasurer shall make a record of the name
and mailing address of the applicant paying the impact fee, the tax map and lot numbers of the
property for which the impact fee is collected, the amount collected, and the date the impact
fee is received. The Code Enforcement Officer shall maintain such record in the files relating
to the property for which the impact fee was paid.
b. Deferral of Impact Fees
The Town treasurer may enter into an agreement to defer collection of all or part of the impact
fees imposed by this ordinance in the following circumstances:
1. If the fee is greater than $10,000, collection of the portion over $10,000 may be
deferred until the road is substantially completed, or until a certificate of occupancy is
issued.
Such agreement shall be in writing, shall be joined by all owners of the property, including
mortgagees and lien holders of record at the time of execution of the agreement, shall by its
terms create a consensual lien on the property, shall be binding on the applicant’s heirs,
successors and assigns, and shall be recorded in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds by
the applicant prior to the issuance of the building permit.
7. Refund of Unused Impact Fees.
Impact fees collected pursuant to this ordinance shall be utilized by the Town according to the
schedules specified in subsequent chapters of this ordinance for the completion of specific capital
improvements, but in no event later than ten years after the date upon which the impact fee was
collected. Any impact fees which are not so utilized and any impact fees collected which exceed the
Town’s actual costs of implementing the infrastructure improvements for which such fees were
collected shall be refunded. Refunds shall be paid to the owner of record of the property for which
the impact fee was collected, determined as of the date the refund is made.
8. Amendment of Fees.
The impact fees established in this ordinance are based upon the Town Council’s best estimates of
the costs of the construction of the facilities for which the fees are collected and, where appropriate,
upon estimates of state and/or federal funding contributions. The Council may, by amendments to
this ordinance, change the amounts of the impact fees from time to time as warranted by new
information or changed circumstances.
Approved March 7, 2006
Amended 03/06/07
Fees updated 06/04/08
3
8A. Inflation Adjustment.
The impact fees established by the Town Council in this ordinance shall be adjusted annually by the
Town Treasurer to account for changes in the cost of bituminous pavement. Commencing on April 1,
2007 and on each April 1st thereafter, the Treasurer shall increase each impact fee by the dollar
amount (rounded to the nearest ten dollar increment) resulting from the annual pavement bid
coordinated by the Greater Portland Council of Governments for the Freeport Region. If there has
been no such increase, there shall be no adjustment under this paragraph. Each year on April 1st, the
Treasurer shall publish a schedule of impact fees adjusted pursuant to this paragraph (the “adjusted
impact fees”) and provide a copy of such schedule to the Code Enforcement Officer. The adjusted
impact fees shall apply to all building permits issued on or after April 5 in the calendar year 2007 and
on or after April 1st of each calendar year thereafter, whether or not the applications for building
permits were filed prior to such dates.
8. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be determined in a court to be unconstitutional,
invalid or unenforceable, such determination shall not affect the validity of any other portion of the
ordinance or of the remainder of the ordinance as a whole.
Approved March 7, 2006
Amended 03/06/07
Fees updated 06/04/08
4
CHAPTER
Pavement Maintenance Impact Fees
1. Use of Pavement Maintenance Impact Fees.
The fees collected under this chapter of this ordinance shall be used to fund one or more of those
projects identified in the Freeport Road Surface Management Program as updated annually. The fees
shall be specifically used for pavement that is deemed a necessary improvement to roads listed in that
Program.
2. Calculation and Collection of the Pavement Maintenance Impact Fees.
Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any new dwelling unit or an addition to a dwelling unit,
or a new commercial or industrial building or an addition to an existing commercial or industrial
building or prior to the commencement of construction of any new road the Code Enforcement
Officer shall collect a pavement maintenance impact fee according to the following schedule. For
projects with multiple buildings, the fees shall be calculated on a per building basis, regardless of
how many buildings are on a building permit.
Size of building or addition
(residential, commercial, or industrial)
Amount
< 1,000 gross floor area No fee
1,000 – 1,500 gross floor area $300
1,501 – 1,750 gross floor area $600
1,751 – 2,000 gross floor area $900
2,001 – 2,250 gross floor area $1,200
2,251 – 2,500 gross floor area $1,500
For each additional 250 gross floor area Add $300
No fee for an individual building may
exceed $30,000
Length of new road construction
(includes cul-de-sacs and turn arounds)
Amount
< 250’ No fee
250’ – 500’ $1,200
501’ – 750’ $2,400
751’ – 1,000’ $3,600
Approved March 7, 2006
Amended 03/06/07
Fees updated 06/04/08
5
1,001 – 1,250’ $4,800
For each additional 250’ of road Add $1,200
2. Exemptions.
1. A pavement maintenance impact fee is not required for a dwelling unit that is an
“affordable housing dwelling unit” as described herein.
2. Construction undertaken by the Town of Freeport.
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance
Chapter 53
Section 1. Purpose.
The purpose of this “Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance” (the “Ordinance”)
is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Freeport
through monitoring and enforcement of compliance with post-construction stormwater
management plans in order to comply with minimum control measures requirements of the
federal Clean Water Act, of federal regulations, and of Maine’s General Permit for Small
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems.
Section 2. Objectives
This Ordinance seeks to ensure that post-construction stormwater management plans are
followed, and stormwater management facilities are properly maintained and pose no threat to
public safety.
Section 3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the terms listed below are defined as follows:
A. Applicant. "Applicant" means a Person with requisite right, title or interest or an agent for
such Person who has filed an application for New Development or Redevelopment that requires
a Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan under this Ordinance.
B. Best Management Practices (“BMP”). “Best Management Practices” or “BMPs” means
schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the State. BMPs also include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
C. Clean Water Act. “Clean Water Act” means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., also known as the “Clean Water Act”), and any subsequent amendments
thereto.
D. Construction Activity. “Construction Activity” means construction with one acre or more of
Disturbed Area; or activity with less than one acre of total land area that is part of a subdivision,
if the subdivision will ultimately have Disturbed Area equal to or greater than one acre; or
20,000 square feet or more of Impervious Area in the watershed of an urban impaired stream as
listed in Chapter 502, Appendix B in the Rules of the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection, as amended from time to time.
E. Discharge. “Discharge” means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emptying, dumping,
disposing or other addition of Pollutants to “waters of the State.” “Direct discharge” or “point
source” means any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to,
any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock,
2
concentrated animal feeding operation or vessel or other floating craft, from which Pollutants are
or may be discharged.
F. Disturbed Area. “Disturbed Area” is surface area proposed for clearing, grading and
excavation. Mere cutting of trees, without grubbing, stump removal, disturbance or exposure of
soil is not considered “disturbed area.” “Disturbed area” does not include routine maintenance
but does include redevelopment. “Routine maintenance” is maintenance performed to maintain
the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, and original purpose of land or improvements
thereon.
G. Enforcement Authority. “Enforcement Authority” means the Codes Enforcement Officer,
with the support of the Town Engineer, who are both authorized by the Municipality to
administer and enforce this Ordinance.
H. Impervious Area. “Impervious Area” means the total area of the Premises that consists of
buildings and associated constructed facilities or areas that will be covered with a lowpermeability
material, such as asphalt or concrete, and areas such as gravel roads and unpaved
areas that will be compacted through design or use to reduce their permeability.
I. Municipality. “Municipality” means the Town of Freeport.
J. Municipal Permitting Authority. “Municipal Permitting Authority” means the municipal
official or body that has jurisdiction over the land use approval or permit required for a New
Development or Redevelopment, now the Project Review Board.
K. Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, or MS4. “Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System” or “MS4,” means conveyances for storm water, including, but not limited to, roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels
or storm drains (other than publicly owned treatment works) owned or operated by any
municipality, sewer or sewage district, fire district, State agency or Federal agency or other
public entity that discharges directly to surface waters of the State.
L. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge
Permit. “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge
Permit” means a permit issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) or by the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection (“DEP”) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual,
group, or general area-wide basis.
M. New Development. “New Development” means any Construction Activity on unimproved
Premises.
M. Person. “Person” means any individual, firm, corporation, municipality, quasi-municipal
corporation, State agency or Federal agency or other legal entity.
O. Pollutant. “Pollutant” means dredged spoil, solid waste, junk, incinerator residue, sewage,
refuse, effluent, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemicals, biological or radiological
3
materials, oil, petroleum products or by-products, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock,
sand, dirt and industrial, municipal, domestic, commercial or agricultural wastes of any kind.
P. Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan. “Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Plan” means BMPs and associated inspection and maintenance procedures for the
Stormwater Management Facilities employed by a New Development or Redevelopment to meet
the stormwater standards of the Municipality’s subdivision, site plan, or other zoning, planning
or other land use ordinances, and approved by the Municipal Permitting Authority.
Q. Premises. “Premises” means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips, located within the
Urbanized Area in Freeport
R. Qualified Post-Construction Stormwater Inspector. “Qualified Post-Construction
Stormwater Inspector” means a person who conducts post-construction inspections of
Stormwater Management Facilities and meets the following qualifications:
1. The inspector must not have any ownership or financial interest in the property being
inspected nor be an employee or partner of any entity having an ownership or financial
interest in the property, and
2. The inspector must be on the list of approved post-construction stormwater inspectors
maintained by the Town Engineer, who shall approve such inspectors only if they meet the
following criteria:
a. Have a college degree in an environmental science or civil engineering, or comparable
expertise,
b. Have a practical knowledge of stormwater hydrology and stormwater management
techniques, including the maintenance requirements for Stormwater Management
Facilities, and
c. Have the ability to determine if stormwater facilities are performing as intended.
S. Redevelopment. “Redevelopment” means Construction Activity on Premises already
improved with buildings, structures or activities or uses, but does not include such activities as
exterior remodeling.
T. Regulated Small MS4. “Regulated Small MS4” means any Small MS4 regulated by the State
of Maine “General Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater from Small Municipal Separate
Storm Sewer Systems” effective July 1, 2008 (“General Permit”), including all those located
partially or entirely within an Urbanized Area (UA) and those additional Small MS4s located
outside a UA that as of the issuance of the General Permit have been designated by the DEP as
Regulated Small MS4s.
U. Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, or Small MS4. “Small Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer System”, or “Small MS4,”means any MS4 that is not already covered by
4
the Phase I MS4 stormwater program including municipally owned or operated storm sewer
systems, State or federally-owned systems, such as colleges, universities, prisons, Maine
Department of Transportation and Maine Turnpike Authority road systems and facilities, and
military bases and facilities.
V. Storm Drainage System. “Storm Drainage System” means the Municipality’s Regulated
Small MS4.
W. Stormwater. “Stormwater” means any Stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface
runoff and drainage; “Stormwater” has the same meaning as “Storm Water.”
X. Stormwater Management Facilities. “Stormwater Management Facilities” means any
parking areas, catch basins, drainage swales, detention basins and ponds, pipes and related
structures that are part of the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan for a New
Development or Redevelopment.
Y. Urbanized Area (“UA”). “Urbanized Area” or “UA” means the areas of the State of Maine
so defined by the latest decennial census by the U.S. Bureau of the Census.
Section 4. Applicability.
A. In General. This Ordinance applies to all New Development and Redevelopment within the
Urbanized Area and to associated Stormwater Management Facilities.
B. Exception. This Ordinance does not apply to New Development or Redevelopment on a lot,
tract or parcel where that lot, tract or parcel is part of a subdivision that has received approval of
its Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan and Stormwater Management Facilities
under the Municipality’s subdivision or other zoning, planning or other land use ordinances; said
lot, tract or parcel shall not require additional review under this Ordinance, but shall comply with
the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan requirements for that approved subdivision.
Section 5. Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan Approval
A. General Requirement. Notwithstanding any ordinance provision to the contrary, and except
as provided in Section 4.B. above, no Applicant for a building permit, subdivision approval, site
plan approval or other zoning, planning or other land use approval for New Development or
Redevelopment to which this Ordinance is applicable shall receive such permit or approval for
that New Development or Redevelopment unless the Applicant also receives approval under the
Municipality’s subdivision, site plan or other zoning, planning or other land use ordinances for
its Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan and Stormwater Management Facilities for
that New Development or Redevelopment, even if the Municipality’s subdivision, site plan or
other zoning, planning or other land use ordinances would not otherwise apply.
B. Notice of BMP Discharge to Municipality’s MS4. At the time of application for a building
permit, subdivision approval, site plan approval or other zoning, planning or other land use
approval for New Development or Redevelopment to which this Ordinance is applicable, the
Applicant shall notify the Municipal Permitting Authority if its Post-Construction Stormwater
5
Management Plan includes any BMP(s) that will discharge to the Municipality’s MS4 and shall
include in this notification a listing of which BMP(s) will so discharge.
Section 6. Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan Compliance
A. General Requirements. Any Person owning, operating, leasing or having control over
Stormwater Management Facilities required by a Post-Construction Stormwater Management
Plan approved under the Municipality’s subdivision, site plan or other zoning, planning or other
land use ordinances shall demonstrate compliance with that Plan as follows.
1. That Person shall employ a Qualified Post-Construction Stormwater Inspector to, at least
annually, inspect the Stormwater Management Facilities, including but not limited to any parking
areas, catch basins, drainage swales, detention basins and ponds, pipes and related structures, in
accordance with all municipal and state inspection, cleaning and maintenance requirements of
the approved Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan.
2. If the Stormwater Management Facilities require maintenance to function as intended by
the approved Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan, that Person shall take corrective
action(s) to address the deficiency or deficiencies.
3. That Person shall employ a Qualified Post-Construction Stormwater Inspector to provide,
on or by May 31 of each year, a completed and signed certification to the Enforcement Authority
in a form identical to that attached as Appendix 1 to this Ordinance, certifying that the
Stormwater Management Facilities have been inspected, and that they are adequately maintained
and functioning as intended by the approved Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan, or
that they require maintenance or repair, describing any required maintenance and any
deficiencies found during inspection of the Stormwater Management Facilities and, if the
Stormwater Management Facilities require maintenance or repair of deficiencies in order to
function as intended by the approved Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan, the
Person shall provide a record of the required maintenance or deficiency and corrective action(s)
taken.
B. Right of Entry. In order to determine compliance with this Ordinance and with the Post-
Construction Stormwater Management Plan, the Enforcement Authority may enter upon property
at reasonable hours with the consent of the owner, occupant or agent to inspect the Stormwater
Management Facilities.
C. Annual Report. Beginning July 1, 2009 and each year thereafter, the Municipality shall
include the following in its Annual Report to the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection:
1. The cumulative number of sites that have Stormwater Management Facilities discharging
into their MS4;
2. A summary of the number of sites that have Stormwater Management Facilities
discharging into their MS4 that were reported to the Municipality;
3. The number of sites with documented functioning Stormwater Management Facilities;
and
6
4. The number of sites that required routine maintenance or remedial action to ensure that
Stormwater Management Facilities are functioning as intended.
Section 7. Enforcement.
It shall be unlawful for any Person to violate any provision of or to fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this Ordinance or of the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan.
Whenever the Enforcement Authority believes that a Person has violated this Ordinance or the
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan, the Enforcement Authority may enforce this
Ordinance in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
A. Notice of Violation. Whenever the Enforcement Authority believes that a Person has violated
this Ordinance or the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan, the Enforcement
Authority may order compliance with this Ordinance or with the Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Plan by written notice of violation to that Person indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it, including, without limitation:
1. The abatement of violations, and the cessation of practices, or operations in violation of
this Ordinance or of the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan;
2. At the Person’s expense, compliance with BMPs required as a condition of approval of
the New Development or Redevelopment, the repair of Stormwater Management
Facilities and/or the restoration of any affected property; and/or
3. The payment of fines, of the Municipality’s remediation costs and of the Municipality’s
reasonable administrative costs and attorneys’ fees and costs.
If abatement of a violation, compliance with BMPs, repair of Stormwater Management Facilities
and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within
which such abatement, compliance, repair and/or restoration must be completed.
B. Penalties/Fines/Injunctive Relief. Any Person who violates this Ordinance or the Post-
Construction Stormwater Management Plan shall be subject to fines, penalties and orders for
injunctive relief and shall be responsible for the Municipality’s attorney’s fees and costs, all in
accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. Moreover, any Person who violates this Ordinance or the Post-Construction
Stormwater Management Plan also shall be responsible for any and all fines, penalties, damages
and costs, including, but not limited to attorneys’ fees and costs, incurred by the Municipality for
violation of federal and State environmental laws and regulations caused by or related to that
Person’s violation of this Ordinance or of the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan;
this responsibility shall be in addition to any penalties, fines or injunctive relief imposed under
this Section.
C. Consent Agreement. The Enforcement Authority may, with the approval of the municipal
officers, enter into a written consent agreement with the violator to address timely abatement of
the violation(s) of this Ordinance or of the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan for
the purposes of eliminating violations of this Ordinance or of the Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Plan and of recovering fines, costs and fees without court action.
7
D. Appeal of Notice of Violation. Any Person receiving a Notice of Violation or suspension
notice may appeal the determination of the Enforcement Authority to the Board of Appeals in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Freeport Zoning Ordinance. The notice of
appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of receipt of the Notice of Violation. The
Board of Appeals shall hold a de novo hearing on the appeal within 30 days from the date of
receipt of the notice of appeal. The Board of Appeals may affirm, reverse or modify the decision
of the Enforcement Authority. A party aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Appeals may
appeal that decision to the Maine Superior Court within 45 days of the date of the Board of
Appeals decision pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
E. Enforcement Measures. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements
set forth in the Notice of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal to the Board of Appeals, within
45 days of a decision of the Board of Appeals affirming the Enforcement Authority’s decision,
then the Enforcement Authority may recommend to the municipal officers that the municipality’s
attorney file an enforcement action in a Maine court of competent jurisdiction under Rule 80K of
the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
Section 8. Severability.
The provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause,
sentence, or paragraph of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment,
or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions,
clauses, sentences, or paragraphs or application of this Ordinance.
Section 9. Basis.
The Town of Freeport enacts this “Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance” (the
“Ordinance”) pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 (municipal home rule ordinance authority), 38
M.R.S.A. § 413 (the “Wastewater Discharge Law”), 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. (the “Clean Water
Act”), and 40 CFR Part 122 (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s regulations governing the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (“NPDES”)). The Maine Department of
Environmental Protection, through its promulgation of the “General Permit for the Discharge of
Stormwater from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems,” has listed the Town of
Freeport as having a Regulated Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (“Small MS4”);
under this General Permit, listing as a Regulated Small MS4 necessitates enactment of this
Ordinance as part of the Municipality’s Storm Water Management Program in order to satisfy
the minimum control measures required by Part IV D 5 (“Post-construction stormwater
management in new development and redevelopment”).
Enacted this 2nd day of June, 2009.
Effective Date: June 2, 2009.
8
APPENDIX 1
Annual Stormwater Management Facilities Certification
(to be sent to Municipal Enforcement Authority)
I, ________________________________ (print or type name), certify the following:
1. I am making this Annual Stormwater Management Facilities Certification for the
following property: _____________________________________________________________
(print or type name of subdivision, condominium or other development) located at
_________________________________________ (print or type address), (the “Property”);
2. The owner, operator, tenant, lessee or homeowners’ association of the Property is:
______________________________________________________ (name(s) of owner, operator,
tenant, lessee, homeowners’ association or other party having control over the Property);
3. I am a Qualified Post-Construction Stormwater Inspector (as defined by the
Freeport Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance, and) hired by the owner,
operator, tenant, lessee or homeowners’ association of the Property (circle one);
5. On _____________, 20__, I inspected the Stormwater Management Facilities,
including but not limited to parking areas, catch basins, drainage swales, detention basins and
ponds, pipes and related structures required by the approved Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Plan for the Property;
6. At the time of my inspection of the Stormwater Management Facilities on the
Property, I identified the following need(s) for routine maintenance or deficiencies in the
Stormwater Management Facilities:
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
7. On ____________, 20__, the owner, operator, tenant, lessee or homeowners’
association of the Property took or had taken the following routine maintenance or the following
corrective action(s) to address the deficiencies in the Stormwater Management Facilities stated in
6. above:
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
9
8. As of the date of this certification, the Stormwater Management Facilities are
functioning as intended by the approved Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan for the
Property.
Date:____________________, 20__. By:______________________________________
Signature
______________________________________
Print Name
STATE OF MAINE
_______________________, ss. _______________________, 20__
Personally appeared the above-named _______________________________, the
_________________ of ____________________________, and acknowledged the foregoing
Annual Certification to be said person’s free act and deed in said capacity.
Before me,
___________________________________
Notary Public/Attorney at Law
Print Name: ___________________________________
Mail this certification to the Municipal Enforcement Authority at the following address:
Town Engineer
Freeport Municipal Building
30 Main Street
Freeport, ME 04032
TOWN OF FREEPORT
CHAPTER 54
EXEMPTING ELIGIBLE ACTIVE DUTY MILITARY PERSONNEL
FROM VEHICLE EXCISE TAX
Section 1. Authority.
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. § 1483-A, which expressly authorizes such
ordinances.
Section 2. Excise tax exemption; qualifications.
Vehicles owned by a resident of the Town of Freeport who is on active duty serving in the
United States Armed Forces and who is either permanently stationed at a military or naval post,
station or base outside this State or deployed for military service for a period of more than 180
days and who desires to register that resident’s vehicle(s) in this State are hereby exempted from
the annual excise tax imposed pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. § 1482.
To apply for this exemption, the resident must present to the municipal excise tax collector
certification from the commander of the resident’s post, station or base, or from the
commander’s designated agent, that the resident is permanently stationed at that post, station or
base or is deployed for military service for a period of more than 180 days.
For purposes of this section, “United States Armed Forces” includes the National Guard and the
Reserves of the United States Armed Forces.
For purposes of this section, “deployed for military service” has the same meaning as in 26
M.R.S.A. § 814(1)(A).
For purposes of this section, “vehicle” has the same meaning as in 36 M.R.S.A. § 1481(5) and
does not include any snowmobiles as defined in 12 M.R.S.A. § 13001.
Section 3. Effective date; duration.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon enactment by the municipal legislative body
unless otherwise provided and shall remain in effect unless and until it or 36 M.R.S.A. § 1483-A
is repealed.
Effective date: May 15, 2012
Chapter 55-Single Use Carry-Out Bags
Section 55-101
It is in the best interest of the citizens and visitors of Freeport to protect the environment
and natural resources of Maine by: discouraging the distribution and use of
disposable, single- use, carryout p a p e r shopping bags, prohibition of single-use
carry out PLASTIC bags and encouraging the use of reusable shopping bags in
Stores, as defined below.
Section 55-102 Findings:
Single-use carryout bags have a negative impact on the environment and wildlife; and
It is important to keep the Town of Freeport as litter-free as possible to enhance the
quality of life for Freeport's residents and visitors; and
Freeport is a coastal community with a vested interest in protecting the ocean
environment from plastic debris; and
The petition group believes that the best alternative to single-use carryout bags is the
use of reusable bags for shopping, which is accomplished through prohibiting the free
distribution of single-use carryout bags by Stores, as defined in this Section; and
Authority:
This proposed Ordinance to be adopted pursuant to the Town's home rule authority
pursuant to 30-A §3001 et seq.
Section 55-103 Definitions:
Single-Use Carryout Bag. Single-Use Carryout Bag means a bag other than a
Reusable Bag, as defined below, provided at the check stand, cash register, point of sale
or other point of departure for the purpose of transporting food or merchandise out of the
establishment. The term Single-Use Carryout Bag includes compostable and
biodegradable bags, including paper bags, but does not include Reusable Bags, Produce
Bags, Product Bags or bags provided by pharmacists to contain prescription drugs.
Produce Bag or Product Bag. The terms Produce Bag or Product Bag mean any bag
without handles used exclusively to carry produce, meats, other food items or merchandise
within the store to the point of sale inside such store or to prevent such items from coming
into direct contact with other purchased items.
Reusable Bag means a bag that meets all of the following criteria:
(a) Designed and manufactured to withstand repeated uses over a period of time;
(b) Is machine washable or, made from a material that can be cleaned and
disinfected regularly;
(c) Has a minimum lifetime of 75 uses; and
(d) Has the capability of carrying a minimum of 18 pounds.
Store. The term Store means any of the following retail establishments located
within the Town of Freeport engaged in the sale of perishable or non-perishable goods to
the ultimate consumer for direct use or consumption and not for resale:
(a) a full-line, self-service market located in a permanent building, operating
year-round, and which sells at retail a line of staple foodstuffs, meats,
produce, household. supplies, dairy products or other perishable items.
(b) a drug store, pharmacy, supermarket, grocery store, convenience food
store, food mart, or other entity engaged in the retail sale of a limited line of
goods that includes milk, bread, soda, and snack foods.
"Store" does not mean:
1) Restaurants; or
2) Businesses at which food sales are an incidental part of the business.
Food sales will be considered to be "incidental" if such sales
comprise no more than 2 percent of the business's gross sales in the
Town of Freeport as measured by the dollar value of food sales as a
percentage of the dollar value of total sales at any single location.
Section 55-104 Single-Use Carryout Bag:
(a) No Store, as defined above, shall provide a Single use Carryout Bag made of
plastic that does not meet all the criteria as a Reusable Bag, as defined above, to
a customer at the check stand, cash register, point of sale or other point of departure for
the purpose of transporting food or merchandise out of the establishment.
(b) A Store may make available for sale to a customer a Single-Use PAPER Carryout
Bag for a mandatory, uniform charge of five cents ($0.05) per bag.
(c) All monies collected by a Store for Single-Use Carryout Bags under this Section
may be used by the Store for any lawful purpose.
(d) All Stores must post signage clearly indicating the per bag charge for Single-Use
Carryout P A P ER Bags.
(e) Notwithstanding this Section, no Store may make available for sale a Single-Use
Carryout PAPER Bag unless the amount of the sale of the Single-Use Carryout is
separately itemized on the sale receipt.
(f) No Store shall rebate or otherwise reimburse a customer any portion of the
minimum charge required in Subsection (b).
(g) Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit customers from using bags of
any type that the customer brings to the Store for their own use or from carrying away
from the Store goods that are not placed in a bag provided by the Store.
(h) Carry–out bags for Take-Out meals from a restaurant or food ready to eat
carried out from a business that prepares meals on-site for sale to the public are
exempt from the definitions of a single use bag.
Section 55-105 Exemptions:
A Store shall be exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance, in a situation deemed by
the Town Manager to be an emergency for the immediate preservation of the public
health or safety. ·
Section 55-106 Record Keeping and Inspection:
Every Store shall keep complete and accurate records or documents of the purchase and
sale of any Single-Use Carryout PAPER Bag, for a minimum period of three (3) years
from the date of purchase and sale, which record shall be available for inspection at no
cost to the Town during regular business hours by any Town employee authorized to
enforce this Ordinance. Unless an alternative location or method of review is mutually
agreed upon, the records or documents shall be available at the Store's address. The
provision of false information including incomplete records or documents to the Town
shall be a violation of this Ordinance.
Section 55-107 Violations and Enforcement:
The Town Manager or his/her designee(s) shall have the primary responsibility for
enforcement of this Ordinance. If the Town Manager or his/her designee(s) determines that a
violation of this Ordinance has occurred, he/she shall issue a written warning notice to the
Store that a violation has occurred. Subsequent violations of the Ordinance shall be subject
to the penalties set forth below.
Violations of this Ordinance shall be punishable by fines as follows:
• A fine not exceeding $250 for the first violation in a one-year period;
• A fine not exceeding $500 for the second and each subsequent violation in a
one-year period. Each day that a violation occurs will be considered a
subsequent violation.
Section 55-108 Effective Date:
The provisions of this ordinance shall become effective on September 12th, 2016.
Section 55-109 Severability:
If any part or provision of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the Ordinance, including the application
of such part or provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected
thereby and shall continue in full force and effect. To this end, provisions of this
Ordinance are severable.
Enacted 12/06/2016
Extended additional 180 days on 06/06/2017
1
CHAPTER 56
SECTION 56-01
TOWN OF FREEPORT ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A MORATORIUM
ON MEDICAL MARIJUANA PRODUCTION FACILITIES
WHEREAS, the cultivation and production of medical marijuana is an authorized,
regulated program of the State of Maine; and
WHEREAS, the cultivation and production in a medical marijuana caregiver’s residence
or a qualifying patient’s primary residence is allowed pursuant to the Maine Medical Use of
Marijuana Act; and
WHEREAS, there has been an increasing number of requests regarding the establishment
of commercial facilities for the cultivation and production of medical marijuana outside of a
primary residence; and
WHEREAS, State law specifically authorizes municipalities to regulate cultivation and
production of medical marijuana that is outside of a primary caregiver’s or registered patient’s
primary residence as it relates to land use controls and regulations; and
WHEREAS, operations related to the cultivation and production of medical marijuana
outside of an authorized primary residence raise a number of concerns related to the public safety
and welfare, including, but not limited to, potential adverse effects on neighborhoods, security of
the facilities, and odors that may create a public nuisance or hazard; and
WHEREAS, the Town’s existing ordinances do not provide an adequate mechanism to
regulate and control medical marijuana production facilities and are inadequate to prevent the
potential for serious public harm from the future establishment of medical marijuana production
facilities; and
Enacted 12/06/2016
Extended additional 180 days on 06/06/2017
2
WHEREAS, the Town needs a reasonable amount of time to study the land use
implications of medical marijuana production facilities and to develop reasonable regulations
governing their location and operation; and
WHEREAS, during the period of this Moratorium, the Town will work on developing
appropriate land use regulations concerning medical marijuana production facilities; and
NOW THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority granted to it by 30-A M.R.S. § 4356, be it
hereby ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Freeport, Maine, in Town Council
assembled, as follows:
1. DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Ordinance, the following terms have the following meanings:
“Marijuana”: as defined in State Administrative Rules (10-144 CMR Chapter 122), § 1.17,
“Marijuana.”
“Medical Marijuana”: Marijuana as allowed per the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act.
“Medical Marijuana Caregiver”: as defined in State Administrative Rules (10-144 CMR Chapter
122), § 1.31, “Primary Caregiver.”
“Medical Marijuana Production Facility”: A facility used for cultivating, processing, and/or
storing of medical marijuana by a medical marijuana caregiver at a location which is not the
medical marijuana caregiver’s primary year-round residence or their patient’s primary yearround
residence.
2. APPLICABILITY AND PURPOSE.
This moratorium shall apply to medical marijuana production facilities, as defined above, that
are proposed to be located within the Town of Freeport on or after the effective date of this
Ordinance. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in 1 M.R.S.A. § 302, this Ordinance
applies to any application relating to the establishment or operation of a business or operation for
a medical marijuana production facility, whether or not such application had become a “pending
proceeding” as defined in 1 M.R.S.A. § 302 prior to the enactment of this Ordinance.
Enacted 12/06/2016
Extended additional 180 days on 06/06/2017
3
3. PROHIBITION.
During the time this Ordinance is in effect, no official, officer, board, body, agency, agent or
employee of the Town of Freeport shall accept, process or act upon any application for any
approval, including but not limited to a building permit, certificate of occupancy, site plan
review, conditional use, or any other approval relating to the establishment or operation of a
business or operation for a medical marijuana production facility. No person shall establish or
operate a business or operation for a medical marijuana production facility within the Town of
Freeport that was proposed on or after the effective date of this Ordinance.
4. ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION AND PENALTIES.
This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of Freeport.
Any person who violates Section 3 of this ordinance shall be subject to civil penalties and other
remedies as provided in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
5. EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Ordinance takes effect immediately upon adoption and shall expire on the 180th day
thereafter, unless earlier extended, repealed or modified by the Freeport Town Council.
6. SEVERABILITY.
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court to be invalid, such a
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision.
Enacted 01/03/2017
Extended additional 180 days on 06/06/2017
1
CHAPTER 57
SECTION 57-01
TOWN OF FREEPORT
ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A MORATORIUM ON RETAIL MARIJUANA
ESTABLISHMENTS AND RETAIL MARIJUANA SOCIAL CLUBS
WHEREAS, a referendum on legislation titled the Marijuana Legalization Act, codified
at 7 M.R.S.A. Chapter 417, was approved, subject to recount, by the voters of the State of Maine
on November 8, 2016; and
WHEREAS, as enacted by the voters, the Marijuana Legalization Act will authorize the
licensure and operation of retail marijuana establishments and retail marijuana social clubs as a
regulated program of the State of Maine; and
WHEREAS, 7 M.R.S.A. Section 2449, Local Licensing, allows municipalities to regulate
the location, operation and licensing of retail marijuana establishments and retail marijuana
social clubs and to adopt and enforce regulations for such uses; and
WHEREAS, operations related to retail marijuana establishments and retail marijuana
social clubs raise a number of concerns related to public safety and welfare, including, but not
limited to, potential adverse effects on neighborhoods, security of the facilities, and odors that
may create a public nuisance or hazard; and
WHEREAS, there has been an increasing number of requests regarding the establishment
of facilities for the cultivation of marijuana; and
WHEREAS, the Town’s existing ordinances do not provide an adequate mechanism to
regulate and control the location and operation of retail marijuana establishments and retail
marijuana social clubs; and
Enacted 01/03/2017
Extended additional 180 days on 06/06/2017
2
WHEREAS, the Town needs a reasonable amount of time to study the land use
implications of retail marijuana establishments and retail marijuana social clubs and to develop
reasonable regulations governing their location and operation; and
WHEREAS, during the period of this Moratorium, the Town will work on developing
appropriate land use regulations concerning retail marijuana establishments and retail marijuana
social clubs; and
NOW THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority granted to it by 30-A M.R.S. § 4356, be it
hereby ordained by the Freeport Town Council, assembled as the legislative body of the Town,
as follows:
1. DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Ordinance, the following terms have the following meanings as defined in the
Marijuana Legalization Act:
“Marijuana”: means cannabis.
“Retail Marijuana Establishments”: a retail marijuana store, a retail marijuana cultivation
facility, a retail marijuana products manufacturing facility or a retail marijuana testing facility.
“Retail Marijuana Cultivation Facility”: an entity licensed to cultivate, prepare and package retail
marijuana and sell retail marijuana to retail marijuana establishments and retail marijuana social
clubs.
“Retail Marijuana Products Manufacturing Facility”: an entity licensed to purchase retail
marijuana; manufacture, prepare and package retail marijuana products; and sell retail marijuana
and retail marijuana products only to other retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities,
retail marijuana stores and retail marijuana social clubs.
“Retail Marijuana Social Club”: An entity licensed to sell retail marijuana and retail marijuana
products to consumers for consumption on the licensed premises.
“Retail Marijuana Store”: an entity licensed to purchase retail marijuana from a retail marijuana
cultivation facility and to purchase retail marijuana products from a retail marijuana products
manufacturing facility and to sell retail marijuana and retail marijuana products to consumers.
“Retail Marijuana Testing Facility”: an entity licensed and certified to analyze and certify the
safety and potency of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products.
Enacted 01/03/2017
Extended additional 180 days on 06/06/2017
3
2. APPLICABILITY AND PURPOSE.
This moratorium shall apply to retail marijuana establishments and retail marijuana social clubs,
as defined above, that are proposed to be located within the Town of Freeport on or after the
effective date of this Ordinance. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in 1 M.R.S.A. § 302
or any other law, this Ordinance applies to any application relating to the establishment or
operation of a proposed retail marijuana establishment and retail marijuana social club, whether
or not such application had become a “pending proceeding” as defined in 1 M.R.S.A. § 302 prior
to the enactment of this Ordinance.
3. PROHIBITION.
During the time this Ordinance is in effect, no official, officer, board, body, agency, agent or
employee of the Town of Freeport shall accept, process or act upon any application for any
approval, including but not limited to a building permit, certificate of occupancy, site plan
review, conditional use, or any other approval, received after the effective date of this Ordinance
relating to the establishment or operation of a business or operation of a retail marijuana
establishment and/or retail marijuana social club. No person shall establish or operate a business
or operation of a retail marijuana establishment and/or retail marijuana social club within the
Town of Freeport that was proposed on or after the effective date of this Ordinance.
4. ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION AND PENALTIES.
This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Codes Enforcement Officer of the Town of Freeport.
Any person who violates Section 3 of this ordinance shall be subject to civil penalties and other
remedies as provided in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
5. EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Ordinance takes effect immediately upon adoption and shall expire on the 180th day
Enacted 01/03/2017
Extended additional 180 days on 06/06/2017
4
thereafter, unless earlier extended by the Freeport Town Council.
6. SEVERABILITY.
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court to be invalid, such a
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision.
Adopted 07/11/2017
Chapter 58 – Prohibition of Retail Marijuana Establishments and Retail Marijuana Social Clubs
Section 1. Authority.
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the Marijuana Legalization Act, 7 M.R.S.A. c. 417; and Municipal
Home Rule Authority, Me. Const., art. VIII, pt. 2; and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001.
Section 2. Definitions.
For purposes of this ordinance, retail marijuana establishments, including retail marijuana stores, retail
marijuana cultivation facilities, retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities and retail marijuana
testing facilities, and retail marijuana social clubs are defined as set forth in 7 M.R.S.A. § 2442.
Section 3. Prohibition on Retail Marijuana Establishments and Retail Marijuana Social Clubs.
Retail marijuana establishments, including retail marijuana stores, retail marijuana cultivation facilities,
retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities, and retail marijuana testing facilities; and retail
marijuana social clubs, are expressly prohibited in the Town of Freeport.
No person or organization shall develop or operate a business that engages in retail or wholesale sales
of a retail marijuana product, as defined by 7 M.R.S.A. § 2442.
Nothing in this ordinance is intended to prohibit any lawful use, possession or conduct pursuant to the
Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act, 22 M.R.S.A. c. 558-C.
Section 4. Effective date; duration.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon enactment by the Freeport Town Council and shall
remain in effect until it is amended or repealed.
Section 5. Penalties.
This ordinance shall be enforced by the Codes Enforcement Officer. Violations of this ordinance shall be
subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
Adopted 02/05/19
TOWN OF FREEPORT
ORDINANCE CHAPTER 59 – MUNICIPAL SHELLFISH AQUACULTURE
Section 1 – General
Authority. This section is enacted pursuant to M.R.S. Title 30-A: §3001, et seq., and
Freeport Town Charter Section 2.13.
Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to ensure that intertidal shellfish aquaculture
activities conducted within the Town of Freeport protect and optimize Freeport’s
shellfish resources through introduction and support of sustainable aquaculture practices.
This ordinance is intended to set forth the process for granting municipal approval for
aquaculture operations, as required by 12 M.R.S.A. Chapter 6072, Section 3, and to
ensure that any approvals granted are consistent with Freeport Ordinance Chapter 32
“Shellfish Conservation”, specifically section 32-201, subsections (F), (I), and (J),
Section 2 - Municipal Approval Criteria for State Aquaculture Leases within the
Town of Freeport Intertidal Zone
The criteria and considerations described in this section apply to applications to the State
of Maine for aquaculture leases within the intertidal zone in Freeport. Applicants are
encouraged to read and become familiar with Parts A (The Lease Application Process:
What to Expect) & B (Requirements & Restrictions) of these applications. Pursuant to 12
M.R.S Chapter 6072, Section 3, applicants must receive municipal approval to be granted
a State lease.
Applicants seeking municipal approval must:
(1) provide a completed Part C (Cover Sheet) of the State lease application.
(2) provide completed documentation for Part D (Application Information
Requirements) — sections D1 through and including section D6 for
Experimental Leases and sections D1 through and including section D7 for
Standard Leases.
(3) provide written permission from landowners and copy of any agreements with
landowners of intertidal land in, on or over, which shellfish aquaculture activity
will occur, as well as written permission and agreements with owners of private
property required for access to the lease site.
(4) confirm that the applicant holds a valid Freeport Commercial Shellfish
Harvesting license issued pursuant to Freeport Ordinance Chapter 32 Section 601
– “Licensing”. No less than 90% of leases approved under this ordinance shall
be held by Freeport residents who possess an active Freeport resident
commercial shellfish harvesting license, with no more than 10% of leases
approved under this ordinance being held by non-residents who possess an active
Freeport non-resident commercial shellfish harvesting license. To accommodate
the potential timing of lease applications, the Shellfish Conservation
Adopted 02/05/19
Commission may waive the non-resident lease percentage restriction, so long as
the underlying intent of no more than one non-resident lease for every ten leases
issued is preserved.
(5) confirm that the applicant does not already hold an active intertidal aquaculture
lease in Freeport.
(6) confirm that the intertidal land subject to the lease application does not exceed
four (4) acres.
(7) verify that the proposed lease is consistent with the intent of the Town of
Freeport shellfish conservation program as set forth in Ordinance Chapter 32,
“Shellfish Conservation Ordinance”.
(8) verify that approval of the lease will not cause the total area under municipal
shellfish leases or permits to exceed twenty-five percent of the Town's total
intertidal zone open to the taking of shellfish.
(9) submit to municipal authorities by December 31 of each year during the lease
period (or at such other time as municipal authorities may require), a written
report on the status of the lease, including (a) a description of the efforts made to
cultivate shellfish in the leased area, including total acreage under cultivation; (b)
the type of shellfish harvested from the leased area; (c)the amount of each type
of shellfish harvested from the leased area (i.e. landings by type); and (d) such
other information as municipal authorities may require.
(10) satisfy additional reasonable conditions established by municipal authorities as
deemed necessary.
(11) satisfy municipal authorities that the proposed lease is in the best interests of the
Town of Freeport.
Section 3 - Process for New Lease Applications
The following process applies to those seeking municipal approval in conjunction with
State aquaculture lease applications for which the proposed lease site is entirely or
partially located within the Town of Freeport intertidal zone.
1. The application for a State issued shellfish aquaculture lease shall be submitted in
writing to the Town Clerk. The application shall include all relevant items
described in Section 2, above. It may also include such other materials that the
applicant wishes to be considered by the Shellfish Conservation Commission.
2. An incomplete application will not be considered by the Shellfish Conservation
Commission until it is complete.
3. The Town Clerk shall promptly transmit the application and related documents to
the Shellfish Conservation Commission for the Commission’s consideration and
send notice of applications to Freeport’s Planning Board, Coastal Waters
Commission, Conservation Committee, and Town Council.
4. The Town Clerk shall promptly publish a summary of the application in a
newspaper of general circulation in the area that would be affected by the lease
Adopted 02/05/19
and on the Town’s webpage. Such publication will take place at least 30 days
before consideration of the application by the Shellfish Conservation
Commission.
5. Any person may provide written comments to the Town on the proposed lease
may submit them to the Town Clerk’s office within 30 days of publication of the
summary in the newspaper or on the Town’s webpage, whichever is later. The
Town Clerk shall promptly transmit any such comments to the Shellfish
Conservation Commission.
6. The Shellfish Conservation Commission, at its discretion, may hold a public
hearing regarding the lease application. Public Hearings shall conform to any
procedures or requirements established by order of the Freeport Town Council.
7. Upon receipt of the application by the Shellfish Conservation Commission, the
Commission shall consider the application in light of the factors set forth in
Section 2.
8. The Shellfish Conservation Commission shall issue its decision whether to
recommend that the Town Council grant approval to applications for State
aquaculture leases in writing. It shall make findings with respect to each of the
factors identified in Section 2, above in writing and make those findings available
to the public.
9. The Town Council shall review the findings and recommendation of the Shellfish
Conservation Commission and shall decide, by order, whether to approve or deny
the application.
10. All applications for State aquaculture leases acted upon by the Town Council
shall be forwarded by the Town Clerk to the Commissioner of the Maine
Department of Marine Resources, along with an attested copy of the Council’s
order approving or denying the application.
Section 4 - Lease Renewals
A State shellfish aquaculture lease is renewable upon application by the lessee in
accordance with Maine Department of Marine Resources - Procedural Rules; Chapter 2 -
Aquaculture Lease Regulations - Section 2.45. In addition, lessee must submit a copy of
the application for renewal to the Freeport Town Clerk at least 90 days prior to the lapse
of the lease. The Town Clerk will promptly transmit the application to the Shellfish
Conservation Commission and notify the Planning Board, Coastal Waters Commission,
Conservation Commission, and Town Council. As deemed appropriate, the Shellfish
Conservation Commission may provide documentation, comments, testimony, and
recommendations to the State authorities overseeing the lease adjudicatory proceedings.
Section 5 - Lease Revocations
Adopted 02/05/19
If the Shellfish Conservation Commission is presented evidence that aquaculture has
been conducted in a manner substantially injurious to marine organisms, or that no
substantial aquaculture or research has been conducted over the course of the lease, or
that any section of this Ordinance has been violated, the Commission may request in
writing to the Commissioner of the Department of Marine Resources that the
Department initiate revocation procedures in accordance with 12 M.R.S.A. 6072(11)
(Monitoring and Revocation of Leases). The Town Council shall be provided a copy of
any such requests made to the Commissioner of the Department of Marine Resources by
the Shellfish Conservation Commission.