CHAPTER 220
AMBULANCE ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY, MAINE
Proposed January 8, 2019, 2nd Reading January 22, 2019
Approved January 22, 2019, Effective March 1, 2019
Section 220.1 – Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide emergency ambulance service for public
safety and to establish the fees related to and necessary for the provision of such service.
Section 220.2 – Title and Authority
This Ordinance shall be known as the “Town of Gray Ambulance Ordinance.” It is
adopted pursuant to the enabling provisions of the Maine Constitution, the provisions of 30-A
M.R.S.A. Section 3001, and the provisions of the Town Charter for the Town of Gray.
Section 220.3 – Ambulance Service
a. The Town of Gray shall provide ambulance service within the geographic boundaries
of the Town of Gray to residents and non-residents.
b. The Town of Gray may provide ambulance service outside of the geographic
boundaries of the Town of Gray when, in the discretion of Authority Having Jurisdiction, such
service is required due to a public emergency and/or when the Town of Gray has entered into a
mutual aid agreement with another municipality for such service.
Section 220.4 – Fees
a. The fees to be charged for ambulance services shall be determined by the Town
Council annually during its budget process and shall be published in the Town’s comprehensive
fee schedule to be adopted by the Town Council.
b. All fees will be collected by the Town of Gray Finance Department and deposited into
the General Fund on a daily basis.
c. The Town of Gray retains the discretion to contract with outside agencies to conduct
billing and collections services related to the fees assessed for ambulance services under this
Ordinance.
d. The Town of Gray may not be considered a preferred provider for purposes of
insurance billing.
Section 220.5 – Use of Fees
The fees collected from the provision of ambulance services shall be deposited into the
General Fund for the purpose of paying the reasonable and necessary expenses actually incurred,
including personnel, training, supplies and equipment used in providing ambulance services
under this Ordinance.
Section 220.6 – Administration and Enforcement:
It shall be the duty of the Town of Gray Finance Department to administer and enforce
the provisions of this Ordinance for the payment of fees for services rendered hereunder.
Section 220.7 – Severability
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be determined in court to be
unconstitutional, invalid, or unenforceable, such determination shall not affect the validity of any
other portion of the ordinance or the remainder of the ordinance as a whole.
Section 220.8 – Effective Date
This Ordinance shall take effect upon March 1, 2019.
CHAPTER 106
LICENSE AND PERMIT ISSUANCE ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY
Adopted September 5, 1995
SECTION 106.1 – TITLE
This ordinance shall be known and cited as the License and Permit Issuance Ordinance of the Town of
Gray, Maine.
SECTION 106.2 – PURPOSE
The regulations set forth in this ordinance are adopted to promote payment of real and personal property
taxes, judgments and accounts owned to the Town of Gray.
SECTION 106.3 – DEFINITIONS
A. “Applicant” shall mean the natural person or entity submitting the application for a license or permit
to the Licensing Authority.
B. “Licensing Authority” shall mean the Town official or officer or Town body that is authorized to
issue a license or permit.
C. “License” shall mean any license that the Town of Gray, its officers, officials or bodies are
authorized by statute or ordinance to issue, but excludes liquor licenses issued pursuant to 28-A;
M.R.S.A.; Section 651 et seq., as amended from time to time.
D. “Permit” shall mean any permit that the Town of Gray, its officers, officials or bodies are authorized
by statue or ordinance to issue, but excludes liquor licenses issued pursuant to 28-A; M.R.S.A.;
Section 651 et seq., as amended from time to time.
SECTION 106.4 – CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSES OR PERMITS
A. No license or permit shall be issued by the Licensing Authority until said Licensing Authority
determines as of the date of the license or permit application, whether or not:
1. The Applicant owes any real or personal property taxes to the Town of Gray;
2. There is an outstanding, final judgment against the Applicant that is due and payable to the Town
of Gray;
3. There is any account of the Applicant payable to the Town of Gray which has not been paid in
full;
4. All real and personal property taxes or final judgments due and payable to the Town of Gray on
account of the premises for which said license or permit is requested have not been paid in full.
Provided, however, the requirement that all taxes and other monies owed to the Town be paid in full
before the issuance of a license or permit may be waived by the vote of the Town Council if the
Applicant pays the licensing fee in full and agrees, in writing, to pay the taxes, final judgments or
accounts or a showing by the Applicant that there is not rational relationship between withholding the
license or permit and the payment of the taxes, final judgments or accounts owed.
SECTION 106.5 – WAIVER
The requirements in Section 106.4 that all taxes, final judgments and accounts be paid prior to issuance
of a license or permit may be waived by vote of the Town Council upon good cause shown by the
Applicant, which good cause includes, but is not limited to non-economic reasons beyond the
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 106 LICENSE AND PERMIT ISSUANCE\CHAPTER 106 LICENSE AND PERMIT ISSUANCE.DOCX 2
Applicant’s control for failure to pay the taxes, final judgments or accounts or a showing by the
Applicant that there is not rational relationship between withholding the license or permit and the
payment of the taxes, final judgments or accounts owed.
SECTION 106.6 – EXCEPTION FOR CERTAIN TAX DELINQUENCIES
The above sections of this Ordinance notwithstanding, the Licensing Authority may not refuse to issue a
license or permit because of the owner of the premises for which Applicant requests a license or permit
during the pendency of any request for abatement, or any appeal from the real or personal property tax
assessment which appears to be delinquent.
CHAPTER 201
BUILDING CODE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted March, 1963
Amended December 6, 1968
Amended August 14, 1984
Amended January 20, 1989
Amended March 5, 1996
Amended January 1, 2001
SECTION 201.0 – TITLE AND SCOPE
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Building Code of the Town of Gray, Maine.
The Building Code relates to the design, materials of construction, alteration, repair, and use of
buildings and structures or parts thereof, all to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the
occupants and users of such buildings and structures and of the public, and for the protection against
ignition and spreading of fires and prevention of accidents.
Buildings and structures, parts thereof and equipment in or on or in connection with buildings or
structures, shall not be constructed, altered, installed, repaired, used, or changed as to use contrary to the
provisions of this code; but the provisions of this code shall not apply to buildings or structures
constructed or maintained within the limits of a public highway by public authority; to railway bridges
or trestles, to buildings or structures owned or to be owned by the United States, to the State of Maine,
or county of Cumberland; and shall not apply to an existing building or structure, its existing equipment
or appurtenances unless and until such building or structure, its existing equipment or appurtenances are
to be enlarged, altered, moved, converted to other uses or demolished, or unless otherwise provided in
this code.
SECTION 201.2 – ADMINISTRATION
A. The Office of Code Enforcement is hereby created. The office will be headed by a Code
Enforcement Officer who acts as Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, and Electrical Inspector
and who is assisted by a designated member of the Fire Department and such other personnel as is
deemed necessary by the Code Enforcement Office or by the Town Council and then only after
authorization and appointment by the Town Manager. The Code Enforcement Officer will be named
to the three offices, namely Electrical Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, and Building Inspector, by the
Town Manager for a one-year period beginning April first. (Refer to Personal Policy for more
specific information).
B. The Building Inspector shall inspect all buildings or structures during construction to see that the
provisions of law are complied with and that construction is performed safely.
Whenever, by reason of defective or illegal work in violation of a provision of this code, the
continuation of a building is contrary to public welfare, the code Enforcement Officer may order all
further work to be stopped and may require suspension of work until the condition in violation has
been remedied.
SECTION 201.3 – CONSTRUCTION PERMITS
A. No building or structure shall be built, enlarged, altered, or moved without a permit from the
building Inspector, who may require a plan of the proposed work, together with a statement of the
materials to be used. Prior to the issuing of the permit by the Building Inspector, the applicant must
satisfy the Building Inspector that soil conditions are or will be suitable for a sanitary absorption of
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 201 BUILDING CODE\CHAPTER 201 - BUILDING CODE.DOC 2
waste materials from proposed septic tanks if the same are to be used in conjunction with the
construction work. The expense of soil surveys that may be required will be borne by the applicant.
No building permit shall be issued where the proposed work would violate any provision of the
Zoning Ordinance or any other ordinance or statute. No building permit or renewal thereof granted
hereunder shall be valid unless the work for which its issued is commenced within six (6) months
from the date of issue or renewal, and the work so commenced is completed within one (1) year; if
requested and if renewal fee paid, an automatic renewal will be issued for 1 year.
B. Fee Collections
Building Permit Fees collected will be accounted for by the Building Inspector and submitted to the
town as they are collected.
SECTION 201.4 – UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
A. Removal or made safe
When a building or structure or any portion thereof is found unsafe upon inspection by the Building
Inspector, he/she shall order such building or structure or any portion thereof to be made safe or to
be taken down and removed. The term unsafe building or structure or portion thereof shall include
any building or structure or portions thereof structurally unsafe; unstable; unsanitary; inadequately
provided with exit facilities; constituting a fire hazard; unsuitable or improper for the use of
occupancy to which they are put; constituting a hazard to health or safety because of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment; or otherwise dangerous to life or property.
B. Restoration of unsafe building or structure
A building or structure or part thereof declared unsafe by the Building Inspector may be restored to
safe condition; provided that if the damage or cost of reconstruction or restoration is in excess of 50
percent of the value of the building or structure, exclusive of foundations, such building or structure,
if reconstructed or restored shall be made to conform, with respect to materials and type of
construction, to the requirements of this code; but no change or use of occupancy shall be compelled
by reason of such reconstruction or restoration.
C. Notice of unsafe building or structures
Upon determining that a building or structure or portion thereof is unsafe, the Building Inspector
shall serve or cause to be served on the owner, or someone of the owners, his agents, lessees, or
other persons who may have interest in the same, a written notice containing a description of the
building or structure or portion thereof deemed unsafe, a statement of the particulars in which the
building or structure or portion thereof is unsafe, and an order requiring the same to be made safe
and secure or removed, as may be deemed necessary by the Building Inspector. If the person to
whom such notice and order is addressed cannot be found after diligent search, or if the owner of
such property is unknown, then such notice and order shall be sent by registered mail to the last
known address of such person or of the last known owner, and a copy of such notice shall be posted
in a conspicuous place on the premised to which it relates. Such mailing and posting shall be
deemed adequate service.
D. Disregard of unsafe notice
If a person or owner served with a notice or order to remove or repair an unsafe building or structure
or portion thereof should fail, within a reasonable time, to comply with the requirements thereof, the
Building Inspector shall advise the Town Council of all the facts in the case, and the Town Council
shall thereupon cause an appropriate legal action to be instituted to compel a compliance.
E. Emergency work
In case there shall be, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, actual and immediate danger of
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 201 BUILDING CODE\CHAPTER 201 - BUILDING CODE.DOC 3
failure or collapse of a building or structure or portion thereof so as to endanger life or property, the
Building Inspector shall obtain the necessary funds from the Town Treasury, to purchase such
material and employ such labor and cause the necessary work to be done to render said building or
structure or portion thereof, temporarily safe, whether the procedure prescribed in this section has
been instituted or not.
F. Vacating unsafe buildings or structures and closing streets
When a building or structure or portion thereof is in an unsafe condition so that life is endangered
thereby, the Building Inspector shall order and require the owners or occupants thereof to vacate the
same forthwith. He/She shall when necessary for the public safety, temporarily close sidewalks,
streets, buildings, structures and places adjacent to such building or structure, and prohibit the same
from being used.
G. Recovery of costs
The Town Council shall cause to be instituted proper actions against the owner of the premises for
the recovery of all costs incurred by the Building Inspector in the performance of emergency work.
SECTION 201.5 – ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of
Gray being marked and designated as the “The BOCA National Building Code, “Fourteenth Edition,
1999” as published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc. be and hereby
adopted as the Building Code of the Town of Gray in the State of Maine; for the control of buildings and
structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations. Provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of said BOCA National Building Code, are hereby referred to, adopted and made part here of as if
fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, deletions and changes, if any, as prescribed in the
following sections.
SECTION 201.6 – FOUNDATIONS
A. Detached non-residential buildings (1000) one thousand square feet or less are exempted fro the
current BOCA code section 1806.
B. Any non-dwelling detached public structure over (1000) one thousand square feet shall require a
design professionals stamp and may be constructed on posts or piers carried (4) four feet below the
finished grade or on a reinforced concrete slab.
C. Any non-dwelling, detached private structure over 1000 square feet, may be constructed on posts or
piers, 8 inches in diameter, spaced at a maximum of 8 feet on center, carried 4 feet below the
finished grade or otherwise designed by a professional engineer. Agricultural structures are exempt
from this provision.
SECTION 201.7 – SPAN TABLES-RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION
The standards and specifications in the 1998 edition of the International One and Two Family Dwelling
Code referencing floor joists, ceiling joists and roof rafters shall be adhered to. The town clerk shall
keep on file three copies of the International One and Two Family Dwelling Code, for public use and
examination.
SECTION 201.8 – ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS
The following standards and specifications for electrical installation and all work in connection with the
installation, alteration, repair, maintenance of, or additions to electrical equipment of any nature
whatsoever in the town shall comply with the most recent Edition of the National Electrical Code, as
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 201 BUILDING CODE\CHAPTER 201 - BUILDING CODE.DOC 4
published by the National Fire Protection Association. The town clerk shall keep on file three (3) copies
of the most recent edition of the National Electrical Code, available for public use and examination.
SECTION 201.9 – ELEVATORS AND CONVEYING SYSTEMS
Adopt State statues regarding elevators and tramways, installers and operators, Maine state elevator law,
title 32 chapter 133 of the Maine state elevator code and all applicable amendments.
SECTION 201.10- PLUMBING INSTALLATIONS
The standards and specifications for plumbing installation and all work in connection with the
installation, repair or maintenance of plumbing and equipment to be used in connection therewith in the
town shall comply with the State of Maine Internal Plumbing code (5-83), revised (7-2-94) and the State
of Maine External Plumbing code (6-1-00).
The town clerk shall keep on file three copies of the State Plumbing Code, available for public use,
inspection and examination.
SECTION 210.11 – ACCESSIBILITY
Adopt following State regulations, title 25 chapter 331; ADA; MHRA, subchapter 5; MHRA subchapter
4 Fair Housing AA; section 504, BOCA 1996 NFDA 101; ME. State plumbing; ABA; IRS Tax code(s).
SECTION 210.12 – SOLID FUELS
Adopt the standards of specifications for the use of oil and solid fuels adopted by the State of Maine.
Reference Maine state oil and solid fuel laws and rules 1998 edition and amendments.
SECTION 210.13 – GRADING LUMBER
The use of non-graded or rough sawn lumber in residential and commercial construction shall be
allowed in the Town of Gray.
SECTION 210.14 – ENERGY CODE
Adopt the State of Maine energy efficiency building standards adopted 2/92 revised 11/95.
SECTION 210.15 – APPEAL
A. In case of refusal to issue a permit or amendment thereof, appeal shall lie from the decision of the
Building Inspector to the Municipal Officers. The Municipal Officers may affirm or reverse the
decision of the Inspector as to the interpretation of the provision of this code. Ins specific cases
wherein the enforcement of this code would involve practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and
wherein desirable relief may be granted without substantially departing from the intent and purposes
of this code, but not otherwise, the Municipal Officers may, by three consenting votes of their
membership, permit exceptions to and variations from the provisions of this Code.
B. The Town Council with the advice of Code Enforcement, the Fire Department, and the Planning
Board shall have authority to regulate the cost of inspections and permits under this code; to regulate
standards of design and construction materials so that the requirements of the code will conform to
the statutes of the State of Maine, and may conform to the State Building Code and to the several
codes relating hereto as approved and published by the National Fire Protection Association.
SECTION 201.16 – PENALTIES AND LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation being the owner, or having control of any building or
structure or part thereof, who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance, or fails to conform to
any of the provisions thereof, or fails to obey any order of any officer charged with the enforcement
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 201 BUILDING CODE\CHAPTER 201 - BUILDING CODE.DOC 5
of the provisions of this Ordinance in relation to the matters and things herein contained; or any
architect, engineer, contractor, builder, subcontractor, foreman, plumber, carpenter, electrician,
employee, or other person who shall violate or assist in the violation of this Ordinance, or of any
certificate, order or permit issued there under, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to a penalty of not les than five (5) dollars nor more than one-hundred (100)
dollars. Each and every day on which the person or persons, firm or corporation continues to violate
the provisions of this Ordinance, after having been notified of such violation, shall constitute a
separate offense. Such penalty or fines to be recovered by complaint to the use of the Inhabitants of
the Town of Gray.
B. Whenever the Inspector or other employee of the Town charged with the enforcement of any part of
this Code is satisfied that any provision thereof, or any law enforced by the Town applicable to the
same subject matter, has been violated in any respect, or that any order or direction made pursuance
of this Code has not been complied with, he/she may apply to the Town Council for the purpose of
instituting civil proceedings, provided that nothing in this section and no action taken hereunder
shall be held to exclude such criminal proceedings, provided that nothing in this section and no
action taken hereunder shall be held to exclude such criminal proceedings as may be authorized by
this Code or by any laws or ordinances in force in the Town of Gray or to exempt anyone violating
this Code or any of the said laws from any penalty which may be incurred.
SECTION 201.17 – VALIDITY AND APPLICATION
Should any section, or part thereof, of this Code be declared by the courts to be invalid, the same shall
not affect the validity of this Code as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be
invalid. All laws or parts of laws of this Town in conflict with this code are hereby repealed but only to
the extent of such conflict.
CHAPTER 203
PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Enacted January 16, 2001
Whereas, the Municipal Officers for the Town of Gray have become aware of public safety concerns
regarding vehicle and pedestrian traffic on public ways and public easements;
Whereas, Municipal Officers have the exclusive authority to enact ordinances regulating traffic and
parking on public ways and on public property, including vehicular and pedestrian traffic, handicapped
parking and vehicles for hire per 30-A MRSA Section 3009;
Whereas, the Municipal Officers of the Town of Gray find it necessary to promote the health, welfare,
and safety of the public and that restrictions on motor vehicles be administered under a comprehensive
Ordinance;
Whereas, the Town of Gray identifies the need for a comprehensive and complete Public Safety
Ordinance regulating;
? The operation of motor vehicles within the Town.
? Pedestrian traffic.
? Licensing and inspection of vehicles for hire.
? Establishment of Emergency Lanes on public ways and public easements that are open to the
public.
? Enforcement of Handicap Parking areas on public ways and public easements open to the public.
? Removal and disposal of snow and sleet from public ways and public easements that are adjacent
to public ways.
? Enforcement against violations involving obstruction of any public ways, pedestrian way, or
sidewalk.
? Enforcement against obstruction of any fire hydrant, hose, or any other fire-fighting equipment
or machine.
? Vendors and sellers of wares and goods from any public way, pedestrian way, or sidewalk.
? Noise.
? Animal Control.
? Traffic Control Devices and Traffic Slowing Devices.
? Road Closings.
? The use of public ways and public easement for recreational vehicles.
Whereas, the Town of Gray has the authority under the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated to enact such
an Ordinance it is hereby proclaimed that the following rules, regulations, fines, fees, actions, and
sanctions are enacted;
Now therefore, the Town of Gray does hereby adopt this consolidated Ordinance regulating motor
vehicles within the Town of Gray, hereby repealing and replacing any and all other ordinances which
are inconsistent herewith.
O:\CHAPTER 203 PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 203 PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE.DOCX 2
The Municipal Officers shall, from time to time, direct the Town Manager to erect and maintain
appropriate signs, markings, and devices reflecting action taken by the said Municipal Officers in
restricting the use of designated portions of the public streets and highways, as it shall from time to time
decide. The restrictions to be authorized by the Municipal Officers shall include but not be limited to
the following:
? The operation of motor vehicles within the Town.
? Pedestrian traffic.
? Licensing and inspection of vehicles for hire.
? Establishment of Emergency Lanes on public ways and public easements that are open to the
public.
? Enforcement of Handicap Parking areas on public ways and public easements open to the public.
? Removal and disposal of snow and sleet from public ways and public easements that are adjacent
to public ways.
? Enforcement against violations involving obstruction of any public ways, pedestrian way, or
sidewalk.
? Enforcement against obstruction of any fire hydrant, hose, or any other fire-fighting equipment
or machine.
? Vendors and sellers of wares and goods from any public way, pedestrian way, or sidewalk.
? Noise.
? Animal Control.
? Traffic Control Devices and Traffic Slowing Devices.
? Road Closings.
? The use of public ways and public easement for recreational vehicles.
The Municipal Officers hereby direct the Town Manager and his/her designees to enforce the provisions
of this Ordinance and to establish the appropriate town policies and regulations in accordance with this
ordinance. The Town Manager is hereby authorized to establish, regulate and enforce all traffic and
parking in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance, provided that in the event of a fire,
disaster, or any other emergency, or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers may
temporarily direct traffic or parking as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this
Ordinance or any other ordinance.
CHAPTER 204
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CONTROL ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Enacted May 1979
Amended May 7, 2002
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 204.1 – TITLE ........................................................................................................................................................... 1
SECTION 204.2 – PURPOSE ..................................................................................................................................................... 1
SECTION 204.3 – LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY ..................................................................................................................... 1
SECTION 204.4 – DEFINITIONS .............................................................................................................................................. 1
SECTION 204.5 – REGULATION ............................................................................................................................................. 4
SECTION 204.6 – ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES .......................................................................................................... 5
SECTION 204.7 – HAZARDOUS MATERIALS USE, STORAGE OR DISPOSAL SITE PERMIT APPLICATIONS ......... 7
SECTION 204.8 – HAZARDOUS MATERIALS USE, STORAGE, OR DISPOSAL SITE DESIGN STANDARDS .......... 13
SECTION 204.9 – HAZARDOUS MATERIALS USE, STORAGE, OR DISPOSAL SITE OPERATION ........................... 16
SECTION 204.10 – DECISION MAKING CRITERIA ........................................................................................................... 20
SECTION 204.11 – SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT ................................................................................ 20
SECTION 204.12 – PRESENT HAZARDOUS MATERIALS USERS ................................................................................... 20
SECTION 204.13 – AVAILABILITY OF RECORDS AND ACCESS FOR INSPETIONS ................................................... 21
SECTION 204.14 – CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP, ADMINISTRATION, LOCATION, OR SERVICES .............................. 21
SECTION 204.15 – VIOLATIONS AND APPEALS ............................................................................................................... 22
SECTION 204.16 – PERMIT APPLICATION FEES AND ANNUAL PERMIT FEES ......................................................... 22
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 1
SECTION 204.1 – TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and be cited as the Hazardous Materials Control Ordinance of the Town
of Gray, Maine.
SECTION 204.2 – PURPOSE
The regulations set forth in this ordinance are adopted to:
A. Provide for the protection of groundwater and surface water quality through the control of hazardous
materials handling, storage, or disposal;
B. Protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Gray.
SECTION 204.3 – LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to authority granted in 30 M.R.S.A. Section 1917, 38 M.R.S.A.
Section 1320, and 38 M.R.S.A. Section 1321.
SECTION 204.4 – DEFINITIONS
A. “Hazardous Materials” shall mean all materials in quantities controlled by this ordinance with the
characteristics listed below, specifically excluding salt, solid wastes lawfully deposited in the Gray
Landfill, domestic sewage, domestic sewage sludge, nonradioactive cooling water, boiler blow down
water, sand and gravel washing waste, waste that is lawfully discharged to surface waters or any
public sewerage system, virgin petroleum products for retail sales or use on site as a fuel, and
agricultural organic wastes.
1. “Type 1 Toxic Materials” shall mean a material which, due to toxicity, ability to harm genetic
material, or persistence of a representative sample of a standard leachate from the waste, has any
of the properties defined below.
a. Has a concentration of any substance, for which a federal drinking water standard exists,
greater than or equal to ten (10) times that drinking water standard.
b. Has a concentration (mg/1) of any substance in the NIOSH Registry of Toxic Effects of
Chemical Substances (“Registry”) greater than or equal to 0.35 times the lowest oral
mammalian LD50 expressed in mg/kg units for that substance.
c. Has a concentration (mg/1) of any substance equal to 10 times the lowest 96 hour LC50
(mg/1) for that substance as listed in the “Registry”.
2. “Type 2 – Reactive Materials” shall mean a material which has any of the following properties:
a. Materials which in themselves are normally unstable and readily undergo violent chemical
change but do not detonate. Also materials which may react violently with water, which may
form potentially explosive mixtures with water, or which generate toxic fumes when mixed
with water.
b. Materials which in themselves are capable of detonation or explosive reaction but require a
strong initiating source or which must be heated under confinement before initiation or which
react explosively with water.
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 2
c. Materials which in themselves are readily capable of detonation or explosive decomposition
or reaction at normal temperatures and pressures.
d. Reactive materials can also be identified by the following tests:
(i) Thermally unstable liquid materials can be identified using the JANAF (Joint Army-
Navy-Air Force) L.P. Test No. 6.
(ii) Thermally unstable liquid or nonfluid materials can be identified using the protocol
specified in ASTM Standard Method E-476—73.
(iii) Materials unstable to mechanical shock can be identified using the Picatinny Arsenal
Impact Test (Picattinny Arsenal Technical Report No. 1740 (Revision 1) (1958) or
the Bureau of Mines Impact Test (U.S. Bureau of Mines Bulletin 346 (1931)).
3. “Type 3 – Radioactive Materials” shall mean low level liquid and gaseous radioactive materials
and high level solid, liquid or gaseous materials. Low level liquid and gaseous radioactive
materials shall mean all liquid and gaseous materials that exceed the maximum permissible
concentrations for discharge to unrestricted areas as listed in Appendix B, Table II, Columns 1
and 2 of Title 10, Part 20 of the Code of Federal Regulations except that defined as high level
liquid or gaseous radioactive waste. High level liquid and gaseous radioactive waste includes the
liquid and gaseous wastes resulting from the operation of the first cycle solvent extraction
system, or equivalent, and concentrated wastes from subsequent extraction cycles, or equivalent,
in a facility for reprocessing of irradiated reactor fuel; and, any other radioactive waste which the
Planning Board shall subsequently specify as high level radioactive waste as adopted by order of
the Council.
4. “Type 4 – Flammable Waste” shall mean any waste such that any sample of that waste has a
flash point less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Centigrade) determined by the Pensky-
Martens Closed Cup Tester, using the protocol specified in ASTM Standard D-93-73.
5. “Type 5 – Corrosive Waste” shall mean any waste such that any sample of that waste has either
of the following properties:
a. pH less than 2, or greater than 12, as determined by the pH meter, using the protocol
specified in the “Manual of Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes” (EPA-
625-16-74 003).
b. A corrosion rate greater than 0.250 inch per year on steel (SAE 1020) at a test temperature
of 130 degrees Fahrenheit as determined using the protocol specified in NACE (National
Association of Corrosion Engineers) Standard TM-01-69.
6. “Type 6 – Infectious Waste” shall mean any waste which is generated from the following
sources:
a. Health care facilities
Certain departments of hospitals as defined by Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes
8062 and 8069 in “Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972” U.S. Government
Printing Office, Stock No. 4101-0066.
(i) Obstetrics department including patients’ rooms
(ii) Emergency department
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 3
(iii) Surgery department including patients’ rooms
(iv) Morgue
(v) Pathology department
(vi) Autopsy department
(vii) Isolation rooms
(viii) Laboratories
(ix) Intensive care unit
(x) Pediatrics department
b. Laboratories, as defined by SIC Codes 7391, 8071 and 8922 but does not include any waste
which is discharged directly to an underground seepage system at the site at which it is
generated.
7. “Type 7 – Other Waste” shall mean any industrial waste which is not a Type 1 – Toxic Waste;
Type 2 – Reactive Waste; Type 3 – Radioactive Waste; Type 4 – Flammable Waste; Type 5 –
Corrosive Waste; or Type 6 – Infectious Waste; and which is not discharged directly to an
underground seepage system at the site at which it is generated.
8. “Waste Oil” shall mean discarded oil generated by residential, institutional, commercial,
industrial, agricultural sources or oil recovered from spills.
B. “Hazardous Materials Use Permit” shall mean a certificate issued by the Gray Planning Board
authorizing the handling, transportation, storage, or disposal of hazardous materials for a specific use
site by a specific person or firm and specifying the types of records which must be kept, the types
and schedules of reports which must be filed, and such other requirements which the Planning Board
finds to be necessary for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Gray.
C. “Planning Board” or “Board” shall mean the Gray Planning Board.
D. “Code Enforcement Officer” shall mean the Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of Gray or
employees of the Town of Gray under his direction.
E. “Storage” shall mean the placement of materials in drums, tanks, lagoons, or other structures
intended to retain the materials for subsequent use or disposal.
F. “Use” shall mean any employment of materials for any purpose unless specifically exempted by this
ordinance.
G. “Disposal” shall mean the discharge, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any materials into or
on the land or water.
H. “Ground Water” shall mean the water present in the saturated zone of an aquifer.
I. “Aquifer” shall mean geologic deposits or structures from which useable quantities of ground water
are available for households, municipalities or industries.
J. “Industrial Waste” shall mean waste oil, liquid waste, containerized gaseous waste or waste sludge
produced by an industrial process or produced by an industrial waste water treatment plant but does
not include any solid waste nor any domestic sewage or domestic sewage sludge or cooling water or
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 4
boiler blow down water or sand washing or gravel washing waste or waste that is discharged directly
into a municipal sewer system or waste that is lawfully discharged into any surface body of water.
K. “Hazardous materials use, storage or disposal site” shall mean real and personal property acquired,
constructed or operated for the purpose of the storage, use, or disposal of hazardous material. Such
sites shall be placed in one of the following five classifications: Class I, Class II, Class III, Class IV,
or Class V.
1. “Industrial Waste Incinerator” shall mean an arrangement of chambers and equipment designed
for burning industrial waste to a gaseous emission and a residue.
L. “Liner” shall mean a layer of material used as a barrier to impede the movement of hazardous
materials or industrial waste into ground or surface water. Liners may include but not be limited to
natural soils, asphalt treatments, polymeric membranes and/or treated soils.
M. “Load” shall mean a mass or weight of industrial waste or hazardous material contained in one
transporting container.
N. “Manifest” shall mean a separate record for identifying the quantity, composition, type and the
origin, routing and destination of hazardous materials or industrial waste.
O. “Oil” shall mean any of a class of substances typically unctuous, viscous, combustible, liquid at sixty
(60) degrees Fahrenheit and soluble in either or alcohol but not in water.
P. “Open Burning” shall mean the combustion of any material under such conditions that the products
of combustion are emitted directly into the open atmosphere without passing through a stack or
chimney.
Q. “Operator” shall mean any authorized individual responsible for the control of the site.
R. “Person” shall mean any individual, group of individuals, firm, corporation, association, partnership
or private or public entity, including a district, county, city, town or other governmental unit or agent
thereof, and in the case of a corporation, any individual having active and general supervision of the
properties of such corporation.
S. “Surface Water” shall mean a body of water whose top surface is exposed to the atmosphere
including but not limited to rivers, ponds, lakes, streams, marshes and wetlands.
T. “Solid Waste” shall mean garbage, refuse and other discarded solid materials generated by
residential, institutional, commercial, industrial and agricultural sources but does not include solids
or dissolved material in domestic sewage or sewage sludge.
U. “Water Table” shall mean the upper level of the ground water.
SECTION 204.5 – REGULATION
A. The construction, expansion, or utilization of facilities to handle, store, or dispose of hazardous
materials Types 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 in quantities in excess of 120 gallons, 16 cubic feet, or 1000
pounds at any one time, or 180 gallons, 24 cubic feet, or 1500 pounds per month, shall require a
hazardous materials use permit. The construction, expansion, or utilization of facilities to handle,
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 5
transport, store, or dispose of Type 3 hazardous materials (radioactive materials) in quantities in
excess of one pound shall require a hazardous materials use permit.
B. No person shall construct, develop, establish, operate, manage, own or maintain an industrial or
commercial site which will use, store, or dispose of hazardous material in quantities covered by the
ordinance without having first obtained a permit from the Planning Board. A permit or permit
renewal shall be issued for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless sooner
suspended or revoked. Each permit or permit renewal shall be issued only for the site designated in
the plans accompanying the application and shall not be transferable or assignable except with the
written approval of the Planning Board.
C. There shall be five classes of hazardous materials use, storage, and disposal permits issued by the
Planning Board. These permits shall be issued to the respective classes of sites, categorized by the
expected use of the site as described below. The five classes of hazardous materials use, storage, or
disposal sites may accept or store hazardous materials in quantities covered by this ordinance in
accordance with the following:
1. Class I hazardous materials use, storage, or disposal sites may accept, use, process, and dispose
of all types of hazardous materials, unless specifically prohibited by the Planning Board.
2. Class II hazardous materials use, storage, or disposal sites may accept all types of materials for
storage in tanks but only Types 4, 5, 6 and 7 hazardous materials and waste for storage in
lagoons or for disposal unless specifically prohibited by the Planning Board.
3. Class III hazardous materials use, storage, or disposal sites may accept all types of hazardous
materials for storage in tanks preparatory to use on site or resale.
4. Class IV hazardous materials use, storage or disposal sites may accept only Types 6 and 7
hazardous materials for storage in lagoons or pits or for disposal unless specifically prohibited by
the Planning Board.
5. Class V hazardous materials storage sites may drain hazardous materials, including waste crank
case oils, hydraulic fluids, and coolants from automobiles and trucks and store such materials on
site within the volume limitation of this ordinance and in accordance with their permit
limitations.
6. Where a particular hazardous material or an inseparable mixture of hazardous materials may be
categorized into more than one type of hazardous materials that which has the lowest type
number will be the basis for determining the class site that must be used for the disposal of this
material or mixture of materials.
SECTION 204.6 – ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
A. The Planning Board shall receive applications from applicants desirous of being permitted to operate
hazardous materials use, storage, or disposal sites. The application must be made upon forms
provided by the Planning Board and shall contain plans and specifications required by this
ordinance. The application shall also contain such other information as the Planning Board requires
which may include affirmative evidence of ability to comply with this ordinance.
B. Application for the renewal of a permit must be submitted three (3) months prior to the expiration
date of the permit.
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 6
C. Each application shall be accompanied by a list of direct and indirect owners, in affidavit form. If
the entity is a corporation or association, the list shall include all officers, directors and other persons
owning ten percent (10%) or more of the corporate stock.
D. Applications for hazardous materials use permits shall contain the information required in Section
204.7 of this ordinance.
E. The Planning Board shall issue permits for hazardous materials use, storage and/or disposal in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
F. The Planning Board may impose such permit conditions as it determines are necessary for the
protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the Town of Gray. Such conditions may include, but
are not limited to, testing of ground and surface waters, specific limitations on the manner and
methods by which hazardous materials are handled, transported, stored or disposed of, and/or such
performance bonding as the Board determines to be necessary. No such limitation may be less
restrictive than the requirements of this ordinance for Class I and II permits. Variance may be
granted for Class III, Class IV and Class V permits providing that such variances do not increase the
risks to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Gray and meet the purposes of this
ordinance.
G. The Planning Board shall respond within sixty (60) days to persons submitting an application for a
hazardous materials use permit. This response shall state whether or not the information supplied in
the application is sufficient for the Board to determine that the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of Gray will be adequately protected. The Planning Board shall respond to each new set of
information presented by the applicant within 60 days of its submittal. If the Planning Board
determines that the information is sufficient to determine whether or not the proposed use will
threaten the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Gray, it shall call a public hearing on the
proposal within thirty (30) days of formal notice of that determination.
H. The applicant shall respond to each determination by the Planning Board that the information
contained in the application is not sufficient with the required information within forty-five (45)
days, or some other period of time as specified by the Planning Board.
I. The Planning Board shall grant a hazardous materials use permit within forty-five (45) days of
public hearing if it determines that the proposed use will not threaten the health, safety, and welfare
of the citizens of Gray. If issued, this permit shall contain record keeping requirements and such
other conditions as it determines are necessary. If the Planning Board denies a hazardous materials
use permit, it shall state the reasons for rejection of the application in its order for denial.
J. A permit issued hereunder shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place on the permitted facility and
must be kept legible and protected from the weather.
K. The permit shall apply onto the operations and site which is delineated on plans submitted as part of
the application. Additional areas or services shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Board
in accordance with this ordinance.
L. Separate permits shall be required for hazardous materials use sites which are located in separate
geographical areas even though they are under the same management.
M. A separate permit may be issued to a distinct part of a site which can be identified as a separate unit.
N. A permittee shall notify the Planning Board of the impending closure of the site at least thirty (30)
days prior to such closure.
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 7
O. Permits shall expire one (1) year from the date of issue, unless sooner suspended or revoked, but
may be renewed.
SECTION 204.7 – HAZARDOUS MATERIALS USE, STORAGE OR DISPOSAL SITE PERMIT APPLICATIONS
A. Class I and Class II Hazardous Materials use Permits – A person shall be entitled to a Class I or
Class II hazardous materials use permit if he or she meets the following:
1. The applicant must document his or her right, title and interest to the land on which the
hazardous material use, storage, or disposal is to occur and the site must be at least twenty (20)
acres in size.
2. If the site is to be used for hazardous materials disposal, the applicant must have access to at
least one piece of earth-moving equipment with a minimum weight of 17,000 pounds.
3. The applicant must have obtained zoning approval from the Town of Gray fro the proposed use
and site.
4. The applicant must have complied with the minimum criteria set forth for the particular class site
for which the permit is sought as delineated in this ordinance.
5. The applicant must have obtained all permits from the Department of Environment Protection
which do not require the approval of the Town of Gray for the disposal, storage, or use of
hazardous materials.
6. The applicant must affirm that neither the site nor the owner is, in whole or in part, encumbered
in any way whatsoever by any preexisting injunctive court order prohibiting the use of the site
for the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials.
7. The applicant must have obtained a surety bond in the amount of $1,000,000.00 guaranteeing the
operation on the site in accordance with these rules and regulations, or the applicant must post a
sum equal to or greater than $1,000,000.00 with the Town of Gray, any or all of which may be
used by the Town of Gray to correct failures to comply with this ordinance or to pay for actual
damages it finds have been caused by the applicants hazardous materials use, storage, or disposal
activities. Such surety bonds or cash deposits shall be held by the Town of Gray for a period of
forty (40) years after the site is no longer in operation.
8. The applicant must have submitted an application in accordance with the procedures and
requirements set forth in the ordinance.
9. The applicant must have paid the application fee.
B. Class III and Class IV Hazardous Materials use Permits
1. A person shall be entitled to a Class III and Class IV hazardous materials use permit if he or she
meets the following:
a. The applicant must document his or her right, title, and interest to the land on which the
hazardous materials use site is to be operated.
b. The applicant must have obtained zoning approval from the Town of Gray for the site at
which hazardous materials use, storage or disposal will occur.
c. The applicant must demonstrate compliance with the minimum criteria set forth for the
particular class site for which the permit is sought as delineated in this ordinance.
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 8
d. The applicant must have obtained the necessary permits and/or approval from the
Department of Environmental Protection of the State of Maine which do not require the
approval of the Town of Gray for the disposal, storage, or use of hazardous materials.
e. The applicant must affirm that neither the site nor the owner is, in whole or in part,
encumbered in any way whatsoever by any preexisting injunctive court order prohibiting the
use of the site for the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials.
f. The applicant must have submitted an application in accordance with the procedures and
requirements set forth in this ordinance.
g. The applicant must agree to:
(i) obtain a surety bond of not more than $500,000 to guarantee the operation of the site in
accordance wit this ordinance, or
(ii) post a sum of not more than $500,000 with the Town of Gray, any or all of which may be
used by the Town of Gray to correct failures to comply with this ordinance or to pay for
damages it finds have been caused by the applicants use, storage, or disposal of
hazardous materials.
2. The amount of the bond or the amount of cash to be posted shall be determined by the Planning
Board based upon its review of the application and its assessment of the risk associated with the
activities for which the hazardous materials use permit is being sought. Such surety bonds or
cash deposits shall be held by the Town of Gray throughout the life of the permitted facility, and
shall terminate or be relinquished only after the prescribed closure period, from zero (0) to
twenty (20) years, as set by the Planning Board, has elapsed.
C. Class V Hazardous materials Storage Permits A person shall be entitled to a Class V hazardous
materials storage permit if he or she meets the following criteria:
1. The applicant must demonstrate right, title, or interest to the site at which the proposed
hazardous materials storage is to be located.
2. The proposed use must be in accordance with the zoning ordinance of the Town of Gray, and any
waivers, variances, special exceptions, and other permits for deviations from this ordinance must
be obtained prior to making application for this permit.
3. The applicant must have obtained the necessary permits and/or approvals from the Department
of Environmental Protection, the Department of Human Services, or other departments of the
State of Maine prior to making application for this permit.
4. The applicant must have submitted an application in accordance with the procedures and
requirements of this ordinance.
5. The applicant must never have had a Class V hazardous materials storage permit revoked by the
Town of Gray.
6. The applicant must affirm that neither the site nor the owner is, in whole or in part, encumbered
in any way by any preexisting injunctive court order prohibiting the use of the site for the storage
of hazardous materials.
7. The applicant must have paid all fees required by this ordinance.
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 9
D. Industrial Waste Incinerator Permits – A person shall be entitled to an industrial waste incinerator
permit if he or she meets the following criteria:
1. The applicant must document right, title and interest to the land on which the industrial waste
incinerator is to be operated.
2. The applicant must have obtained zoning approval from the Town of Gray for the location of the
industrial waste incinerator.
3. The applicant must have complied with the minimum criteria set forth as delineated in this
ordinance.
4. The applicant must have obtained the necessary permits and/or approval from the Department of
Environmental Protection of the State of Maine.
5. The applicant must affirm that neither the site nor the owner is, in whole or in part, encumbered
in any way whatsoever by any preexisting injunctive court order prohibiting the use of the site
for the operation of an industrial waste incinerator.
6. The applicant must have obtained a surety bond in the amount of $1,000,000.00 guaranteeing the
operation on the incinerator site in accordance with this ordinance, or the applicant must post a
sum equal to or greater than $1,000,000.00 with the Town of Gray, any or all of which may be
used by the Town of Gray to correct failures to comply with this ordinance or to pay for actual
damages it finds have been caused by the applicants hazardous materials use, storage, or disposal
activities. Such surety bonds or cash deposits shall be held by the Town of Gray for a period of
five years after the site is no longer in operation.
7. The applicant must have submitted an application in accordance with the procedures and
requirements set forth in this ordinance.
8. The applicant must have paid the application fee.
E. The following plans and specifications shall be submitted as application supporting information for
applications for Class I, II, III, and IV permits. All plans except the initial investigation plan must be
stamped by a registered professional engineer (ME. Regis,) a registered land surveyor, a certified
geologist, or a registered soil scientist, as is appropriate.
1. Initial Investigation Plan – A copy of the latest geologic survey map available, with the site
outlined, should be submitted prior to all other required information. This will allow initial
investigations of the area relating to wetlands, aquifers and impacts to shoreland zones before
large investigation and development expenditures are made.
2. Radius Plan – A radius plan including all of the information listed below shall be submitted. The
radius plan shall include all areas within a one-half (1/2) mile radius out from all perimeter
property lines of the site and shall locate and delineate the following:
a. Zoning of the areas
b. All building and dwellings
c. All water supplies (wells, etc.)
d. All surface water courses and other wetlands
e. All roads
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 10
f. All boring locations
g. Site property lines
h. North arrow
i. Extent of 100 year flood plain
j. Monitoring well locations
3. Site Plan – A site plan including all of the information listed below for all areas within the site
shall be submitted.
a. All boring locations
b. All buildings
c. All water supply wells
d. All surface water courses and wetlands
e. All roads
f. Site property lines
g. Powerlines, pipe lines, rights of way and other utilities
h. All fences
i. North arrow
j. All disposal trenches (if any)
k. Ground contours at two foot intervals
l. All monitoring well locations
4. Hydrological Survey Plan – A hydrological study shall be made for each site. A plan including
all of the information listed below shall be submitted.
a. Ground water contours
b. Boring locations
c. Monitoring well locations
d. Top of monitoring well pipe elevation
e. Soil profiles including ground water location and impervious formations
f. Boring logs from borings and monitoring wells
5. Cross Section Plan – A minimum of two cross section plans, drawn at right angles, including all
of the information listed below shall be submitted for Class I and II Permits, for Industrial Waste
Incinerator Permits, and at the option of the Planning Board, for Class III and Class IV Permits.
a. All disposal locations
b. Bedrock location
c. Ground water elevation
d. Soil profiles
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 11
e. Location of liner (if any)
f. Design of liner system
g. Under-drain monitoring system (if any)
h. Trenches (if any)
6. Operating Plan – An operating plan including all of the information listed below shall be
submitted.
a. Proposed operations
b. Fire control and prevention provisions
c. Operating hours
d. Types of hazardous materials to be used, stored, or disposed
e. Personnel and duties
f. Projected use of completed site if used fro disposal
g. Odor control program
h. Equipment to be on site during operation
i. Communication equipment available
j. Estimated life of site
k. Aesthetic considerations
l. Salvaging operations
m. Leachate treatment operations (if any)
n. Surface drainage control method
F. The following plans and specifications shall be submitted as application supporting information for
Class V Permits.
1. Radius Plan – A radius plan including all of the information listed below shall be submitted. The
radius plan for an automobile service garage shall include all areas two hundred (200) feet in all
directions for all perimeter property lines of the site. The radius plan for all automobile
graveyards shall include all areas one thousand (1000) feet from the perimeter property lines of
the site. Both radius plans shall locate and delineate the following:
a. Zoning of the areas
b. All buildings and dwellings
c. All water supplies including public and private wells
d. All surface water courses and other wetlands
e. Site property lines
f. North arrow
g. Extent of the 100 year flood plain
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 12
2. Site Plan – A site plan including all information listed below for all areas within the site shall be
submitted.
a. All buildings
b. All water supply wells
c. Site property lines
d. Roads
e. Tank locations and access points
3. Operating Plan – An operating plan including all of the information listed below shall be
submitted.
a. Proposed operation
b. Proposed removal schedule for hazardous materials stored on site
G. The following plans and specifications shall be submitted as application supporting information for
Class I Industrial Waste Incinerator Permits. All plans must be stamped by a registered professional
engineer. (ME. Regis.).
1. Initial Investigation Plan – A copy of the latest geologic survey may available, with the
incinerator site outlined, should be submitted prior to all other required information. This will
allow initial investigations of the area relating to wetlands, aquifers and impacts to shoreland
zones before large investigation and development expenditures are made.
2. Radius Plan – A radius plan including all of the information listed below shall be submitted. The
radius plan shall include all areas within a one-half (1/2) mile radius out from all perimeter
property lines of the industrial waste incinerator site and shall locate and delineate the following:
a. Zoning of the areas
b. All buildings and dwellings
c. All water supplies (wells, etc.)
d. All surface water courses and other wetlands
e. All roads
f. All boring locations (if any)
g. Site property lines
h. North arrow
3. Site Plan – A site plan including all of the information listed below for all areas within the site
shall be submitted.
a. All boring locations (if any)
b. All buildings
c. All water supplies wells
d. All surface water courses and wetlands
e. All roads
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 13
f. Site property lines
g. Power lines, pipe lines, rights of way and other utilities
h. All fences
i. North arrow
j. On site residue disposal and storage areas (if any)
k. Site drainage facilities
4. Construction and Engineering Plans – A complete set of construction and engineering plans and
specifications relating to the incinerator and all associated buildings, equipment, and hazardous
materials storage must be submitted.
5. Operating Plan – An operating plan must be submitted including all of the information listed
below.
a. Operating hours
b. Operating and design capacities
c. Personnel and duties
d. Odor control
e. Substitute disposal arrangements
f. Communication equipment
g. Provisions for limited access
h. Aesthetic considerations
i. Residue disposal arrangements
j. Fire control and prevention provisions
k. Routine overhaul and maintenance schedules
l. Industrial waste handling procedures
m. Water and waste water treatment and disposal
n. On site traffic control
o. Storage procedures
p. Industrial waste container disposal procedures
SECTION 204.8 – HAZARDOUS MATERIALS USE, STORAGE, OR DISPOSAL SITE DESIGN STANDARDS
A. Class I sites shall be located, designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following:
1. The containment vessel must be lined on all surfaces except the top surface with material that is
equivalent to a five foot layer of soil with a permeability of 1.0 x 10-8 centimeters per second.
2. The liner material may not be reactive with the hazardous material (s) to be placed in any storage
or disposal site.
3. Deposited material shall not have top surfaces directly exposed to the atmosphere.
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 14
4. The liner must be covered by at least four feet of suitable fill material that will minimize frost
effects on the liner, or a registered professional engineer (ME. Regis.) must certify that any tanks
used will not be subject to the effects of frost.
5. Industrial waste shall not be disposed of within 2,500 feet of any dwelling or private drinking
water supply well. Industrial waste shall not be disposed or stored in any watershed of an
existing or planned public drinking water supply well.
6. Sites shall not be located within any 100 year flood plain.
7. All areas, including a 200 foot buffer zone, of the site shall be enclosed with a chain link fence
six (6) feet in height.
8. The site shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a surface body of water within its watershed.
B. Class II sites shall be located, designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the
following:
1. The containment vessel must be lined on all surfaces except the top surface with material that is
equivalent to a ten foot layer of soil with a permeability of 1.0 x 10-7 centimeters per second.
2. The liner materials may not be reactive with the deposited hazardous materials.
3. Deposited materials shall not have top surfaces directly exposed to the atmosphere.
4. The liner must be covered by at least four feet of suitable fill materials that will minimize frost
effects on the liner or a registered professional engineer (ME. Regis.) must certify that any tanks
employed to store hazardous materials will not be subject to the effects of frost.
5. Hazardous materials shall not be disposed of within 2,500 feet of any dwelling or private
drinking water supply well. Hazardous materials shall not be disposed or stored on any
watershed used as a surface public drinking water supply or any area likely to drain to a public
drinking water supply.
6. The site shall not be located within any 100 year flood plain.
7. All areas, including a 200 foot buffer zone, of the site shall be enclosed with a chain link fence
six feet in height.
8. The site shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any residence.
C. Class III hazardous materials use or storage sites shall be located, designed, constructed, and
maintained in accordance with the following:
1. The material separating the deposited or stored material and the highest level of the ground water
table must be equivalent to a five foot layer of soil with a permeability of 1.0 X 10-5 centimeters
per second.
2. The liner material may not be reactive with the stored or used hazardous materials.
3. Hazardous materials stored on site shall not have its top surface directly exposed to the
atmosphere.
4. The storage area liner and the storage tanks must be certified by a registered professional
engineer (ME. Regis.) to be designed in such a fashion that frost, normal wear, and foreseeable
accidents will not adversely affect their functioning.
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 15
5. Hazardous materials covered by this permit shall not be stored or used within 500 feet of any
residence, or public or private drinking supply well, and all lands within this area shall be
controlled through ownership, easement, or other legal means to assure that such uses are not
established within 500 feet during the life of the site. Nor shall they be stored or used in any
watershed tributary to a public drinking water supply whether from surface waters or from wells.
6. The site shall not be within the 100 year flood plain.
D. Class IV sites shall be located, designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the
following:
1. The material separating the deposited or stored material and the highest level of the ground water
table must be equivalent to a five foot layer of soil with a permeability of 1.0 X 10-2 centimeters
per second.
2. Hazardous materials to be disposed of on site shall not be disposed within 1,000 feet of any
dwelling or within 500 feet of a private drinking water supply well. Industrial or commercial
waste containing hazardous materials shall not be deposited on any watershed used as a surface
public drinking water supply or any areas likely to drain to a public drinking water supply well.
3. Any trenches used for the disposal of hazardous materials in the site must either be enclosed with
six (6) foot chain link fencing or covered with grates constructed of chain link fence and
supported by frames.
4. The site shall not be located within 200 feet of any surface body of water.
5. Hazardous materials stored for subsequent sale, or use on site shall be stored at least 200 feet
from the nearest residence and shall be stored in a manner which the Planning Board deems to be
protective of the health, welfare, and safety of the citizens of Gray.
6. The site shall not be within the 100 year flood plain.
E. Class V sites shall be located, designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the
following:
1. The Class V hazardous materials storage site shall not be within the 100 year flood plain unless
flood protection of the area in which hazardous materials are stored is provided by structures
designed by a registered professional engineer (ME. Regis.).
2. The Class V hazardous materials storage site shall provide not more than one (1) underground
tank with 500 gallon capacity to store waste oil drained from automobiles or trucks serviced on
site.
3. Automobile graveyards with Class V hazardous materials storage permits shall use underground
storage for hazardous materials drained from unserviceable, discarded, worn-out, or junked
motor vehicles, or parts thereof, store or processed on site.
F. There is only one class (Class I) of industrial waste incinerators. Class I incinerators may burn all
types of industrial waste unless specifically prohibited by the Planning Board.
Class I Industrial Waste Incinerators- Class I industrial waste incinerators shall be located, designed,
constructed and maintained in accordance with the following:
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 16
1. The minimum temperature at the exit of the final combustion chamber shall be retained in the
combustion chamber for a minimum of two (2) seconds.
2. The rate of combustion shall not exceed the design limitations.
3. Gaseous and particulate emissions from the incinerator shall conform with the regulations of the
Division of Air Quality of the Department of Environmental Protection of the State of Maine.
4. An alternate method of disposal using a class I industrial waste disposal site must be available
for use in the event of breakdown.
5. The incinerator shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any private dwelling or private drinking
water supply well. No incinerator shall be located on any watershed of a surface public drinking
water supply or any area likely to drain to a public drinking water supply well.
6. The incinerator shall not be located within any 100 year flood plain.
7. All areas of the site, including as 200 foot buffer zone, shall be enclosed with a chain link fence
six feet in height.
8. The site shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a surface body of water.
9. All industrial waste must be stored within a building or in an area that would meet the design
criteria of a Class I industrial waster disposal site.
10. The residue from the incinerator must be disposed of at a Class I hazardous materials use,
storage or disposal site, or at such other sites outside of the Town of Gray which meet the
requirements of that town and the state in which it is located.
11. All water used to quench the incinerator residue, scrub the flue gas, clean and facility, as well as
all drainings from the incinerator and the storage buildings, shall be disposed of in a manner that
will not pollute any source of private or public water supply, any of the waters of the state or
ground waters.
12. All incinerator facilities shall have a suitable means for extinguishing all types of fires.
SECTION 204.9 – HAZARDOUS MATERIALS USE, STORAGE, OR DISPOSAL SITE OPERATION
A. Class I, II, III, IV and V Hazardous Materials Use, Storage or Disposal Sites shall be operated as
follows:
1. Water Contamination – Hazardous materials use, storage or disposal sites shall not be located or
operated in a manner so that they will cause or contribute to the pollution of any source of
private or public water supply or any surface water or any ground water.
2. Open Burning – Open burning of hazardous materials at hazardous materials use, storage or
disposal sites shall be prohibited.
3. Inspection – All land, buildings, facilities and equipment used in the use, storage or disposal of
hazardous materials must be available for inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer at any
reasonable time.
4. Sampling – All industrial wastes must be available for sampling and testing by the Code
Enforcement Officer at any reasonable time.
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 17
5. Odors- Suitable measures shall be taken to minimize odors originating at all hazardous materials
use, storage or disposal sites. No odors shall be detectable off the site.
6. Safety – Hazardous materials use, storage or disposal sites shall be designed, operated and
maintained in such a manner as to protect the health, safety and welfare of the users of the site,
personnel associated with the operation of the site, and any other persons or their property who
or which might come into contact with the site or with gaseous or liquid materials emanating
from the operations of the site.
7. Record Keeping – Records shall be kept by the operator of the hazardous material use, storage or
disposal site except Class V sites stating accurately and truthfully the source, quantity, type of
hazardous materials, hauler and any other pertinent information for each load of hazardous
material accepted for use, storage or disposal. These records shall be submitted monthly or at
some other interval specified by the Planning Board to the Code Enforcement Officer and made
available during inspections of the site and at other times as requested.
8. Signs – A sign shall be erected and maintained at the entrance to the Type I, II, III and IV
hazardous material use, storage or deposal site, clearly legible and visible, which shall contain
the following:
a. Name of site
b. Emergency phone number
c. Accepted types of hazardous materials
d. Operating hours
9. Fire Protection – All hazardous material use, storage or disposal sites shall arrange in writing for
the Gray Fire Department to provide emergency service whenever called, and shall provide such
special equipment and training as is necessary to reasonable prepare the Gray Fire Department to
respond to emergencies at the site.
10. Labeling – No Class I, II, III, and IV hazardous materials use, storage or disposal site shall
accept any hazardous material unless each load has an identifying label accurately describing the
contents affixed to each transporting container.
11. Maintenance of Site – For a period specified in the permit and by Section 204.7 A7 and B7 of
this ordinance following the last use, storage or disposal of hazardous material at permitted sites,
the operator shall retain control of the site and maintain the site in a condition consistent with
this ordinance unless the permitted use of a Class III site was for hazardous materials use and
storage only. Such maintenance of the site shall be guaranteed by an escrow account established
by the individual or firm operating the site through equal annual payments over the first half of
the site’s life expectancy. The total amount this account shall be determined by the Planning
Board and shall be a condition of the permit.
12. Ground Water Separation – No land disposal of hazardous materials, and no lagoon storage of
hazardous materials shall be conducted where the deposited material shall be within five feet of
the maximum ground water table measured during the wet season as determined by the Planning
Board at time of application.
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 18
13. Limited Access – Access to and all operations at hazardous materials use, storage or disposal
sites where disposal of hazardous materials is occurring shall be limited to those hours between
sunrise and one-half hour past sunset and only when authorized operating personnel are on duty.
14. Fire Extinguishers – All mobile equipment used at a hazardous material use, storage or disposal
site shall be equipped with dry chemical fire extinguishers.
15. Surface Drainage – Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent surface water runoff from
entering the area of hazardous material use, storage or disposal and to prevent the collection of
standing water within the hazardous materials use, storage or disposal site.
16. Hazardous Materials Disposal Areas – The depositing, storing or disposing of any hazardous
material at a hazardous material disposal site in places not designated for this purpose on the site
plan shall be prohibited.
17. Borings- A sufficient number of borings, but not less than six (6) at Class I and II sites and not
less than three at Class III and Class IV sites, shall be installed at each site in order to allow for
the adequate determination of ground water contours, soil profiles and other data. The boring
shall be installed to a depth of twenty (20) feet below the ground water table or to refusal
whichever is first. Pipes shall be installed in each boring hole so that ground water level
determinations can be made during the wet season as determined by the Planning Board a
minimum of twenty-four (24) hours after the boring is installed. After these measurements have
been made, the pipes shall be removed and the boring holes shall be filled with suitable material
prior to the installation of any liner at the site and/or the acceptance of any hazardous material at
the site.
18. Monitoring Wells – The operator of a Class I, II, III, or IV hazardous materials use, storage or
disposal site shall install and maintain monitoring wells in locations selected by the Planning
Board and shall be of a design approved by the Planning Board. It shall be the responsibility of
the operator of the site to arrange for the sampling and analysis of these wells before the
acceptance of any hazardous material and on a monthly schedule or other schedule as set by the
Planning Board thereafter. Results of these analyses must be submitted to the Code Enforcement
Officer monthly or as required by the permit if another sampling schedule is set.
19. Equipment – All operators shall have all equipment necessary for operating the site in
accordance with this ordinance. All equipment shall be maintained in such a manner that it shall
be fit for the purposes for which it was intended by the manufacturers.
20. Communication – A suitable means of communication (telephone, two-way radio, etc.) shall be
available at the site.
21. Manifest – The operator of any site shall not accept any industrial waste unless a manifest is
completed for each load of hazardous material.
22. Insurance – The operator of any hazardous materials use, storage or disposal site shall be insured
for damages to employees and other persons and their property. The amount of such insurance
may be a condition of the permit.
23. Automobile Graveyard Hazardous Materials Storage – Operators of an automobile graveyard
shall drain, in so far as is practical, all hazardous materials contained in unserviceable, discarded,
worn-out, or junked motor vehicles, or parts, thereof, to tanks provided on site immediately upon
bringing such motor vehicles or parts on site.
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 19
24. Tank Inspections – All hazardous material storage tanks shall be pressure tested annually, and
tanks failing such tests shall be reported immediately to the Code Enforcement Officer, drained
or pumped to another permitted storage or disposal facility, and replaced within ten (10) days.
B. Industrial Waste Incinerators shall be operated as follows:
1. Water Contamination – Industrial waste incinerators shall not be located or operated in a manner
so that they will cause or contribute to the pollution of any source of private or public water
supply or any surface water or any ground water.
2. Open Burning – Open burning at an industrial waste incinerator site shall be prohibited.
3. Inspection – All land, building, facilities and equipment used in the disposal of industrial waste
must be available for inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer at any reasonable time.
4. Sampling – All industrial wastes must be available for sampling and testing by the Code
Enforcement Officer at any reasonable time.
5. Odors – Suitable measures shall be taken to minimize odors originating at all industrial waste
incinerators. No odors shall be detectable off the incinerator site.
6. Safety – Industrial waster incinerators shall be designed, operated and maintained in such a
manner as to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the users of the incinerator, personnel
associated with the operation of the incinerator, and any other persons or their property who or
which might come into contact with the incinerator or with gaseous or liquid materials emanating
from the operations of the incinerator.
7. Record Keeping – Records shall be kept by the operator of the industrial waste incinerator
stating accurately and truthfully the source, quantity, type of waste, hauler, and any other
pertinent information for each load of industrial waste accepted for disposal. These records shall
be submitted monthly to the Code Enforcement Officer or at such other intervals as the Planning
Board shall require and they shall be made available during inspections of the incinerator and at
other times as requested.
8. Signs – A sign shall be erected and maintained at the entrance to the industrial waste incinerator,
clearly legible and visible, which shall contain the following:
a. Name of incinerator
b. Emergency phone number
c. Accepted types of waste
d. Operating hours
9. Emergency Protection – All industrial waste incinerators shall arrange in writing for the Gray
Fire Department, The Gray Rescue Squad, and with such other organizations as are necessary to
provide emergency service whenever called, and they shall provide whatever special equipment
and training is reasonably necessary to enable these organizations to respond to emergencies or
fires at the site. Documentation of this arrangement shall become a part of the emergency plan
for the site, and copies of this plan shall be made available to all affected organizations.
10. Labeling – No industrial waste incinerator shall accept any industrial waste unless each load has
an identifying label accurately describing the contents affixed to each transporting container.
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 20
11. Fire Extinguishers – All mobile equipment used at an industrial waste incinerator shall be
equipped with dry chemical fire extinguishers.
12. Surface Drainage – Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent surface water runoff from
entering the area of the incinerator and to prevent the collection of standing water within the
industrial waste incinerator site.
13. Waste Disposal Areas – The depositing, storing or disposing of any industrial waste at an
industrial waste incinerator site in places not designated for this purpose on the site plan shall be
prohibited.
14. Equipment – All operators shall have all equipment necessary for operating the industrial waste
incinerator in accordance with these rules. All equipment shall be maintained in such a manner
that it shall be fit for the purposed for which it was intended by the manufacturer.
15. Communication – A suitable means of communication (telephone, two-way radio, etc.) shall be
available at the industrial waste incinerator.
16. Manifest – The operator of any industrial waste incinerator shall not accept any industrial waste
unless a manifest is completed for each load of industrial waste.
17. Insurance – The operator of any industrial waste incinerator shall be insured for damages to
employees and other persons and for damages to property. The amount of such insurance shall
be determined by the Planning Board and shall be a condition of the permit.
SECTION 204.10 – DECISION MAKING CRITERIA
The Planning Board may adopt such a guidelines and regulations regarding the classification, use
handling, storage, or disposal of hazardous materials as it may deem necessary to implement the
provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 204.11 – SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT
A. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit where he/she finds there
has been a failure to comply with this ordinance.
B. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determined that a hazardous materials use, storage or
disposal site is not being operated in conformance with any portion of this ordinance, he/she may
cause to have issued a notice of violation indicating corrective action necessary to comply with this
ordinance. Such notice may include an order to cease the operation of the site where violations of
the permit constitute a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare.
C. The permit holder may appeal the Code Enforcement Officer’s suspension or revocation of his/her
permit of the Code Enforcement Officer’s notice of violation to the Planning Board for
Administrative review.
SECTION 204.12 – PRESENT HAZARDOUS MATERIALS USERS
A. Existing persons to whom this ordinance applies shall submit an application for a hazardous
materials use permit within sixty (60) days of the date at which this ordinance is in force in order to
receive the protection afforded in Part B & C of this section.
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 21
B. No applicant for a hazardous materials use permit Class I or Class II whose present business or
hazardous materials use would require a permit under the conditions of this ordinance shall be held
to be in violation of this ordinance until such time as the Planning Board either issues or denies the
permit for which application is made. The Planning Board may consider the permit application
made by persons to whom this section applies for a period not to exceed six (6) months plus the
period of time set by the Planning Board for two extensions (to be granted at the Board’s discretion).
If the Planning Board does not grant the applicant the permit for which the application is made
during the time specified above, the application shall be deemed to have been denied.
C. No applicant for a hazardous materials use permit Class III, Class IV, or Class V, whose present
business or hazardous materials use would require a permit under the conditions of this ordinance,
shall be held to be in violation of this ordinance until such time as the Planning Board either issues
or denies the permit for which application is made. The Planning Board may deny the permit
application where it determines that the applicant has failed to provide an adequate application or
where it determines that the applicant has failed to provide such additional information as the
Planning Board has requested pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 204.13 – AVAILABILITY OF RECORDS AND ACCESS FOR INSPETIONS
A. The permit holder shall keep such records as are required by the permit and shall make such records
available upon the request of the Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of Gray, the Planning
Board or designees of the Council during normal business hours.
B. The permit holder shall make all lands, buildings, facilities, and equipment used in the handling,
storage, transportation, or disposal of hazardous materials available to the Code Enforcement
Officer, the Planning Board and/or other designees of the Council of the Town of Gray for purposes
of inspection at any time.
SECTION 204.14 – CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP, ADMINISTRATION, LOCATION, OR SERVICES
A. The permit(s) shall immediately become void and shall be returned to the Planning Board upon the
sale, lease or change in ownership of the business or other use for which the hazardous materials use
permit has been issued.
B. The Planning Board may extend the expiration date of the permit for such time as is required for
processing a new application for a hazardous materials use permit.
C. The permit shall apply only to those sites, uses and methods specifically delineated in the
application; additional services, changes in operation, uses, or methods, or changes in sites shall
require a separate permit or a modification of the existing permit at the option of the Planning Board.
D. The Planning Board shall issue a temporary permit to the purchaser, lessor, or other new operator of
an existing, permitted hazardous materials use, storage, transport, or disposal site upon the return of
the previous permit and upon the presentation of a bond or cash deposit in the amount required for
the previous permit. The conditions of the temporary permit shall be identical to the conditions of
the previous permit. The temporary permit shall be for a period of not more than six (6) months, but
may be extended at the option of the Planning Board.
O:\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS\CHAPTER 204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.DOC 22
SECTION 204.15 – VIOLATIONS AND APPEALS
A. Persons aggrieved by the conditions of a permit issued by the Planning Board or the denial of a
permit by the Planning Board under the terms of this ordinance may, within thirty (30) days of
permit issuance or notification of denial, appeal the conditions or denial to the Superior Court of the
State of Maine.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$1,000 and not less then $250 for each offense, each day during which a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 204.16 – PERMIT APPLICATION FEES AND ANNUAL PERMIT FEES
Section 204.16.A is hereby amended by deleting the entire subsection and substituting the following:
Applicants for a Class I, II, III, IV and V permit to operate a hazardous materials use, storage or
disposal site shall pay an application fee to the Town of Gray in accordance with the Codified Fee and
Fine Schedule. Applicants for Class I, II or Class I Industrial Waste Incinerator Permits shall also
establish an escrow account from which the Gray Planning Board may make payments for professional
review of an advice on the applications. The amount of this escrow account shall be determined by the
Codified Fee and Fine Schedule for the Town of Gray.
Section 204.16.B is hereby amended by deleting the entire subsection and substituting the following:
The annual permit fees shall be determined by the Codified Fee and Fine Schedule for the Town of
Gray.
CHAPTER 205
ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted September 4, 1990
The Council of the Town of Gray hereby ordains that Chapter 205, an ordinance regulating the Control
of Barking Dogs, be rescinded in its entirety; and that Chapter 205, Animal Control Ordinance, be
amended by rescinding Section 205.2 and replacing it with the following:
SECTION 205.2 DEFINITIONS
As used in this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise indicates,
a) “Dog” shall be intended to mean both male and female dogs.
b) “Owner” shall be intended to mean any person or persons, firm, association or corporation
owning, keeping or harboring a dog.
c) “At Large” shall be intended to mean off the premises of the owner; and not under the control of
the owner; a member of his immediate family or other authorized person, either by leash, cord,
chain, voice control or otherwise.
SECTION 205.3 ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER
The Town Manager shall be responsible for appointing an Animal Control Officer(s) whose duties shall
be enforcement of the following sections; and such other duties to control animals as required by law.
SECTION 205.4 ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER TO INVESTIGATE DOG BITES
The Animal Control Officer shall investigate all dog bites or other violations of this Ordinance or State
law referred for investigation.
SECTION 205.5 PENALTY FOR NONCOMPLIANCE
Whoever keeps a dog contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less
than $100, to be recovered by complaint before any district court. Initial warnings may be issued by the
Animal Control Officer or hand delivered; and shall constitute legal notice prior to any legal action.
SECTION 205.6 LICENSE, RECORD, TAG REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY
License, record and tag requirements for dogs shall be as prescribed and required by State law.
SECTION 205.7 RABIES
Any dog which is suspected of having Rabies, or has been bitten by another dog having or suspected of
having Rabies (or, in either event, not having been immunized against Rabies) shall be immediately
impounded in an animal shelter, veterinary clinic, animal refuge league or similarly authorized facility;
and there confirmed for observation in a humane manner, as provided for by State law; provided,
however the dog is transported immediately by its owner or the owner’s agent to such a facility, without
requiring Town transportation; then no transportation fee under Section 205.8 shall be charged.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 205 ANIMAL CONTROL\CHAPTER 205 ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE.DOCX 2
SECTION 205.8 RECLAIMING
The owner shall be entitled to resume possession of an impounded dog after complying with the license
provisions, paying a fifty dollar ($50) transportation fee per animal, and paying the impoundment fees.
SECTION 205.9 DOGS NOT TO RUN AT LARGE
It shall be unlawful for any dog, licensed or unlicensed, to run at large, except when used for hunting.
The owner or keeper of any dog found running at large shall be subject to the penalties provided in this
ordinance and under State law.
Any Animal Control Officer shall be authorized to seize, impound or restrain any dog found in violation
of this section; and deliver it to any shelter, animal refuge league, or similarly authorized facility, as
provided for by State law; or shall take the dog to its owner, if known. If ownership cannot be
established, such animals may be handled as strays for the purposes of acceptance by an approved
shelter.
SECTION 205.10 BARKING, HOWLING DOGS
No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog which by loud, frequent or habitual barking, howling or
yelping shall disturb the peace of any person.
CHAPTER 208
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted October 6, 1981
Amended February 16, 1982
SECTION 208.1 – TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and be cited as the Coin-Operated Amusement Device Ordinance of the
Town of Gray, Maine.
SECTION 208.2 – PURPOSE
The Town of Gray hereby ordains the following Coin-Operated Amusement Device Ordinance for the
purpose of regulating the location and operation of any such device in or on any premises or location
within the Town of Gray.
SECTION 208.3 – DEFINITIONS
A. Coin-Operated Amusement Device-A coin-operated amusement device shall include all of those
machines whether mechanical or electronic which upon insertion of a coin, slug, token plate or disc
may be operated by the public generally at a public premises for use as a game, entertainment, or
amusement, but not limited solely to musical entertainment, whether or not registering the score and
which are created for amusement only and do not dispense any form of payoff, price or reward
except free replays.
B. Good Moral Character-Proof of good moral character shall include general testimony of the
applicant's reputation in the community and the results of a records check to be conducted by the
police. Such results shall be considered relevant only if they disclose a felony conviction within the
last ten (10) years.
C. Effect on Neighboring Properties-The applicant shall establish that the location of a premises for the
operation of coin-operated amusement devices will not adversely affect the property values of other
real property in the immediate vicinity of said premises. Any plans the applicants may have in regard
to supervision of said premises to prevent vandalism and other potential property damage or personal
injury to abutters shall be considered in this regard.
D. Traffic Hazards-Traffic conditions on any public way adjacent to said premises shall be evaluated to
insure that the location of said premises will not unnecessarily aggravate said conditions; such
evaluation shall be conducted by the police in conjunction with the Department of Public Works.
E. General Health and Safety-The Code Enforcement Officer in conjunction with the Fire Chief shall
inspect said premises and report on the general health and safety of the premises in regard to any
violations or possible violations of the Building Code, Health Code, Fire Code, or State Plumbing
Code.
SECTION 208.4 – LICENSES
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association to keep for public patronage or
to permit or allow the operation of any coin-operated amusement device in or on any public
patronage premises or location under his, hers or its charge, control or custody without having first
obtained a license from the Town Council. Said license shall be issued upon approval by the Council
and upon the payment of the annual fee of fifty (50) dollars of each for the first three (3) machines
O:\CHAPTER 208 COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE\CHAPTER 208 COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE.DOCX 2
and seventy-five (75) dollars for each additional machine located at said premises and said license
shall expire on December 31, of each year.
B. Exceptions and conditions of License. A license shall not be issued until authorized by the municipal
officers following public hearing on the establishment of said coin-operated amusement device
location. Such hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days of the receipt of such license application
and authorization or denial by said officers shall be by written decision stating the reasons thereof.
At the public hearing the municipal officers shall receive testimony and take evidence as to the good
moral character of the applicants as well as to such factors regarding the premises for location of
said devices as traffic hazards, effect on neighboring properties and general health and safety of the
premises to house said coin-operated amusement devices. Each establishment shall maintain
restroom facilities for public use. Children under the age of eighteen unaccompanied by an adult
shall not be permitted to play or operate such machines except in the presence of an adult attendant
of at least twenty-five (25) years of age. In this regard, the Code Enforcement Officer shall be
required to submit written reports on his evaluation of said premises. The license shall be granted
subject to such conditions and restrictions as the Council may deem necessary.
C. License Specifics. The license required by this ordinance shall be posted securely and conspicuously
on the premises for which it is granted. Said license shall designate the number of machines licensed.
Said license shall not be transferable to any other person, firm, corporation or association or from
location to location and shall be valid only at the location and for the person, firm, corporation or
association designated therein. Further, such license shall not be granted to any person under the age
of twenty-five (25) years, nor to any firm, corporation or association whose officers are under said
age.
D. Revocation of License. Any such license herein shall be revoked by the Municipal Officers after
hearing when any of the following violations are found:
1. There are more machines located on the premises than are described in the license application.
2. That minors under the age of eighteen (18) years unaccompanied by an adult have been allowed
to operate said machines in violation of the terms of the ordinance.
3. That any of the other specific findings required by this ordinance and defined in Section 208.3
have been violated and/or cease to be true.
4. When it has been established to the municipal officers' satisfaction that the premises for which
said license was granted had ceased to be a proper location due to the creation of a public
nuisance at said premises.
SECTION 208.5 – APPEAL
The decision of the municipal officers may be appealed to the Superior Court within thirty (30) days
from the rendering of said decision.
SECTION 208.6 – PENALTY
Any person, firm or, in the case of a corporation or association, any official thereof, violating any of the
provisions of this ordinance, shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five
(25) dollars nor more than one-hundred (100) dollars for each offense, and each day such violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense.
CHAPTER 212
MOBILE VENDOR ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY
Adopted November 19, 1985
Amended March 17, 1992
SECTION 212.1 – TITLE AND PURPOSE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Mobile Vendor Ordinance of the Town of Gray,
Maine.
This ordinance applies to any food service establishment, including ice cream vendors, hot dog stands,
push carts, and other food services that are located on private property. Mobile units for the sale of food
on public ways is regulated by the Lunch Wagon Statute under 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 3931.
SECTION 212.2 – DEFINITIONS
“Disqualifying Criminal Conviction” shall mean and include any conviction or any criminal offense
punishable by imprisonment for more than one year whether or not the sentence was imposed or served,
but shall not include any conviction which is more than five (5) years old or is shown to have been set
aside on appeal or collaterally, or for which a pardon, certificate of rehabilitation, or equivalent under
the law of the sentencing jurisdiction has been granted.
“Mobile Vendor” shall mean and include any food service establishment not more than eight (8) feet in
width and eighteen (18) feet in length attached to wheels and which is capable of moving under its own
power or being self-contained unit to be readily moved and must have a wash basin and napkins if
selling food and which has all utilities and facilities contained within it or is capable of hookup thereto,
in order to serve persons present at its location. The term shall exclude any use which falls exclusively
within the definition of “lunch wagon” under 30-A M.R.S.A. Sec. 3931 as amended from time to time.
SECTION 212.3 – LICENSE
No person, firm, corporation or association shall operate as a mobile vendor in Gray without first
securing a license under this ordinance. Any person seeking such a license shall annually make
application to the Gray Town Council. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of said application, the Town
Council shall hold a public hearing following notification of the abutters of the location at which the
vendor intends to do business. Following the Public Hearing, the Council shall issue, issue with
conditions, or deny the license. Said license shall expire on December 31st of each year. Fees will not
be prorated. Refer to the Town’s fee schedule for the annual license fee.
SECTION 212.4 – APPLICATION FORM
This application shall be on a form provided by the Town Clerk and shall require the applicant to furnish
the following information:
A. Name, address and telephone number of mobile vendor owner.
B. Name, address and telephone number of mobile vendor operator, if different from owner.
C. Identification of site or sites where mobile vendor will operate.
D. Description of mobile vendor vehicle and its license number, if any.
E. A certificate of insurance as required in Section 212.8.
F. A photograph or sketch, or plan of the mobile vendor vehicle.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 212 MOBILE VENDOR ORDINANCE\CH 212 MOBLIE VENDOR ORDINANCE.DOCX 2
G. A certificate of approval issued by the Department of Human Services of the State of Maine, if
required.
H. A complete record of the applicant with respect to any disqualifying criminal conviction or a
statement by the applicant that no such conviction exists.
I. An appropriate form of statement, over the signature of the applicant, giving all persons and
governmental agencies having information relevant to the above items and permission to release
same to the Clerk.
J. A description of those items which the applicant proposes to sell and dispense.
K. Written evidence from the Code Enforcement Officer that the use is allowed in the zoning district (s)
in which the applicant proposes to operate.
SECTION 212.5 – DISQUALIFYING CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
A license granted under this section shall be denied or revoked when any applicant or licensee has
received a disqualifying criminal conviction at any time during the five years immediately preceding the
application or while a license granted under this ordinance is an effect – or has been imprisoned at any
time during said periods for a disqualifying criminal conviction, provided that said conviction was for an
offense which is rationally related to the purpose of licensing mobile vendors.
SECTION 212.6 – SCOPE OF AUTHORITY
A licensee under this ordinance shall be authorized to sell and dispense only those items which have
been described in the application and which the mobile vendor is equipped to dispense pursuant to the
rules described by the Department of Human Services, as they may be amended forms time to time. No
mobile vendor shall operate within two hundred (200) feet of any fixed base retail establishment or other
mobile vendor offering the same or substantially similar goods or services. A mobile vendor shall
operate only on private property and not within or on any public ways. No license shall be granted for a
mobile vendor unless allowed as a land use in the underlying zoning district(s) in which it operates.
SECTION 212.7 – OPERATING STANDARDS
A. Location. A mobile vendor may operate only on land that is owned by the operator or land which
he/she has written permission to use. If the mobile vendor is to be operated on land that is not
owned by the operator, a copy of the written permission to use the land of another property owner
must be submitted to the Town Council along with the original application on such forms as the
Town shall require.
B. Abutters of land to be used by a mobile vendor shall be notified of the Public Hearing date at which
the mobile vendor’s application will be considered by the Town Council.
C. Access. Mobile vendor license applicants demonstrate to the Town Council that there is sufficient
access, parking and maneuvering space available at the site on which the mobile vendor will operate.
The location and adequacy of approaches shall be first reviewed by the Code Enforcement Officer.
Suitable, safe access by pedestrians must also be provided.
D. Mobile vendors and any mobile vendor ancillary facilities such as parking shall be located at least
ten (10) feet from the nearest edge of the roadway surface and ten (10) feet from the adjacent side lot
lines, unless written approval is received from the abutter to locate less than ten (10) feet from the
side lot line.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 212 MOBILE VENDOR ORDINANCE\CH 212 MOBLIE VENDOR ORDINANCE.DOCX 3
E. The approved mobile vendor registration sticker issued by the Town of Gray must be conspicuously
displayed on the vending equipment. This sticker is non-transferable.
F. Mobile Vendor Signs. Mobile vendors must conform with the Town of Gray Sign Ordinance.
G. Hours of operation shall be from sunrise to sunset. The mobile unit shall be removed from the site
and relocated in a safe and suitable place between the hours of sunset and sunrise.
H. Noise level (dBA). No loud speakers or any unnecessary noise will be allowed on the site. Noise is
required to be muffled so as not to be objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency or
shrillness. The average dBA count resulting shall not exceed sixty (60) dBA at any point on or
beyond the site.
SECTION 212.8 – RUBBISH CONTAINERS
A sufficient number of covered, metal rubbish containers shall be provided at each site immediately
adjacent to the mobile vendor to hold material discarded by its customers, and the license shall cause the
same to be emptied as necessary. In no case shall such containers be more than ten feet from the mobile
vendor vehicle. A licensee shall keep sidewalks, roadways, and other public or private spaces adjoining
and adjacent to his/her locations clean and free from paper and refuse of any kind which may be
generated by the operation of the business.
SECTION 212.9 – INSURANCE
The licensee shall provide written evidence of insurance coverage for the period of the license and
executed by an insurance company authorized to issue such policy in the state, in the usual form of
automobile liability insurance policies in this state for injuries to persons and property resulting from the
use and operation of the vehicle to be licensed.
Such policy of insurance shall be issued for the principal sum not less than $300,000 for bodily injury,
death and property damage. A certificate of insurance bearing an endorsement thereon by the issuing
agent shall be deposited with the Clerk. Such certificate shall state that the issuing agent will notify the
clerk in writing no less than thirty (30) days prior to the cancellation thereof.
SECTION 212.10 – AUTOMATIC REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION
No license granted under this ordinance shall be effective for any period during which the licensee’s
certificate of approval, issued by the Department of Human Services, is suspended or revoked.
SECTION 212.11 – GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION
A license granted under the authority of this ordinance may be suspended or revoked by the Town
Council, after notice of hearing, when the Council determines that the licensee has violated any
condition of this ordinance or any other applicable law, or of the license granted to him/her.
CHAPTER 213
HOME SOLICITATION ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted November 19, 1985
SECTION 213.1 – TITLE
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Home Solicitation Ordinance of the Town of
Gray, Maine.
SECTION 213.2 – SCOPE
This ordinance shall apply to persons, both principals and agents, offering goods, wares, and
merchandise for unsolicited sale by sample for future delivery; to those who offer for unsolicited sale
goods, wares, and merchandise at retail from a motor vehicle; and to hawkers or peddlers on the streets,
or peddlers from motor vehicles.
SECTION 213.3 – DEFINITIONS
Charitable solicitor: any person, firm or organization acting on behalf of any church, civic group, public
institution, youth organization or any organization which is granted tax exempt status by the State of
Maine.
Route salesperson: any individual who has established customers to whom he/she makes periodic
deliveries on a regular basis.
SECTION 213.4 – EXCEPTIONS
Sections 213.5, 213.6, 213.7, 213.8, 213.9, 213.10, 213.14 and 213.16 shall not apply to charitable
solicitors and route salespersons as defined above.
SECTION 213.5 – LICENSE
No person described in Section 213.2 shall be or remain in or on any of the streets, ways, or public
places of the Town of Gray without obtaining a license which has been duly issued by the Town Clerk.
SECTION 213.6 – APPLICATION
The application for such a license shall be on a form provided by the Town Clerk and shall contain at
least the following information:
A. The name of the applicant
B. his/her home address
C. his/her telephone number
D. the name of his/her employer
E. the address of hi s/her employer
F. the telephone number of his/her employer
G. the license number and general description of any motor vehicle or motor vehicles which the
applicant intends to use in the conduct of his/her business
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 213 HOME SOLICITATION\CHAPTER 213 HOME SOLICITATION ORDINANCE.DOCX 2
H. an authorization for the release of any information about the applicant from any law enforcement
agency to the Town of Gray
I. the application must be signed under oath
SECTION 213.7 – INSURANCE
In addition to the information required in Section 213.5, an applicant for a license shall provide a
certificate of insurance indicating that he/she carries motor vehicle liability insurance coverage in
amounts not less than $50,000 for injury to, or death of, one person; $100,000 for injury to, or death of,
more than one person in a single incident; and property damage insurance in the amount of not less than
$25,000.
SECTION 213.8 – LICENSE FEE
The license fee shall be $25.00 for residents of the Town of Gray and $50.00 for non-residents and shall
be paid at the time of filing the application.
SECTION 213.9 – EXPIRATION DATE
All licenses issued under this ordinance shall expire one year from their date of issue.
SECTION 213.10 – DISPLAY OF LICENSES
All licenses granted under this ordinance shall be conspicuously displayed at all times while the licensee
is conducting business in the Town of Gray.
SECTION 213.11 – NOTICE OF RIGHT OF RECESSION
A. Before executing any contract for the sale of goods in excess of $250 which sale is regulated by this
ordinance, the seller shall give the buyer a notice on a form provided by the Town Manager's office,
obtain the buyer's signature on the notice in the space provided and affix the notice to either the copy
of the contract or any receipt given by the seller to the buyer and return said notice to the Town
Manager's office within forty-eight hours of the date of the execution of the contract.
B. Said notice shall, at least, specify the consumer's rights under 9-A MRSA, Section 3.502.(1).
SECTION 213.12 – PROHIBITION AGAINST FRAUDULENT PRACTICES
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any of the practices described below:
1. Uses any plan, scheme or ruse or makes any statement which indicates that the purpose of such
person's visit is other than to obtain orders for or to make sales of goods or services;
2. Does not disclose to the prospective customer at the outset, his/her name and company and
product he/she represents;
3. Fails to show, upon request, company identification setting forth his/her name, company and
product he/she represents;
4. Misrepresents the right of the buyer to rescind or cancel a sale under state and federal law;
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 213 HOME SOLICITATION\CHAPTER 213 HOME SOLICITATION ORDINANCE.DOCX 3
5. Causes likelihood of confusion or misunderstanding as to the source, sponsorship, approval or
certification of goods or services;
6. Causes likelihood of confusion or misunderstanding as to affiliation, connection, or association
with, or certification by another;
7. Represents that goods or services have sponsorship, approval, characteristics, ingredients, uses,
benefits, or qualities that they do not have or that a person has a sponsorship, approval, status,
qualification. affiliation, or connection that he/she does not have;
8. Represents that goods are original or new if they are deteriorated, altered, reconditioned,
reclaimed, used or second-hand;
9. Makes false or misleading representation of fact concerning the reasons for, existence of, or
amounts of price regulations; or
10. Makes false or misleading representations concerning the availability of credit or the nature of
the transaction or obligation incurred.
SECTION 213.13 – HOURS OF SOLICITATION
No sale or offer to sell regulated by this ordinance shall be made between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m.
SECTION 213.14 – FALSE STATEMENTS
Any false statement in an application, either original or supplementary, for a license shall subject such
applicant or licensee to the same penalty if he had no license.
SECTION 213.15 – PENALTY
Anyone found guilty of violating any provision of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine of $100. Each
day such violation continues shall be deemed a new offense.
SECTION 213.16 – APPEAL
Denial of a license under this ordinance may be appealed through the Municipal Officers of the Town of
Gray.
CHAPTER 215
MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted November 13, 2012
Effective December 13, 2012
ARTICLE 1 - PURPOSES AND EXEMPTIONS
215.1.1 – PURPOSES
The Town of Gray recognizes the desirability of certain outdoor events, including exhibitions, festivals,
music concerts, sporting events, and fairs; and hereby ordains the following to protect the general
welfare and promote public health and safety by addressing issues arising there from, such as traffic
congestion, crowd control, health and sanitation, compliance with alcohol and drug laws, and protection
of public and private property.
215.1.2 – EXEMPTIONS
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
A. Events held by the Town of Gray and approved by the Town Council.
B. Public school functions involving student population or staff held on school property and approved
by the MSAD 15 School Board.
C. Private school functions involving student population and staff and held on school property.
D. Religious institution functions held on institution property.
ARTICLE 2 - DEFINITIONS
A. In general, words and terms used in these regulations shall have their customary dictionary
meanings.
B. Other words and terms used herein are defined as follows:
1. Assembly Area – that portion of the premises on which the Mass Gathering is held, within
which persons in attendance are expected to sit or stand.
2. Mass Gathering – any outdoor gathering, pageant, amusement show, exhibition, festival,
theatrical performance, or other special event held outdoors with the intent to attract at least one
thousand (1,000) persons during the course of the event, in a single assembly area, for more than
six continuous hours or overnight, not otherwise operating under the approval of the Town of
Gray.
3. Not-for-profit Organization – a religious, charitable or benevolent association or organization
which is registered with the State of Maine and Is tax exempt under section 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code.
4. Operator – the licensee, the person or entity responsible for the mass gathering.
5. Performance Guaranty – an irrevocable letter of credit from a banking institution authorized to
do business in Maine, cash, an escrow, or other financial guarantee at a monetary level
acceptable to the Town Manager and in a form approved by the Town Attorney or as to form,
sufficiency, manner or execution.
6. Person – any natural person, sole proprietor, partnership, corporation or other entity.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 215 MASS GATHERING\CHAPTER 215 MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE.DOCX 2
7. Private School – schools operated by an agency, organization, or institution other than the
Town, a School Administrative district, any other municipality, the State of Maine, the United
States government or any agency or instrument thereof.
8. Public Costs – those costs incurred by the Town in connection with a Mass Gathering which
would not be incurred by the Town if the Mass Gathering were not held.
9. Public School – schools operated and governed by Town, a School Administrative District, any
other municipality, the State of Maine, the United States Government or any agency or
instrument thereof.
10. Town – the Town of Gray.
11. Town Council – the Town Council of the Town of Gray.
ARTICLE 3 - LICENSE REQUIREMENTS, FEES, AND APPLICATION PROCEDURE
215.3.1 – LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
A. No person shall sponsor, promote, operate or hold any mass gathering without first procuring a Mass
Gathering license from the Town.
B. Licenses for a Mass Gathering shall require a license issued by the Town Council according to the
procedure contained herein.
215.3.2 – FEES
A. A non refundable application fee shall be due when the application is filed and shall be according to
the adopted Fee Schedule.
B. Licensing fees may be waived at the discretion of the Town Council.
215.3.3 – APPLICATION PROCEDURE
A. Licensing procedure will be administered in the following manner:
1. Any person seeking a mass gathering license shall be provided a copy of this ordinance.
2. The person(s) seeking a license must file a completed application and the application fee with the
Town Clerk not less than seventy-five (75) days before the proposed event.
3. The application must include:
a. A contract with a refuse collection company or other responsible plan for removal of trash;
b. Proof of applicant’s liability insurance;
c. Vender permits;
d. Off-premises Liquor License via a catering license if applicable;
e. Special Amusement Permit Application if applicable;
f. Game of Chance Permit application if applicable;
g. Written proof that the applicant is the owner of the property at which the Mass Gathering is
to be held, OR a letter proving ownership, and with written permission from the owner of the
property at which the Mass Gathering is to be based.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 215 MASS GATHERING\CHAPTER 215 MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE.DOCX 3
4. Within five (5) days of receipt of an application, the Town Clerk shall forward a copy of the
application to the Town Manager, Director of Public Safety, Public Works Director, and Code
Enforcement Officer, and the Town Clerk shall schedule a public hearing for a Mass Gathering
at the earliest possible meeting of the Town Council.
5. Within ten (10) days of application, the Town shall notify abutters within 100 ft. of the proposed
location of the Mass Gathering
a. Notification may include details including time, location, date, operator, and a brief
description of the application.
6. In response to an application for a Mass Gathering License, the Town Council shall hold a public
hearing to review the application and determine the conditions required to safeguard the public
health, safety, and welfare. The hearing shall be conducted not less than thirty (30) days after
application for the proposed event.
7. The Town Council may deny or grant the license, or grant the license and impose conditions to
safeguard the public interest. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, requiring the
applicant to:
a. Compliance with the provisions of Appendixes A through H of this ordinance;
b. Post a performance guaranty / bond to ensure prompt clean up of the grounds and payment
for damages to public or private property in the area of the event. Within ten (10) days
following the mass gathering, the Town shall release the performance guaranty upon receipt
of proof that the operator / licensee has paid all clean up and public costs associated with the
mass gathering.
c. At the licensee’s expense, hire either municipal or private police & security and / or fire /
rescue personnel deemed necessary by the Director of Public Safety or his designees upon his
review of the application. Fees for municipal personnel are contained in the Municipal Fee
Schedule.
d. Demonstrate by means of a written, descriptive plan that facilities will be provided at the
proposed site to protect the health or attendees, including;
(i) Waste disposal;
(ii) Fire, rescue, and police personnel and equipment;
(iii) Water supplies;
(iv) Communication system;
(v) Demonstrate by means of an illustrative, scaled plot plan, that adequate parking spaces
will be available;
(vi) Provide a plan showing, in sufficient detail, how crowd security and police protection of
private property will be accomplished.
e. Provide a plan for controlling traffic, which shall contain as appropriate:
(i) A description of routes, that attendees will use;
(ii) Methods to be used to publicize alternative routes;
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 215 MASS GATHERING\CHAPTER 215 MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE.DOCX 4
(iii) The number of persons who will be present to direct traffic at the site both before and
after the event, and their locations;
(iv) A description of what means will be available to remove disabled vehicles from locations
under the control of the operator, if such vehicles would prevent the free flow of traffic;
(v) Public toilet facilities.
f. Provide a plan for evacuating the site in the event of a natural disaster or other civil
emergency.
8. Licenses will be issued for events to be held on property meeting the requirements of both this
ordinance and the Gray Zoning Ordinance.
ARTICLE 4 - ENFORCEMENT, PENALTY, ASSIGNABILITY
215.4.1 – ENFORCEMENT
The Code Enforcement Officer or designee will enforce the provisions of this Ordinance prior to the
event. Contracted Municipal security and public safety staff will enforce the provisions during the actual
event.
215.4.2 – PENALTY
Violation of this ordinance constitutes a civil violation punishable by a civil penalty of one thousand
dollars ($1,000) for each violation.
215.4.3 – ASSIGNABILITY
Licenses issued under this ordinance are not transferable or assignable without prior approval of the
Town Council.
215.4.4 – EXPIRATION
Licenses issued under this ordinance are valid during the proposed operating hours of the Mass
Gathering.
A. The license is void should the event be canceled or indefinitely postponed.
B. If the event is postponed to a date certain, the license may be renewed for the new date, and an
administrative fee may be assessed per the Fee Schedule.
214.4.5 – CONFLICTS WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
This Ordinance shall not repeal, annul, or in any way, impair or remove the necessity of compliance
with any other rules, regulation, bylaw, permit, or provision of law. Where this Ordinance imposes a
greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings, or structures the provision of this Ordinance shall
control.
ARTICLE 5 - APPENDIX
APPENDIX A - WATER SUPPLY & WASTE WATER DISPOSAL
1. Where water is distributed under pressure for drinking, washing, flushing toilets, and /or
showers, the water supply system shall deliver water at normal operating pressures (20 psi
minimum) to all fixtures at a rate of at least thirty (30) gallons per person per day.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 215 MASS GATHERING\CHAPTER 215 MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE.DOCX 5
2. Where water is not available under pressure and non-water carriage toilets are used, at least three
(3) gallons of potable water per person per day shall be provided for drinking and washing
purposes.
3. Waste water generated shall be estimated according to anticipated number of persons attending
the event and shall have a predetermined method of disposal; sized accordingly utilizing table
(501.2) located in the Maine subsurface waste water disposal rules 10-144 CMR241.
4. The Towns Local Plumbing Inspector shall have the authority to require that the applicant
provide a copy of a contract with a qualified party to remove anticipated volumes of wastewater
from the site during the event which may include the servicing / switching of temporary sanitary
facilities during the event.
5. Water points or drinking fountains shall be well identified and conveniently accessible.
APPENDIX B - REFUSE
1. One fifty (50) gallon refuse container or its equivalent shall be provided for each one hundred
(100) persons anticipated.
2. All refuse containers throughout the Mass Gathering site and parking area(s) shall be emptied at
least once per day, and as often as necessary to avoid any overflow of debris from the containers.
3. The Mass Gathering area and immediate surrounding property shall be cleaned of refuse within
twenty-four (24) hours following the mass gathering.
4. Areas where vehicles are parked shall have adequate sized rubbish disposal facilities one (1) for
every fifty (50) vehicles.
5. Within twenty-four (24) hours of the end of the Mass Gathering, refuse that is subject to being
blown to abutting properties shall be properly secured / disposed of to ensure that a storm event
does not adversely affect public roads or neighboring properties.
APPENDIX C - GROUNDS
The assembly area shall be adequately lighted but not unreasonably reflect beyond the assembly area
boundaries unless adjacent properties are uninhabited.
1. Light level intensities shall be at least five (5) foot candles.
2. There shall be at least twenty (20) square feet of usable space per person at the site for daytime
gatherings and at least forty (40) square feet per person for overnight gatherings.
APPENDIX D - ROADS AND PARKING AREAS
1. Width of service roads shall be at least twelve (12) feet for one traffic lane, twenty-four (24) feet
for two (2) traffic lanes, and seven (7) feet for parallel parking lane.
2. There shall be at least one (1) parking space for every four (4) persons; the density should not
exceed one hundred (100) passenger cars or thirty (30) busses per usable acre.
3. Licensee must provide accessible parking spaces in accordance with the Americans With
Disabilities Act (ADA).
4. All parking on public ways must comply with Chapter 502, the Gray Parking Ordinance.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 215 MASS GATHERING\CHAPTER 215 MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE.DOCX 6
APPENDIX E - SANITARY FACILITIES
1. Toilets shall be provided at a rate of one (1) for each hundred and fifty (150) persons.
2. Toilet Facilities at Mass Gatherings attended by the general public must comply with the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). With one (1) ADA accessible toilet facility for each
four hundred and fifty (450) persons.
3. Sanitary facilities shall be conveniently accessible and well identified.
4. Each toilet shall have a continuous supply of toilet paper.
5. Service buildings or rooms housing necessary plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of easily
cleaned, non-absorbent materials.
6. Clearly marked separate service buildings or rooms containing sanitary facilities shall be
provided for each sex. Each toilet room should be provided with a self-closing door to insure
privacy, or the entrance should be screened so that the interior is not visible from the outside.
7. Common drinking cups shall not be used.
APPENDIX F - SAFETY
1. Applicant may employ appropriate law enforcement, medical, and fire personnel as
recommended by Public Safety Director
2. Emergency medical services may be provided, and may include, under the supervision of Gray
EMS, a first aid building or tent, and adequate medical supplies. Emergency first aid vehicles
may be available on site during the entire time of the Major Mass Gathering per the hours of
operation stated on the application.
3. Any emergency calls to the event site during set up and break down would use the 911 system.
4. The electrical system or electrical equipment serving the Mass Gathering shall comply with the
most current state and local adopted codes. All structures must be compliant with NFPA Life
Safety Codes.
5. Upon receipt of completed application and fee, the applicant, the CEO, and / or the Public Safety
Director will meet on site to discuss the various amenities that are envisioned to be utilized
during the Mass Gathering. The Applicant should be prepared to discuss specific actions to be
taken to address utilities (i.e. electric, propane), water & wastewater, stages, location and number
of waste receptacles, frequency and detail of emptying waste receptacles during the event,
lighting, platforms, buildings, and the number of attendees / vendors / performers etc.
APPENDIX G - NOISE CONTROL
1. The sound of the mass gathering should not carry unreasonably beyond the boundaries of the
mass gathering area.
2. All noise should cease at the expiration of the license (midnight of the Mass Gathering date).
APPENDIX H - BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
Where applicable, the CEO will inspect buildings and structures in regard to safety and building codes
during the site visit referenced in Appendix F Paragraph 5.
CHAPTER 216
ORDINANCE REGULATING OBSCENE MATERIAL
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted November 2, 1993
SECTION 216.1 – TITLE
This ordinance shall be known and be cited as an Ordinance Regulating Obscene Material.
SECTION 216.2 – DEFINITIONS
As used in this ordinance, the following words shall have the following meanings:
A. Material: Anything tangible that is capable of being used or adapted to arouse interest, whether
through the medium of reading, observation, sound, or in any other manner, but does not include an
actual three-dimensional obscene device.
B. Obscene: Material or a performance that:
1. The average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find that taken as a
whole appeal to the prurient interest in sex;
2. Depicts or describes:
a. Patently offensive representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, normal or
perverted, actual or stimulated, including sexual intercourse, sodomy, and sexual beastiality;
or
b. Patently offensive representations or descriptions of masturbation, excretory functions,
sadism, masochism, lewd, exhibition of the genitals, the male or female genitals in a state of
sexual stimulation or arousal, covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state or a device
designed and marketed as useful primarily for stimulation of the human genital organs and;
3. Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
C. Obscene Device: A device including a dildo or artificial vagina, designed or marketed as useful
primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs.
D. Patently Offensive: So offensive, on its face as to be intolerable to the average person, applying
contemporary community standards.
E. Performance means a play, motion picture, dance, or other exhibition performed before an audience.
F. Promote: To manufacture, issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer, transmit, publish,
distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit, or advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same.
G. Purient Interest in Sex: A shameful or morbid interest in sex.
H. Wholesale Promote: To manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail, deliver, transfer, transmit, publish,
distribute, circulate, disseminate, or to offer or agree to do the same for purpose of resale.
SECTION 216.3 – WHOLESALE PROMOTION OF OBSCENE MATERIAL OR DEVICES
A. A person commits an offense if, knowing its content and character, he wholesale promotes or
possesses with intent to wholesale promote any obscene material or obscene device.
B. A person commits an offense if, knowing its content and character, he:
1. Promotes or possesses with intent to promote any obscene material or obscene device; or
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 216 OBSCENE MATERIAL\CHAPTER 216 ORDINANCE REGULATING OBSCENE MATERIAL.DOC 2
2. Produces, presents, or directs an obscene performance or participates in a portion thereof that is
obscene or that contributes to its obscenity.
C. A person who promotes or wholesale promotes obscene material or an obscene device or possesses
the same with intent to promote or wholesale promote it, in the course of his business is presumed to
do so with knowledge of its content and character.
D. A person who possesses six (6) or more obscene devices or six (6) or more obscene articles, whether
such devices or articles are similar or identical, is presumed to possess them with intent to promote
the same.
E. This section does not apply to a person who possesses or distributes obscene material or obscene
devices or participates in conduct otherwise prescribed by this section when the possession,
participation, or conduct occurs in the course of law enforcement activities.
SECTION 216.4 – ENFORCEMENT
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the enforcement of this Ordinance. An
enforcement action shall be brought in the name of the Town of Gray.
SECTION 216.5 – PENALTY
The violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be punished by a civil penalty of not less than
$500, and not more than $1,000 for each offense. Each act of violation and every day upon which any
such violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to such civil penalty, the Town may
enjoin or abate any violation of this Ordinance by appropriate action.
SECTION 216.6 – VALIDITY
If any of the depictions or descriptions of sexual conduct described in this Ordinance are declared by a
court of competent jurisdiction to the unlawfully included herein, this declaration shall not invalidate
this Ordinance as to other patently offensive sexual conduct included herein.
CHAPTER 217
PAID SEXUAL CONTACT ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY, MAINE
Adopted November 2, 1993
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 217 PAID SEXUAL CONTACT ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 217 PAID SEXUAL CONTACT ORDINANCE.DOC 1
SECTION 1 – TITLE
This ordinance shall be known and be cited as Paid Sexual Contact Ordinance.
SECTION 2 – DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following definitions apply:
Sexual Contact: Any touching of the genitals, directly or through clothing, for the purpose of arousing
or gratifying sexual desire.
Pecuniary Benefit: Any direct or indirect payment of money or any other object of value.
SECTION 3 – SEXUAL CONTACT FOR PECUNIARY BENEFIT PROHIBITED
Engaging in, or agreeing to engage in, or offering to engage in sexual contact in return for a pecuniary
benefit to be received by the person engaging in the sexual contact or buy a 3rd person is prohibited.
Proving or agreeing to provide a person for the purposes of engaging in sexual contact in return for a
pecuniary benefit to be received by the person engaging in the sexual contact or by a 3rd person is
prohibited.
Causing or agreeing to provide a person for purposes of engaging in sexual contact in return for a
pecuniary benefit to be received by the person engaging in the sexual contact or by a 3rd person is
prohibited.
Leasing or otherwise permitting a place controlled by the defendant in any action to enforce this
Ordinance, alone or in association with others, to be used as a site for sexual contact for pecuniary
benefit to any person is prohibited.
SECTION 4 – ENFORCEMENT
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the enforcement of this Ordinance. Any
enforcement actions shall be brought in the name of the Town of Gray.
SECTION 5 – PENALTIES
The violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be punished by a fine not less than five hundred
($500) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1000) for each offense. Each act of violation and every
day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to such
penalty, the Town may enjoin or abate any violation of this article by appropriate action, including but
not limited to revocation of any Town license for a premise or business in which sexual contact for
pecuniary benefit is transacted.
SECTION 6 – SEVERABILITY
If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
thereof.
CHAPTER 218
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND MASSAGE THERAPIST
REGULATORY ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted April 1, 1997
SECTION 218.1 – TITLE
This Chapter shall be known as the “Town of Gray Massage Establishment and Massage Therapist
Regulatory Ordinance” and may be referred to by short title as the “Massage Ordinance” or the
“Ordinance”.
SECTION 218.2 – PURPOSE
The Town of Gray recognizes that the practice of legitimate massage therapy by trained and experienced
therapists is a valuable component of our health care system. The Town of Gray also recognizes that
persons without legitimate massage training or experience may masquerade as massage therapists as a
façade for unlawful purposes such as prostitution. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to clearly
distinguish between these persons and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by
simultaneously acknowledging and permitting legitimate massage therapy and prohibiting the
commission of sexual intercourse, sexual contacts or sexual acts for money.
SECTION 218.3 – DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
implies otherwise;
A. “Client” means any person who receives a therapeutic massage.
B. “Massage” or “therapeutic massage” are used interchangeably to mean any method of rubbing,
kneading, tapping, vibration, compression, percussion, application of friction or manipulation of the
external parts of the human body other than parts of the body above the neck, with the hands or other
parts of the body or with the aid of any instrument or device.
C. “Massage establishment” or “therapeutic massage establishment” are used interchangeably to mean
any business including but not limited to a sole proprietorship in which the business operations
consist of providing or making available massage in the Town of Gray for consideration or with the
expectation of receiving consideration or any gratuity, whether or not the business has a fixed place
of business within the Town limits.
D. “Massage therapist/practitioner means any person who performs massage therapy, as defined by
State statute, for consideration or gratuity or with the expectation of receiving consideration or any
gratuity. 2
E. “Person” means an individual, partnership corporation or other entity.
F. “Recognized school” means any school or institution of learning approved or accredited by the
American Massage Therapy Association/Commission on Massage Training Accreditation.
Approved [AMTA/COMTAA], or equivalent to or surpassing an AMTA/COMTAA approved
school or the American Body Works and Massage Professional Association, which offers a course of
training in the theory, method, profession and work of massage therapy consisting of five hundred
(500) hours or more, the completion of which renders a student eligible for membership in the
AMTA. Schools which cannot be verified shall not be deemed a recognized school. The burden of
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 218 MASSAGE THERAPIST\CHAPTER 218 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND MASSAGE THERAPIST REGULATORY ORDINANCE.DOCX 2
proving that a school meets or surpasses the education and training requirements of an
AMTA/COMTAA approved school shall be on the applicant.
SECTION 218.4 – EXEMPTIONS
The following persons shall be exempt from this Ordinance while licensed and practicing in accordance
with the laws of this State: Physicians, physicians’ assistants, surgeons, osteopaths, nurses,
chiropractors, physical therapists, members of the AMTA, or those persons with no less than two
hundred (200) hours of training from a recognized school as defined above, barbers, cosmetologists,
beauticians and other health and hygiene professionals. Students enrolled in a recognized school who are
required to give massage as part of their training shall be exempt from this Ordinance only for such
training.
SECTION 218.5 – LICENSE REQUIRED
A. Therapeutic massage establishment license. No person shall operate a therapeutic massage
establishment without a valid therapeutic massage establishment license issued by the Town. A
separate license shall be required for each such establishment.
B. Massage therapist license. No person shall work as a massage therapist without a valid massage
therapist license or a combined massage establishment/therapist license issued by the Town.
C. Combined massage establishment/massage therapist license. A sole who employs no massage
therapist other than himself may apply for a massage establishment/massage therapist license in lieu
of both a therapeutic massage establishment license and a massage therapist license.
SECTION 218.6 – COMPLIANCE OF EXISTING THERAPISTS AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Any person presently operating as a massage therapist and/or operating a massage establishment in the
Town as defined herein on the effective date of this Ordinance shall comply with the terms of this
Ordinance by obtaining a license hereunder within one (1) month of the effective date of this Ordinance.
SECTION 218.7 – LICENSE FEE EXPIRATION
Each applicant, within thirty (30) days of approval of the application and before issuance of the license,
shall pay an annual fee of Five Hundred dollars ($500.00) if the fee is not paid within said thirty (30)
days, the approval of the application shall expire. Any license issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall
expire one (1) year from date of issuance, unless otherwise suspended or revoked.
SECTION 218.8 – APPLICATIONS AND INFORMATION
A. Each applicant for a license shall:
1. Complete all information upon and file an application on a form prescribed by the Town Clerk;
2. Pay a nonrefundable application fee of five hundred ($500.00) in advance to the Town Clerk;
3. Submit the completed application to the Town Clerk, together with attested copies of the articles
of incorporation and bylaws, if the applicant is a corporation; evidence of partnership, if a
partnership; or articles of association and bylaws, if the applicant is an association, as well as a
list of all officers and directors for each of the entities described herein;
4. File an affidavit which will identify all owners, officers, managers or partners of the applicant
and their places of residence at the time of the application and for the immediately preceding five
(5) years;
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 218 MASSAGE THERAPIST\CHAPTER 218 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND MASSAGE THERAPIST REGULATORY ORDINANCE.DOCX 3
5. For a combined massage establishment/massage therapist license or a massage therapist license,
submit two (2) front face photographs of the applicant taken within thirty (30) days of
application, of such size as the Clerk may specify; and
6. File the release authorized by 16 M.R.S.A., Section 620 (6) –Criminal History Record
Information Act, with the application for each applicant and for each officer, owner, manager or
partner of an applicant seeking a therapeutic massage establishment or combined massage
establishment/massage establishment license.
SECTION 218.9 – QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT, OFFICERS
Within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application, no applicant nor, for a massage
establishment or combined massage establishment /massage therapist license, any owner, officer,
manager or partner of an applicant shall have been convicted of a crime now classified under Maine
Statute as a Class A, B, or C crime, a crime involving moral turpitude, the crimes of engaging in
prostitution or promotion of prostitution, or of violating any of the gambling, drug or prohibitive liquor
laws under the laws of the United States or the State of Maine or any other state. Hereinafter any one of
the foregoing convictions or violations may be referred to as a “disqualifying criminal conviction”.
SECTION 218.10 – INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT, OFFICERS
Upon receipt of an application or notice of a change of the owners, officers, manager or partners of the
applicant;
A. The building inspector shall verify that the premises at which the establishment will be located
comply with all applicable ordinances of the Town including, but not limited to, the building code,
electrical code, plumbing code and zoning ordinance, and shall report these findings in writing to the
Town Clerk;
B. The Town Clerk shall review the application and other documents and determine whether such
documents comply with all of the requirements of this Ordinance;
C. The health officer shall inspect the location or proposed location to determine whether the applicable
ordinances relating to health and safety have been satisfied and shall report these findings in writing
to the Town Clerk;
D. The fire chief or designee shall inspect the location or proposed location to determine if all Town
ordinances concerning fire and safety have been satisfied and shall submit these findings in writing
to the Town Clerk; and
E. The police chief or designee shall investigate the application, including the criminal history record
information authorized under Section VIII herein and shall report these findings in writing to the
Town Clerk.
F. All reports under this section shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
SECTION 218.11 – BASIC PROFICIENCY
Each applicant for a massage therapist license or combined massage establishment/therapist license shall
show proof of basic proficiency in the field of massage therapy which may be satisfied by:
A. Evidence of the satisfactory completion of all formal course work and training in massage therapy
required for graduation from a recognized school, which shall be in the equivalent documentation; or
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 218 MASSAGE THERAPIST\CHAPTER 218 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND MASSAGE THERAPIST REGULATORY ORDINANCE.DOCX 4
B. A written statement from a physician, nurse, osteopath, chiropractor, physical therapist or member of
the AMTA stating that the person refers clients to the applicant for therapeutic massage.
SECTION 218.12 – OBTAINING LICENSE BY FRAUD
No person shall make any false, untruthful or fraudulent statement, either written or oral, or in any way
conceal any material fact, or give or use any fictitious name in order to secure or aid in securing a
license required by this Ordinance. Any license so secured shall be void. All names, including but not
limited to maiden name, ever used by the applicant must be noted on the application.
SECTION 218.13 – USE OF LICENSE
No person shall make use of, in any manner, to his own or another’s benefit, any license which has not
been duly issued to him in accordance with this Ordinance.
SECTION 218.14 – STANDARDS FOR DENIAL
A license under this Ordinance shall be denied to the following persons:
A. Therapeutic Massage Establishment License
1. To a corporation not registered to do business in this State; or
2. To a corporation if any principal officer thereof or any person having an actual ownership
interest or management authority therein has a disqualifying criminal conviction (as defined in
Section 22390) within the immediately preceding five {5] years; or
3. To an applicant, other than a corporation, if such applicant or any person having an actual
ownership interest or management authority therein has a disqualifying criminal conviction
within the immediately preceding five [5] years; or
B. Massage Therapist License, or Combined Massage Establishment/Massage Therapist License
1. To an applicant who has been given a disqualifying criminal conviction at any time during the
five [5] years immediately preceding application; or
2. To an applicant who is not at least eighteen [18] years of age.
C. All Licenses
1. To an applicant who has submitted an incomplete application, knowingly made an incorrect
statement of a material nature, or failed to supply additional information required by the Town
Clerk or reasonably necessary to determine whether the license is suitable; or
2. To an applicant, if such applicant or any person having an actual ownership interest or
management authority therein has been denied a license for knowingly making an incorrect
statement of a material nature within the immediately preceding five [5] years; or
3. To an applicant, if such applicant or any person having an actual ownership interest or
management authority therein has had a license granted pursuant to this Ordinance revoked for
any reason within the immediately preceding five [5] years.
SECTION 218.15 – GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION
A. All Licenses. In addition to the grounds of denial set forth in Section XIV above, any license may be
suspended or revoked upon a determination that the licensee:
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 218 MASSAGE THERAPIST\CHAPTER 218 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND MASSAGE THERAPIST REGULATORY ORDINANCE.DOCX 5
1. Failed to notify the Town Clerk of any change in material fact set forth in the application for
such license; or
2. Violated any provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Therapeutic Massage Establishment or Combined Establishment/Therapist License. In addition to
the provisions of Subsection A hereof, either a massage establishment license or a combined
establishment/therapist license may be suspended or revoked upon a determination that the licensee:
1. Permitted any person to perform therapeutic massage without a valid license to do so;
2. Permitted or allowed an employee, massage therapist or conditional massage therapist, to violate
any provision of this Ordinance on the premises of the establishment or in the course of conduct
of the business of the establishment; or
3. Knowingly permitted any violation of Title 17A, M.R.S.A., Sections 851 through 855
[Prostitution and Public Indecency]. Such knowledge shall be presumed if there has been a
conviction of any such offense within the immediately preceding five [5] years. The applicant or
licensee may rebut said presumption by showing that:
a. Due diligence was exercised to prevent the recurrence of any such offense; and
b. Despite such diligence, he or she did not know and could not reasonably have known of any
subsequent offense.
SECTION 218.16 – LICENSES DISPLAYED
A valid therapeutic massage establishment license shall be displayed at all times in an open conspicuous
place in the massage establishment for which it was issued. A valid massage therapist license or
combined massage establishment/massage therapist must be readily available to be produced
immediately if demanded of the licensee.
SECTION 218.17 – AGE RESTRICTIONS
No massage or therapeutic massage shall be practiced on a minor without the written consent of a parent
or guardian.
SECTION 218.18 – MASSAGE TABLES
All therapeutic massage shall be administered on a massage table, treatment table, treatment mat or
treatment chair.
SECTION 218.19 – MAINTENANCE AND CLEANING
Every person who conducts or operates a therapeutic massage establishment shall keep the same at all
times in a clean and sanitary condition. All instruments, supplies and devices of any kind, or parts
thereof, that come into contact with the human body shall be kept clean by a modern and approved
method of cleaning.
SECTION 218.20 – PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
A. No massage therapist shall administer a massage to a client whose genitals are exposed.
B. No massage therapist shall administer or agree to administer a massage to the genitals or anus of a
client.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 218 MASSAGE THERAPIST\CHAPTER 218 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND MASSAGE THERAPIST REGULATORY ORDINANCE.DOCX 6
C. No massage therapist shall administer a massage unless he or she is fully clothed with nontransparent
clothing of the type customarily worn by massage therapists while administering a
massage.
D. No massage therapist shall perform sexual intercourse, commit a sexual act or make sexual contact
as defined in Title 17A; M.R.S.A., Section 251, for pecuniary benefit to himself or a third party.
SECTION 218.21 – CLOSING HOURS
No massage establishment shall be kept open for massage purposes between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.
SECTION 218.22 – SUPERVISION
At all times when open for business, a therapeutic massage establishment shall have upon the premises a
licensed massage therapist or person who possesses a combination massage establishment/massage
therapist license who shall be available to supervise the operation of the establishment and assure that no
violations of this Ordinance occur.
SECTION 218.23 – LIST OF EMPLOYEES
The therapeutic massage establishment shall keep a written list of the names and current addresses of all
employees, both on duty and off duty. Such list shall be shown to the Town Clerk, or his authorized
representative or law enforcement authority, upon request.
SECTION 218.24 – PENALTIES
The violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be punished by a fine or not less than two hundred
fifty [$250.00] nor more than five hundred dollars [$500.00] for each offense. Each act of violation and
every day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to
such penalty, the Town may enjoin or abate any violation of this Ordinance by appropriate action,
including but not limited to, revocation of the license.
SECTION 218.25 – APPEALS
An appeal from any final decision of the Town Clerk hereunder may be taken to the Town Council
within thirty [30] days. An appeal from any final decision of the Town Council hereunder may be taken
by any party to the Superior Court pursuant to Rule 80B of The Maine Rules of Civil Procedure. Any
denial, suspension or revocation shall be in writing and shall include notification of the right to appeal
and the procedure for appeal.
EMERGENCY EFFECTIVE DATE: Based upon the emergency public health, safety and welfare
issues identified in the preamble, this Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage.
CHAPTER 219
NUDE ENTERTAINMENT ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted December 7, 2010
SECTION 219.1 – TITLE
This ordinance shall be known and be cited as the Nude Entertainment Ordinance of the Town of Gray,
Maine.
SECTION 219.2 – LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
WHEREAS, establishments in other communities in Maine that allow nude entertainment have been
found to create or result in certain undesirable conditions; and
WHEREAS, other communities have determined that nude entertainment can induce individuals to
engage in prostitution, sexual assaults, breaches of the peace and other criminal activity; and
WHEREAS, the presentation of nude entertainment in an establishment can have negative impacts upon
surrounding neighborhoods and result in a tawdry atmosphere in the area; and
WHEREAS, establishments that allow or provide nude entertainment on the premises must be carefully
located in a manner that minimizes their negative secondary effects on public health, safety and morals,
as discussed in detail in the McCleary report for Jackson County, Missouri (dated May 9, 2008);
NOW, THEREFORE, the Gray Town Council hereby determines that this Ordinance is necessary to
address the issues set forth in this section and to lessen the negative effects that nude entertainment can
have on the Town.
SECTION 219.3 – DEFINITIONS
A. Commercial Establishment: Any retail establishment that offers food, beverages, merchandise,
products or entertainment services for sale to members of the general public, operated as a for-profit
business and treated as such for federal or state tax purposes.
B. Nude Entertainment: Any display of live persons in a state of nudity or in a visible state of sexual
excitement whether or not clothed.
C. Nudity: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks or the female
breast below the top of the nipple or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state.
D. Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, trustee, lessee, agent, assignee or
other legal entity.
E. Premises: The entire building and parcel of land on which it is located where a use occurs, including
storage and unoccupied areas, regardless of whether areas are partitioned into separate rooms or used
for other purposes.
F. Sadomasochistic Abuse: Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments or a
mask or bizarre costume or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained
on the part of one so clothed.
G. Sexual Conduct: Acts of sodomy, masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse or physical
contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person is a
female, breast.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 219 NUDE ENTERTAINMENT\CHAPTER 219 NUDE ENTERTAINMENT ORDINANCE.DOC 2
H. Sexual Excitement: The condition of the human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal.
SECTION 219.4 – USE PERMIT REQUIRED
No person operating a commercial establishment in the Town of Gray shall present or allow presentation
of any form of nude entertainment on the premises of the establishment concerned without first
obtaining a use permit for that purpose from the Town’s Code Enforcement Officer. The application
procedure and criteria for issuance of a use permit shall be as provided in Section 402.9.1 of the Zoning
Ordinance; provided, however, that the following additional requirements shall apply to commercial
establishments offering nude entertainment:
A. The application for a use permit under Section 402.9.1 of the Zoning Ordinance shall state that the
proposed use includes nude entertainment. The application shall describe the nude entertainment to
be offered, including the intended frequency and times, and shall indicate the area of the premises
where the nude entertainment shall take place.
B. The application shall disclose the name and current residence address of all principals of the
business concerned and shall disclose the name and current residence address of all persons holding
a financial interest of five percent (5%) or more in the business concerned.
C. Prior to granting a use permit, the Code Enforcement Officer shall forward the application to the
Cumberland County Sheriff’s Office for a criminal information background check on each of the
persons named in the application under Subsection B above. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
deny the application if the applicant, any principal of the business concerned or any holder of a fivepercent
or greater financial interest in the business concerned has a record of conviction of
prostitution, promoting prostitution or of a Class A, B, or C felony under Maine law, or equivalent
offenses in other jurisdictions, during the ten-year period ending immediately prior to the application
date.
D. Location and standards.
1. No use permit shall be granted for a commercial establishment offering nude entertainment
unless the premises concerned are located in an eligible zoning district and the premises
concerned meet all district provisions and development standards contained in the Zoning
Ordinance plus the following additional requirements:
a. No use permit shall be granted for a commercial establishment offering nude entertainment if
the premises concerned are located within 1,000 feet of any other such establishment for
which a use permit previously issued remains in force; any establishment licensed to sell
alcohol for on-premises or off-premises consumption under 28-A M.R.S.A. §601 et seq.; a
church, chapel, parish house or other place of worship; or a public library, juvenile shelter or
orphanage in existence as of the application date, as measured from the main entrance of the
premises to the main entrance of a building by the ordinary course of travel.
b. The premises concerned must not be located within 750 feet of the nearest district boundary
of any residential zoning district established under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, as
measured in a straight line from the premises to such property.
c. The premises concerned must not be located within 1,000 feet of the nearest property line of
any public or private school, school dormitory, or school ground, public building, public
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 219 NUDE ENTERTAINMENT\CHAPTER 219 NUDE ENTERTAINMENT ORDINANCE.DOC 3
playground or public park, as measured in a straight line from the premises to the property
line.
2. For the purposes of this Subsection D, the term "eligible zoning district" means the Commercial
District “C”, as designated in the Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map.
E. No use permit shall be issued for a commercial establishment offering nude entertainment unless the
premises concerned include changing rooms and toilet facilities for performers that are separated
from any area of the premises to which the public will have access.
F. No use permit shall be issued for a commercial establishment offering nude entertainment if any
portion of the premises concerned consists of residential apartments or other dwelling units, whether
or not occupied.
G. The premises concerned, in addition, shall meet all applicable local code requirements.
H. The subsequent establishment of an establishment licensed to sell alcohol, a public or private school
or school dormitory, a church, chapel, parish house or other place of worship, a public library, a
juvenile shelter or orphanage, a playground or public park or the rezoning of any nonresidential
district within 750 feet shall not affect the validity of a use permit of a legally existing commercial
establishment offering nude entertainment. In the event of the subsequent establishment of any of
the foregoing uses, the commercial establishment offering nude entertainment shall be treated as any
other use permitted in the zoning district.
I. Notwithstanding any other ordinance provision to the contrary, the Code Enforcement Officer must
decide any application hereunder within thirty (30) days of its receipt, the applicant must take any
appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals within thirty (30) days thereafter, the Zoning Board of
Appeals must hear the case within thirty (30) days of any such appeal, and then must decide the
appeal within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the appeal hearing.
SECTION 219.5 – CONDUCT
A. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be employed in any capacity upon the premises
of a commercial establishment that offers nude entertainment. The operator of each such
establishment shall be responsible for verifying the age of each employee through photographic
identification, including hourly employees, salaried employees and all persons working on the
premises for tips, commissions or as independent contractors, contract dancers or contract
performers.
1. Each employer shall maintain records showing the name and date of birth for each employee,
including a copy of the photographic identification used to verify age. Prior to any employee's
beginning employment, the operator shall bring the records to the Cumberland County Sheriff’s
Office to verify the age of the prospective employee. These records must be maintained by the
employer until six (6) months after the employee ceases to work for the employer. These records
are also subject to review by the Cumberland County Sheriff’s Office on the business premises
during normal operating hours.
2. In the event that the Cumberland County Sheriff’s Office reasonably suspects that any employee
listed in the records is under the age of eighteen (18) years, it may copy the record for
investigatory purposes. Any record or information so obtained, and any subsequent information
developed therefrom, is declared to be "intelligence and investigative information" under 16
M.R.S.A. § 611, Subsection 8, the Criminal History Record Information Statute, which, if
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 219 NUDE ENTERTAINMENT\CHAPTER 219 NUDE ENTERTAINMENT ORDINANCE.DOC 4
publicly disclosed, would endanger the life or safety of the individuals named therein. Record
information may be disclosed to the person named therein, notwithstanding this declaration.
B. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be admitted to any commercial establishment
offering nude entertainment, as a customer or patron. The operator of each such establishment shall
be responsible for verifying the age of each person entering the premises, through photographic
identification.
C. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served or given away on the premises of any commercial
establishment offering nude entertainment, whether for on-premises or off-premises consumption.
Further, operators of any such establishment shall not allow customers or patrons to bring or
consume alcoholic beverages on the premises.
D. There shall be no physical contact on the premises between patrons and dancers. For the purposes of
this subsection, physical contact does not include incidental touching between a dancer and patron,
but does include contact that occurs if a patron is giving a monetary tip to a dancer. In no case shall
incidental contact be deemed to include physical contact otherwise prohibited by law.
E. Dancers or performers who remove any garments during the nude entertainment shall not toss or
throw those garments to any customer or patron.
F. Dancers or performers providing the nude entertainment shall not engage in any sadomasochistic
abuse or sexual conduct as defined in Section 219.3.
G. Nude entertainment presented in a commercial establishment shall not include any showing of the
male or female genitals, pubic area, perineum or anus or the female breast below the top of the
nipple of any person with less than a fully opaque covering.
H. No nude entertainment shall be presented after the hour of 1:00 a.m., local prevailing time. All
premises offering nude entertainment shall be closed and cleared of customers and patrons between
the hours of 1:15 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Mondays through Saturdays and 9:00 a.m. Sundays, local
prevailing time.
SECTION 219.6 – VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
A. Any violation of this Chapter by the owner, lessee, licensee, permittee or operator of a premises shall
constitute a land use violation and shall be subject to prosecution and penalties as provided in 30-A
M.R.S.A. §4452, provided that the minimum fine for any violation by such persons shall be $500 for
each offense. Each day in violation shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the Code
Enforcement Officer may suspend or revoke the use permit for any establishment offering nude
entertainment in violation of this Chapter, or in violation of conditions contained in the use permit.
Suspension or revocation of a certificate of occupancy shall be subject to administrative appeal as
provided in Section 402.9.2 of the Zoning Ordinance, subject to the various time requirements
imposed under Section 219.4(I) above.
B. Any violation of this Chapter by a person other than the owner, lessee, licensee, permittee or
operator of any premises shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500 for the first offense, and
not less than $1,000 for the second and subsequent offenses. Each day in violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 219 NUDE ENTERTAINMENT\CHAPTER 219 NUDE ENTERTAINMENT ORDINANCE.DOC 5
SECTION 219.7 – THEATRICAL PERFORMANCES
The provisions of Section 219.4(A) through (D) shall not apply to theaters, dinner theaters, licensed
movie theaters or similar establishments which are primarily devoted to theatrical performances or the
presentation of movies, provided that any displays of live nudity within such theaters, dinner theaters,
licensed movie theaters or similar establishments shall be limited to occasional nudity by bona fide stage
actors during the course of theatrical performances; provided also that the provisions of Section
219.4(E) through (H), 219.5(C) through (H) and 219.6 of this Chapter shall apply to nude theatrical
performances under this section.
APPLICABILITY DATE: Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, and to the
maximum extent allowed by the State Savings Statute, 1 M.R.S.A. § 302, this ordinance when enacted
shall be applicable to any use, application, change of use or related land use or licensing ordinance
applications for any use not lawfully in existence as of November 9, 2010, when this ordinance was first
read before the Town Council.
CHAPTER 302
LAND BANK ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted September 6, 1988
PURPOSE
The Commission shall recommend to the Town Council the purchase of acquisition of land and interest
in land, in order to maintain and manage it in a manner which allows public use and enjoyment
consistent with the natural, historic and scenic resources of the land.
SECTION 1 – DEFINITIONS
As used in this ordinance, unless the context indicates otherwise, the following terms have the following
meanings:
Commission: “Commission” means the land bank commission established pursuant to section 2.
Fund: “Fund” means the land bank fund established under section 7.
Land Bank: “Land Bank” means the municipal land bank established pursuant to section 2.
Municipality: “Municipality” means the Town of Gray.
SECTION 2 – COMMISSION ESTABLISHED
A municipal land bank under the direction of the Town Council is hereby established and shall be
administered by a Commission consisting of seven (7) persons appointed by the Council for staggered 3-
year terms. Members must be legal residents of the municipality and shall serve without compensation.
The Council must consider appointments from conservation committee, planning board, park and
recreation, economic development committee, council and a member at large. The Commission shall
elect a chairman and a secretary-treasurer from among its members and shall adopt reasonable rules for
the conduct of its affairs and the management of its holdings. The decisions of the Commission shall be
by majority vote of the majority of those present and voting, and no business may be transacted without
a majority of the members present. The Commission shall establish its own-by-laws. The Commission
shall keep accurate records of its meetings and actions and shall file an annual report with the Town
Manager.
SECTION 3 – POWERS AND DUTIES
INTENT
It is the intent of this Ordinance to establish a partnership between the Land Bank Commission and the
Gray Town Council to affirm the common goals as indicated in the Land Bank Ordinance.
For this reason, all purchase/acquisition of land, acceptance of gifts of real property interests (to include
fee simple interests or lesser interests such as conservation restrictions, development rights, easements),
or of funds to further the purpose of the Land Bank, or disposition of real property entrusted to the Land
Bank shall require the majority vote of both the Land Bank Commission and the Gray Town Council.
All acquired land or accepted gifts of real property, intended for the management of the Commission,
must contain a deed provision of the partnership noted above between the Land Bank Commission and
the Town Council.
O:\CHAPTER 302 LAND BANK ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 302 LAND BANK ORDINANCE.DOCX 2
THE COMMISSION
A. The Commission may hire such staff and obtain such professional services as are necessary in order
to perform its duties, including development and updating of the Commission’s open space plan
within the constraints of the Land Bank fund:
B. The Commission may maintain, manage and improve land and interests in land held by it in a
manner which allows public use and enjoyment consistent with the natural, historic and scenic
resources of the land, including planting, pruning and cutting of trees and shrubs to manage and
enhance natural systems and constructing nature trails, bird nest boxes and nature identification
signs, provided that the use of Land Bank funds within any single municipal fiscal year shall be
subject to the following limitations:
1. Expenditure of Land Bank funds for maintenance, management and limited capital improvement
of municipally owned conservation lands purchased with Land Bank funds shall not exceed 10%
of the total Land Bank funds.
2. Expenditure of land bank funds for maintenance, management and limited capital improvement
of municipally owned conservation or park lands not purchased with Land Bank funds shall not
exceed 10% of the total Land Bank funds.
3. Expenditure of Land Bank funds for administrative cases incidental to implementation of the
Land Bank program shall not exceed 10% of the total Land Bank funds.
These restrictions may be removed by a majority vote of the entire Town Council.
SECTION 4 – TYPES OF LAND WHICH MAY BE ACQUIRED
Land, interests in land and other real property interests to be acquired and held as part of the Land Bank
must be situated within the boundaries of the municipality. Any purchase or acquisitions must be
consistent with the Commission’s open-space plan. Prior to purchase or acceptance of land or interest in
land, an investigation will be performed to determine any potential liability to the Town. (e.g. toxic or
chemical waste).
A. River, stream, lake or pond frontage and adjoining backlands;
B. Marshes, flood plains and adjoining uplands;
C. Islands;
D. Land for future active or passive public outdoor recreational use, including hiking trails, bicycle
paths, screen belts, high elevations with a view and parks;
E. Aquifer, aquifer recharge areas and other ecologically fragile or significant property;
F. Properties with unique historical, or geological characteristics or otherwise important to the
community’s cultural welfares;
G. Woods or forestland suitable for a town forest or useable by deer as a wintering yard;
H. Farmland or wildlife habitat;
I. Open spaces which help to shape the settlement pattern of the community by promoting the village
concept and discouraging sprawl;
O:\CHAPTER 302 LAND BANK ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 302 LAND BANK ORDINANCE.DOCX 3
J. Vacant parcels of land, vacant buildings and properties or buildings and properties in significant
disrepair which may be reclaimed for the purpose of establishing natural areas for open space or park
land;
K. Lands or interests in lands determined to be important to the Town’s welfare.
SECTION 5 – MAINTENANCE OF REAL PROPERTY
The Commission shall maintain the real property interests acquired hereunder and pursuant to this
Ordinance, predominantly in its natural, scenic or open condition, except as otherwise provided in this
ordinance. Except upon the approval of the Town Council with the advice of the Commission, and
where appropriate, subject to the constitution of Maine or State law, the Commission shall not allow:
A. Construction or placing of buildings; roads, other than paths for pedestrian or bicycle use; signs;
billboards; or other advertising utilities or other structures on or above the surface, except in
furtherance of the purposes of this ordinance;
B. Dumping or placing of soil or other substance or material as landfill or dumping or placing of trash,
waste or unsightly or offensive material;
C. Removal or destruction of trees, shrubs or other vegetation, except where necessary for management
purposes and to enhance natural systems or open-space uses;
D. Excavation, dredging or removal of loam, peat, gravel, soil, rock or other mineral substance in such
manner as to affect the surface, except limited grading to enhance the open space uses of the land;
E. Surface use except for purposes permitting the land or water area to remain predominately in its
natural, scenic or open condition;
F. Activities detrimental to drainage, flood control, water conservation, erosion control or soil
conservation; or
G. Other acts or uses detrimental to the natural, scenic or open condition of the land or water areas.
SECTION 6 – FILING OF PLAN
The Commission shall file with the Town Manager an open-space, public access and outdoor-recreation
plan, developed by members of the Commission, Parks and Recreation Committee, Conservation
Commission and other persons designated by the Town Council, which shall be as far as possible,
consistent with the Town’s Comprehensive Plan and with any regional planning relating to the area.
The Commission may, from time to time, amend the plan. The Commission shall actively seek
comments from the Planning Board, Conservation Commission, Town Council and the general public at
a public hearing before adopting a plan or revisions to a plan. The plan must show all real property
interests then currently held by the Commission, a description of the use of those interests, all potential
open space being considered for purchase, and priorities for these purchases.
SECTION 7 – LAND BANK FUND
The Commission shall meet its financial obligations by drawing upon a municipal land bank fund to be
set up as a separate revolving or sinking account within the Town. Deposits into the fund shall include:
A. Funds appropriated to be deposited into the fund by vote of the Town Council;
B. Voluntary contributions of money or other liquid assets to the fund;
C. Interest from deposits and investments; and
O:\CHAPTER 302 LAND BANK ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 302 LAND BANK ORDINANCE.DOCX 4
D. Proceeds from disposal of real property interests.
All expenses lawfully incurred in carrying out this ordinance must be evidenced by proper vouchers and
shall be paid by the Town only upon submission of warrants duly approved by the Commission. The
Town shall prudently invest available assets of the fund, and all income from any investment shall
accrue to the fund.
SECTION 8 – RECORDS: ANNUAL REPORT
The Commission shall keep a full and accurate account of its actions, including a record as to when,
from or to whom and on what account money has been paid or received relative to this ordinance, and as
to when, from or to whom and for what consideration real property interests have been acquired,
improved or disposed of. These records and accounts shall be subject to examination by the Town
Council. The Commission shall file annually with the Town Manager a report of all acquisitions,
improvements, or dispositions of real property interests during the preceding year and a summary of
disbursements from the land bank fund.
CHAPTER 303
TAX ACQUIRED PROPERTY PROCEDURES ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY
Adopted March 1, 2011
Effective March 31, 2011
SECTION 1 – TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Town of Gray Tax Acquired Property Procedures
Ordinance.
SECTION 2 – PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish procedures for the Town of Gray in accordance with 36
MRSA §§ 942 and 943 which directly relate to disposition of property acquired for non-payment of
taxes. The underlying purposes of this ordinance are to make a reasonable efforts to return owner
occupied residential properties (one-family or two-family) to their its previous owner(s) and to give the
previous owners of all other classes of properties a reasonable opportunity to re-acquire them, while
maintaining the integrity and fiscal well-being of the Town’s interests in having all properties pay their
fair share of the public tax burden.
SECTION 3 – DEFINITIONS
A. Foreclosed tax lien: A tax lien mortgage that has automatically foreclosed pursuant to 36 MRSA
§§ 942 and 943.
B. Certified/Return Receipt Mail: Certified/return receipt, first class mail, posted at any U.S. post
office, postage prepaid.
C. Municipality: Town of Gray, Maine.
D. Municipal Officers: Gray Town Council.
E. Manufactured Real Estate Property: Any structure, building or dwelling, the same being
constructed or fabricated elsewhere and transported, in whole or part, to and placed, set or installed
permanently or temporarily upon land within the municipality. For the purposes of this Ordinance,
manufactured real estate property shall be commonly referred to as real estate property as defined in
this Ordinance.
F. Prior Owner: The person or persons, entity or entities, heirs or assigns to whom the property was
most recently assessed for municipal tax assessment purposes.
G. Quitclaim Deed: A signed legal instrument releasing the municipality’s right, title or interest in real
estate property, acquired by virtue of foreclosed tax lien(s), to an individual or individuals, entity or
entities without providing any guarantee or any warranty of title to same.
H. Real Estate Property: All land or lands and all structures, buildings, dwelling, tenements and
hereditaments, including manufactured real estate property, located or relocated upon any land or
lands connected therewith and all rights thereto and interests therein.
I. Tax Acquired Property: That real estate property interest acquired by the municipality by virtue of
a foreclosed tax lien as defined in this Ordinance.
O:\CHAPTER 303 TAX ACQUIRED PROPERTY ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 303 TAX ACQUIRED PROPERTY PROCEDURES ORDINANCE.DOCX 2
J. Tax Lien: The statutory lien created by 36 MRSA § 552, as the same may be amended or recodified.
SECTION 4 – MANAGEMENT
Following statutory foreclosure of a tax lien mortgage, title to the real estate property automatically
passes to the municipality. The management of this property rests exclusively with the municipal
officers, subject to the provisions of state statutes and local municipal ordinances and regulations. The
procedures described in Step 1 below are only for owner-occupied residential properties (one-family or
two-family only); for all other types of properties, the municipal officers shall determine on a case by
case basis whether to offer the previous owner(s) the right to redeem under Step 1 based on the best
interests of the Town of Gray, or whether to proceed directly to Step 2 below.
SECTION 5 – POST-FORECLOSURE PROCEDURES
A. The municipal officers authorize the Town Clerk to send notification by certified/return receipt mail
of the previous foreclosure and the Town’s intention to exercise its rights under 36 MRSA §§ 942
and 943 to dispose of the property, in accordance with this Ordinance, to the previously assessed
owner(s). The notification shall allow the previously assessed owner(s) the ability to repurchase the
property within 30 days of the date of the written notification by paying all outstanding property
taxes, including the total amount of all delinquent taxes plus the total taxes for the current year (and
the estimated taxes for the next year after commitment) plus accrued interest, lien costs and any
other costs relating to the property and this process (including, but not limited to insurance and
notice costs). This notification is a matter of courtesy only, and the failure of the municipality or
municipal officers to send this notice shall not create any legal rights in any person. The failure of
the municipal officers or the Clerk to send this notice, or the fact that the notice has not been
received or understood by the person to whom it was sent, shall not invalidate the sale or disposal of
the tax-acquired property pursuant to this Ordinance, nor shall such failure provide a legal basis for
any legal action against the municipality or municipal officers or any employee thereof.
B. In the event that the previous owner(s) has not repurchased the property in accordance with Step 1,
the Treasurer shall then prepare a list of tax-acquired properties to be presented to the municipal
officers at the next Council meeting which list shall include the following:
1. Legal identification of the property including location within the municipality;
2. Zoning of the property;
3. Assessed value and size of the property; and
4. Report from the Tax Assessor concerning occupancy and current state of the property (including,
but not limited to, current occupancy status and/or commercial use status).
C. The municipal officers shall then decide whether to direct the Town Attorney to undertake an action
to quiet title in accordance with the provisions of 36 MRSA § 946, as it may be amended or recodified,
or as otherwise provided under Maine law, as a means of securing a clear title to the taxacquired
property.
D. The municipal officers shall determine whether a tax-acquired property is to be retained for public
use or disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
O:\CHAPTER 303 TAX ACQUIRED PROPERTY ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 303 TAX ACQUIRED PROPERTY PROCEDURES ORDINANCE.DOCX 3
E. The municipal officers may charge a monthly rental fee to any and all occupants of tax-acquired
property. Should a rental fee be charged, the municipal officers immediately shall obtain general
liability insurance coverage for the rented tax-acquired property. The rental fee shall be determined
by the municipal officers and will include the cost of the general liability insurance coverage and any
attorney’s fees incurred in connection therewith, as well as any other applicable fees and charges.
F. The municipal officers may, if the property is vacated for 60 or more consecutive days, obtain a
general liability insurance coverage for the tax-acquired property and secure the property
appropriately.
SECTION 6 – DISPOSITION
Should the municipal officers determine that title to tax-acquired property be relinquished rather than
retained by the municipality, the following shall be observed:
A. The municipal officers shall determine the method of public sale of the tax-acquired property on or
before the first Council meeting in April, choosing either the auction process or the bid process
(although failure to comply with this April 1 date shall be directory only, such that failure to comply
does not prejudice the Town’s position in any way).
B. The bid information on the tax acquired property for either process shall be available at the Town
Office upon advertisement of the sale and shall include the following:
1. Legal identification of the property including location within the municipality;
2. Zoning of the property;
3. Assessed value and size of the property; and
4. Report from the Tax Assessor concerning occupancy and current state of the property (including
but not limited to: current occupancy status and/or commercial use status).
C. Advertising for the sale of tax-acquired property for either process will be done by posting in the
Town Office and publishing notice once per week in a paper of general circulation in Gray, no later
than three consecutive weeks before the date of sale.
D. The sale of tax-acquired property shall be subject to any additional terms and conditions of sale
which the municipal officers may require and the Town Attorney may reasonably advise.
E. The bid price for either process shall be determined by the municipal officers in no event being less
than all outstanding property taxes, including the total amount of all delinquent taxes plus the total
taxes for the current year (and the estimated taxes for the next year after commitment) plus accrued
interest, lien costs and any other costs relating to the property and this process (including, but not
limited to, insurance, attorney’s fees, auction/bid or notice costs). If the tax-acquired property is
sold for a sum which exceeds the determined bid price, the municipality is entitled to retain the
entire proceeds. There is no requirement to refund to the former owner(s) any of the “surplus”
realized upon the sale.
F. The municipal officers shall convey any property sold through either process by Quitclaim Deed.
G. The purchaser of any tax-acquired property sold through either process shall purchase the taxacquired
property and any improvements thereon on an “as is/where is” basis and shall acknowledge
such in writing with the signing of a Town-provided form to that effect. The municipality and its
officers, agents and employees make no representations or warranties of any kind, express or
O:\CHAPTER 303 TAX ACQUIRED PROPERTY ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 303 TAX ACQUIRED PROPERTY PROCEDURES ORDINANCE.DOCX 4
implied, including, but not limited to, the warranties of fitness, habitability, merchantability,
satisfaction of building requirements or use for any particular purpose or otherwise, all of which
shall be disclaimed.
H. The purchaser of any tax-acquired property sold through either process shall be responsible for the
removal of any and all occupants and contents of said property, as may otherwise provided by law,
and shall, in writing with the signing of a Town-provided form to that effect, forever defend and
indemnify the municipality and its officers, agents and employees from any and all claims arising
out of the said sale, whether by the occupants of the purchased property, their heirs or assigns or
otherwise, or by the owners of any contents therein, whether by the occupants, their heirs or assigns
or otherwise.
I. A Purchase and Sale Agreement as well as a Notice and Acknowledgement prepared by the Town
Attorney shall be entered into between the municipality and the successful bidder no later than 30
days from the date of the award of bid and upon successful completion of all terms of sale. Such
agreement shall require the buyer to close in full on the property within thirty (30) days thereafter.
SECTION 7 – AUCTION PROCESS
Pursuant to 32 MRSA § 286 (6), as the same may be amended or re-codified, the Town is not required to
use a licensed auctioneer for the sale of tax acquired property.
A. The auction shall be advertised to include the following information:
1. Notice of date of auction;
2. The minimum bid price, if any;
3. A deposit at the time of award shall be required in the amount of not less than 10% of the
awarded auction bid price. Failure to submit a deposit in the said manner at the time of award
shall cause the bid to be rejected and allow the municipality to negotiate with unsuccessful
bidders without holding another public auction;
4. The awarded bidder has ten (10) business days from the date of award to comply with the terms
of the sale in full;
5. Must specify that the auction is being held “With Reserve” in order for the municipality to
reserve the right to reject all bids that fail to comply with any minimum bid price or other terms
or conditions imposed by the municipality; and
6. Should the awarded bidder fail to comply with the terms of the sale, the deposit shall be forfeited
and the municipality may negotiate with unsuccessful bidders without holding another public
auction.
B. The municipal officers shall retain the right to accept or reject any and all bids submitted, and shall
cause the same disclaimer to be noted in any public advertisement of auction in accordance with this
Ordinance. Should the municipal officers reject all bids, or in the absence of any bids, the property
may be offered again for public sale on such terms as the municipal officers determine.
C. The municipal officers shall, as a credit to payment, retain the submitted bid price deposit of any
successful bidder.
D. The municipal officers shall require payment in full from any successful bidder within ten (10)
business days following the award of the bid. Should the awarded bidder fail to comply with the
O:\CHAPTER 303 TAX ACQUIRED PROPERTY ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 303 TAX ACQUIRED PROPERTY PROCEDURES ORDINANCE.DOCX 5
terms of the sale, the deposit shall be forfeited and the municipality may negotiate with unsuccessful
bidders without holding another public auction.
SECTION 8 – BID PROCESS
A. The municipal officers shall solicit sealed bids for sale of the tax-acquired property and shall read
aloud all submitted bids at the first Council meeting in June (although failure to comply with this
April 1 date shall be directory only, such that failure to comply does not prejudice the Town’s
position in any way).
B. The bid shall be advertised to include the following information:
1. Notice of date of bid;
2. The minimum bid price, if any;
3. A certified/return receipt bank check or postal money order, in the amount of not less than 10%
of the bid price, shall be included as the deposit on the bid. Failure to submit a deposit shall
cause the bid to be automatically rejected;
4. Bids shall be sealed in a single plain envelope marked only "Tax-Acquired Property Bid" on the
exterior and either be hand-delivered to the Town Clerk’s office or, if mailed, be enclosed within
a second envelope addressed to the Gray Town Clerk, Town Offices, 24 Main Street, Gray,
Maine 04039. All bids must be received by the municipality no later than 10:00 a.m., prevailing
local time, on the date that is seven (7) calendar days before the date the bids are to be read
aloud by the municipal officers;
5. The awarded bidder has ten (10) business days from the date of award to comply with the terms
of the sale in full;
6. Must specify the bid is being conducted “With Reserve” in order for the municipality to reserve
the right to reject all bids that fail to comply with any minimum bid price or other terms or
conditions imposed by the municipality;
7. Should the awarded bidder fail to comply with the terms of the sale, the deposit shall be forfeited
and the municipality may negotiate with unsuccessful bidders without holding another public
auction.
C. The municipal officers shall require the following for proper submission:
1. The bid information sheet shall be submitted containing a full description of the property being
bid upon and the bid price of the bidder in U.S. currency;
2. A certified bank check or postal money order, in the amount of not less than 10% of the bid
price, shall be included as the deposit on the bid; failure to submit a deposit shall cause the bid to
be automatically rejected;
3. A self-addressed stamped envelope must be included in the bid envelope;
4. Bids shall be sealed in a single plain envelope marked only "Tax-Acquired Property Bid" on the
exterior and either be hand delivered to the Town Clerk’s office or, if mailed, be enclosed within
a second envelope addressed to the Gray Town Clerk, Town Offices, 24 Main Street, Gray,
Maine 04039; and
O:\CHAPTER 303 TAX ACQUIRED PROPERTY ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 303 TAX ACQUIRED PROPERTY PROCEDURES ORDINANCE.DOCX 6
5. All bids must be received by the municipality no later than 10:00 a.m., prevailing local time, on
the date that is seven (7) calendar days before the date the bids are to be read aloud by the
municipal officers.
D. The municipal officers shall retain the right to accept or reject any and all bids submitted, and shall
cause the same disclaimer to be noted in any public notice soliciting bids in accordance with this
Ordinance. Should the municipal officers reject all bids, or in the absence of any bids, the property
may be offered again for public sale on such terms as the municipal officers determine.
E. The municipal officers shall notify any successful bidder, via mail, with the self-addressed stamped
envelope submitted with the bid.
F. The municipal officers shall, as a credit to payment, retain the submitted bid price deposit of any
successful bidder, and shall return all other submitted deposits via mail, with the self-addressed
stamped envelope submitted with the bid within fifteen (15) business days. Unsuccessful bidder
deposits will be retained in the event that the successful bidder fails to comply with the terms of the
sale, the municipality may negotiate with unsuccessful bidders without holding another public bid.
G. The municipal officers shall require payment in full from any successful bidder within ten (10)
business days following the award of the bid. Should the awarded bidder fail to comply with the
terms of the sale, the deposit shall be forfeited and the municipality may negotiate with unsuccessful
bidders without holding another public bid.
SECTION 9 – SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Ordinance shall be finally held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, this invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the Ordinance which can
be given effect without the invalid provision or application. For this purpose, the Tax Acquired Property
Procedures Ordinance is severable.
CHAPTER 401
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Amended May 11, 2011
Amended October 20, 2015 / Effective November 19, 2015
Amended January 3, 2017 / Effective February 2, 2017
Amended May 16, 2017 / Effective June 15, 2017
Amended October 17, 2017 / Effective November 16, 2017
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1 - PURPOSES AND STATUTORY REVIEW CRITERIA ................................................... 4
401.1 – PURPOSES ................................................................................................................................ 4
401.2 – Statutory Review Criteria .......................................................................................................... 4
ARTICLE 2 – AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION ........................................................................ 6
401.2.1 – Authority ................................................................................................................................. 6
401.2.2 – Administration ........................................................................................................................ 6
401.2.3 – Amendments ........................................................................................................................... 6
ARTICLE 3 – DEFINITIONS .................................................................................................................... 6
Section 401.3 – Definitions..................................................................................................................... 6
ARTICLE 4 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ................................................................................ 10
Section 401.4 – Preparation of Agendas ............................................................................................... 10
ARTICLE 5 – SKETCH PLAN MEETING AND SITE INSPECTION ................................................. 11
401.5.1 – Purpose .................................................................................................................................. 11
401.5.2 – Sketch Plan Meeting Procedure ............................................................................................ 11
401.5. 3 – Sketch Plan Submissions ..................................................................................................... 12
401.5.4 – On-Site Inspection ................................................................................................................ 12
401.5.5 – Factors to Consider in Sketch Plan Review .......................................................................... 12
401.5.6 – No Substantive Review or Vested ........................................................................................ 13
ARTICLE 6 – MINOR SUBDIVISIONS................................................................................................. 13
401.6.1 – Minor Subdivision Plan Review and Approval Procedure ................................................... 13
401.6.2 – Required Submissions for Minor Subdivision Plan .............................................................. 15
401.6.3 – Additional Information that may be Required by the Planning Board ................................. 16
401.6.4 – Approval and Filing of the Minor Subdivision Plan ............................................................. 17
401.6.5 – Amendments to a Previously Approved Minor Subdivision Plan ........................................ 17
ARTICLE 7 – MAJOR SUBDIVISION PRELIMINARY PLAN APPLICATION ................................ 17
401.7.1 – Preliminary Plan Review and Approval Procedure .............................................................. 17
401.7.2 – Required Submissions for Preliminary Plan ......................................................................... 19
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 2
401.7.3 – Additional Required Plans and Studies ................................................................................. 22
401.7.4 – Required Submissions for which a Waiver May be Granted ................................................ 22
401.7.5 – Additional Information that may be Required by the Planning Board ................................. 23
ARTICLE 8 - FINAL PLAN APPLICATION ......................................................................................... 23
401.8.1 – Procedure .............................................................................................................................. 23
401.8.2 – Negotiated Exactions ............................................................................................................ 26
401.8.3 – Required Final Plan Submissions ......................................................................................... 30
401.8.4 – Final Subdivision Plan Approval and Filing ......................................................................... 32
ARTICLE 9 - REVISIONS TO MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLANS ......................................................... 33
401.9.1 – Procedure .............................................................................................................................. 33
401.9.2 – Submissions .......................................................................................................................... 33
401.9.3 – Scope of Review ................................................................................................................... 33
ARTICLE 10 - INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT........................................................................ 34
401.10.1 – Inspection of Required Improvements ................................................................................ 34
401.10.2 – Violations and Enforcement ............................................................................................... 35
ARTICLE 11 - PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES ................................................................................ 35
401.11.1 – Types of Guarantees ........................................................................................................... 35
401.11.2 – Contents of Guarantees ....................................................................................................... 36
401.11.3 – Cash Escrow Account ......................................................................................................... 36
401.11.4 – Letter of Credit .................................................................................................................... 36
401.11.5 – Phasing of Development ..................................................................................................... 36
401.11.6 – Release of Guarantee .......................................................................................................... 37
401.11.7 – Default................................................................................................................................. 37
401.11.8 – Improvements to be Covered by Guarantees ...................................................................... 37
ARTICLE 12 - WAIVERS ....................................................................................................................... 37
401.12.1 – Waivers of Certain Submission Requirements Authorized. ............................................... 37
401.12.2 – Waivers of Certain Improvements Authorized. .................................................................. 37
401.12.3 – Waiver of Procedural Steps ................................................................................................ 38
401.12.4 – Conditions for Waivers ....................................................................................................... 38
401.12.5 – Waivers to be shown on final plan. ..................................................................................... 38
ARTICLE 13 - PERFORMANCE & DESIGN STANDARDS ............................................................... 38
401.13.1 – Basic Subdivision Layout ................................................................................................... 38
401.13.2 – Sufficient Water ............................................................................................................... 40
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 3
401.13.3 – Erosion and Sedimentation and Impact on Water Bodies .................................................. 41
401.13.4 – Sewage Disposal ................................................................................................................. 41
401.13.5 – Solid Waste ......................................................................................................................... 42
401.13.6 – Impact on Natural Beauty, Aesthetics, Historic Sites, Wildlife Habitat, Rare Natural Areas
or Public Access to the Shoreline ......................................................................................................... 42
401.13.7 – Conformance with Zoning Ordinance and Other Land Use Ordinances ............................ 46
401.13.8 – Financial and Technical Capacity ....................................................................................... 46
401.13.9 – Impact on Ground Water Quality or Quantity .................................................................... 46
401.13.10 – Floodplain Management. .................................................................................................. 48
401.13.11 – Identification of Freshwater Wetlands, Rivers, Streams or Brooks .................................. 48
401.13.12 – Stormwater Management .................................................................................................. 48
401.13.13 – Residential Open Space Subdivisions ............................................................................... 49
401.13.14 – Compliance with Timber Harvesting Rules. ..................................................................... 58
401.13.15 – Traffic Conditions and Streets .......................................................................................... 58
401.13.16 – Specific Access and Street Design Standards [Adopted Dec 7, 2010] ............................. 60
401.13.17 – Driveway Design Standards [Adopted May 18, 2010] ..................................................... 73
401.13.18 – Net Residential Area and Density ..................................................................................... 74
ARTICLE 14 - APPEALS ........................................................................................................................ 80
401.14.1 – Appeals to Superior Court .................................................................................................. 80
401.14.2 – Planning Board Reconsideration ......................................................................................... 80
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 4
ARTICLE 1 - PURPOSES AND STATUTORY REVIEW CRITERIA
401.1 – PURPOSES
The purposes of these regulations are:
A. To provide for an expedit ious and efficient process for the review of proposed subdivisions;
B. To assure new development in the Town of Gray meets the goals and conforms to the policies of the
Comprehensive Plan;
C. To assure the safety, health and welfare of the people of the Town of Gray;
D. To protect the environment and conserve the natural and cultural resources identified in the Gray
Comprehensive Plan as important to the community;
E. To assure that a minimal level of services and facilities are available to the residents of new
subdivisions and that lots in subdivisions are capable of supporting the proposed uses and structures;
F. To minimize the potential impacts from new subdivisions on neighboring properties and on the
municipality; and
G. To promote the development of an economically sound and stable community.
401.2 – STATUTORY REVIEW CRITERIA
When reviewing any application for a subdivision, as defined by Article 3, the Planning Board shall find
that the following criteria as found in Title 30-A M.R.S.A. §4404 have been met, as well as all
applicable provisions of the Gray Zoning Ordinance and other sections of this Ordinance, before
granting approval. For a subdivision to be approved under this Ordinance, a majority vote of the
Planning Board members present shall be required to determine that the applicant has adequately proven
compliance with each of the following ordinance criteria, with each criterion considered separately. For
most of the criteria, compliance with the specific standards of this ordinance shall constitute prima facie
evidence that the general criteria have been met. The Board may, however, require additional
documentation when presented with factual evidence that a subdivision criterion is not met by the
application as submitted:
A. Pollution. Will not result in undue water or air pollution. In making this determination, it shall at
least consider:
1. The elevation of the land above sea level and its relation to the flood plains;
2. The nature of soils and subsoils and their ability to adequately support waste disposal;
3. The slope of the land and its effect on effluents;
4. The availability of streams for disposal of effluents; and
5. The applicable State and local health and water resources rules and regulations;
B. Sufficient Water. Has sufficient water available for the reasonably foreseeable needs of the
subdivision;
C. Municipal Water Supply. Will not cause an unreasonable burden on an existing public water supply,
if one is to be used;
D. Erosion. Will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or reduction in the land’s capacity to hold water
so that a dangerous or unhealthy condition results;
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 5
E. Traffic. Will not cause unreasonable highway or public road congestion or unsafe conditions with
respect to the use of the highways or public roads existing or proposed and, if the proposed
subdivision requires driveways or entrances onto a state or state aid highway, located outside the
urban compact area of an urban compact municipality, the Department of Transportation has
provided documentation indicating that the driveways or entrances conform to Title 23, section 704
and any rules adopted under that section;
F. Sewage Disposal. Will provide for adequate sewage waste disposal and will not cause an
unreasonable burden on municipal services if they are utilized;
G. Solid Waste. Will not cause an unreasonable burden on the municipality’s ability to dispose of solid
waste if municipal services are to be utilized;
H. Significant Aesthetic, Natural, or Cultural Areas. For natural and cultural resources identified in the
Comprehensive Plan or other studies of the Town, State or Federal governments, will not have an
undue adverse effect on the scenic or natural beauty of the area, aesthetics, and historic sites,
significant wildlife habitat identified by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or the
municipality, or rare and irreplaceable natural areas or any public rights for physical or visual access
to the shoreline;
I. Conformity with Local Ordinances and Plans. Is in conformance with specific provisions of a duly
adopted subdivision regulation or ordinance, comprehensive plan, development plan or land use
plan, if any. In making this determination, the Planning Board may interpret these ordinances and
plans;
J. Financial and Technical Capacity. The developer has adequate financial and technical capacity to
meet the standards of this section.
K. Surface Waters. Whenever situated entirely or partially within the watershed of any regulated pond
or lake or within 250 feet of any wetland, great pond or river as defined in Title 38, sections 435
through 490, will not adversely affect the quality of such body of water or unreasonably affect the
shoreline of such body of water.
L. Ground Water. Will not, alone or in conjunction with existing activities, adversely affect the quality
or quantity of ground water.
M. Flood Areas. Based on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's Flood Boundary and
Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps, and information presented by the applicant
whether the subdivision is in a flood-prone area. If the subdivision, or any part of it, is in such an
area, the applicant shall determine the 100-year flood elevation and flood hazard boundaries within
the subdivision. The proposed subdivision or project plan must include a condition of plan approval
requiring that principal structures in the subdivision will be constructed with their lowest floor,
including the basement, at least one foot above the 100-year flood elevation;
N. Fresh Water Wetlands. All freshwater wetlands within the proposed subdivision have been
identified on any maps submitted as part of the application, regardless of the size of these wetlands.
Any mapping of freshwater wetlands may be done with the help of the local soil and water
conservation district;
O. River, Stream, or Brook. Any river, stream or brook within or abutting the proposed subdivision has
been identified on any maps submitted as part of the application. For purposes of this section, "river,
stream or brook" has the same meaning as in Title 38, section 480-B, subsection 9;
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 6
P. Storm Water. The proposed subdivision will provide for adequate storm water management;
Q. Spaghetti-lots Prohibited. If any lots in the proposed subdivision have shore frontage on a river,
stream, brook, great pond or coastal wetland as these features are defined in Title 38, section 480-B,
none of the lots created within the subdivision have a lot depth to shore frontage ratio greater than 5
to 1;
R. Lake Phosphorus Concentration. The long-term cumulative effects of the proposed subdivision will
not unreasonably increase a great pond's phosphorus concentration during the construction phase and
life of the proposed subdivision;
S. Impact on Adjoining Municipality. For any proposed subdivision that crosses municipal boundaries,
the proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable traffic congestion or unsafe conditions with
respect to the use of existing public ways in an adjoining municipality in which part of the
subdivision is located.
T. Lands Subject to Liquidation Harvesting. Timber on the parcel being subdivided has not been
harvested in violation of rules adopted pursuant to Title 12, M.R.S.A section 8869, subsection 14.
ARTICLE 2 – AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION
401.2.1 – AUTHORITY
A. These standards have been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 30-A M.R.S.A.,
§4403.
B. These standards shall be known and may be cited as "Subdivision Ordinance of the Town of Gray,
Maine."
401.2.2 – ADMINISTRATION
A. The Planning Board of the Town of Gray, hereinafter called the Board, shall administer these
regulations.
B. The provisions of these regulations shall pertain to all land and buildings proposed for subdivision
within the boundaries of the Town of Gray.
401.2.3 – AMENDMENTS
A. These regulations may be only amended by the Town Council of the Town of Gray or by the voters
of Gray under the provisions of the Town Charter, subject to any requirements of applicable State
statutes.
ARTICLE 3 – DEFINITIONS
In general, words and terms used in these regulations shall have their customary dictionary meanings.
Any word or term defined in the Gray Zoning Ordinance shall have the definition contained in that
ordinance, unless defined differently below. Other words and terms used herein are defined as follows:
SECTION 401.3 – DEFINITIONS
Applicant: The person applying for subdivision approval under these regulations.
Average Daily Traffic (ADT): The average number of vehicles per day that enter and exit the premises
or travel over a specific section of road.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 7
Capital Improvements Program (CIP): The Town’s proposed schedule of future projects listed in order
of construction priority together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each
project.
Capital Investment Plan: The portion of the comprehensive plan that identifies the projects for
consideration for inclusion within the capital improvements program, together with an estimate
of the order of magnitude for the cost of each project.
Cluster Development: A subdivision in which the lot sizes are reduced below those normally required in
the zoning district in which the development is located in return for the provision of permanent
open space.
Common Open Space: Land within or related to a subdivision, not individually owned or within an
individual lot, which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents
of the development or the general public. It may include complementary structures and
improvements, typically used for maintenance and operation of the open space, such as for
outdoor recreation.
Complete Application: An application shall be considered complete upon submission of the required fee
and all information required by these regulations unless waived, after the applicant's written
request, by a vote by the Board . The Board shall issue a written statement to the applicant upon
its determination that an application is complete.
Complete Substantial Construction: The completion of a portion of the improvements which represents
no less than thirty percent of the costs of the proposed improvements within a subdivision. If the
subdivision is to consist of individual lots to be sold or leased by the subdivider, the cost of
construction of buildings on those lots shall not be included. If the subdivision is a multifamily
development, or if the applicant proposes to construct the buildings within the subdivision, the
cost of building construction shall be included in the total costs of proposed improvements.
Comprehensive Plan: A document or interrelated documents adopted by the Town Council, containing
the elements established under Title 30-A M.R.S.A. §4326 sub-§§ 1 to 4, including the strategies
for an implementation program which are consistent with the State goals and guidelines
established under Title 30-A M.R.S.A. §§4311 through 4350.
Condominium: A form of property ownership based upon building occupancy and use rather than
traditional lot boundaries as defined in the Maine Condominium Act, Chapter 31 of the Maine
Revised Statutes as amended from time to time.
Conservation Easement: A nonpossessory interest in real property imposing limitations or affirmative
obligations, the purposes of which include retaining or protecting natural, scenic or open space
values of real property; assuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational or open space
use; protecting natural resources; or maintaining air or water quality.
Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
Direct Watershed of a Great Pond: That portion of the watershed which drains directly to the great pond
without first passing through an upstream great pond.
Driveway: A vehicular accessway serving two lots or less.
Dwelling Unit: A room or suite of rooms used as a habitation which is separate from other such rooms
or suites of rooms, and which contains independent living, cooking, and sleeping facilities;
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 8
includes single family houses, and the units in a duplex, apartment house, multifamily dwellings,
and residential condominiums.
Engineered Subsurface Waste Water Disposal System: A subsurface waste water disposal system
designed, installed, and operated as a single unit to treat and dispose of two thousand (2,000)
gallons of waste water per day or more; or any system designed to be capable of treating waste
water with higher BOD5 and total suspended solids concentrations than domestic waste water.
Final Plan: The final drawings on which the applicant's plan of subdivision is presented to the Board for
approval and which, if approved, may be recorded at the Registry of Deeds.
Forested Wetland: A freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six (6) meters tall
(approximately twenty (20) feet) or taller.
Freshwater Wetland: Areas which are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency
and for a duration sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a
prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils; and are not part of a
great pond, coastal wetland, river, stream or brook. Freshwater wetlands may contain small
stream channels or inclusions of land that do not conform to the above criteria.
Great Pond: Any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess of ten (10)
acres, and any inland body of water artificially formed or increased which has surface area in
excess of thirty (30) acres, except for the purposes of these regulations, where the artificially
formed or increased inland body of water is completely surrounded by land held by a single
owner.
High Intensity Soil Survey: A soil map prepared by a qualified professional showing soil types,
composition, and limitations at a scale detailed enough to provide important information for the
development of engineering, stormwater management, septic and other design components of the
subdivision process.
100-Year Flood: The highest level of flood that, on the average, has a one percent chance of occurring
in any given year.
Level of Service: A description of the operating conditions a driver will experience while traveling on a
particular street or highway calculated in accordance with the provisions of the Highway
Capacity Manual, most recent edition, published by the National Academy of Sciences,
Transportation Research Board. There are six levels of service ranging from Level of Service A,
with free traffic flow and no delays to Level of Service F, with forced flow and congestion
resulting in complete failure of the roadway.
Multifamily Development: A subdivision which contains three or more dwelling units on land in
common ownership, such as apartment buildings, condominiums or mobile home parks.
Net Residential Area: The net area of a parcel or site that is generally suitable for development in its
natural state. Net residential area shall be determined by subtracting unsuitable and marginal
areas from the gross land area as calculated in Section 401.13.18 of this Chapter 401, the Gray
Subdivision Ordinance.
Net Residential Density: Net residential density shall mean the number of lots or dwelling units allowed
on a parcel or site after unsuitable land per Net Residential Area is deducted and the minimum
area per lot (or dwelling unit in the case of multi-family) for the District is applied to the
remaining suitable land area.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 9
Person: Includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well
as an individual.
Planning Board: The Planning Board of the Town of Gray.
Preliminary Plan: The preliminary drawings indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be
submitted to the Planning Board for its consideration.
Professional Engineer: A professional engineer, registered in the State of Maine.
Public Water System: A water supply system that provides water to at least fifteen (15) service
connections or services water to at least twenty-five (25) individuals daily for at least 30 days a
year.
Recording Plan: An original of the Final Plan, suitable for recording at the Registry of Deeds and which
need show only information relevant to the transfer of an interest in the property, and which does
not show other information presented on the plan such as sewer and water line locations and
sizes, culverts, and building lines.
Sight Distance: The length of an unobstructed view from a particular access point to the farthest visible
point of reference on a roadway. Used in these regulations as a reference for unobstructed road
visibility.
Sketch Plan: Conceptual maps, renderings, and supportive data describing the project proposed by the
applicant for initial review prior to submitting an application for subdivision approval.
Street: Public and private ways such as alleys, avenues, highways, roads, and other rights-of-way, as
well as areas on subdivision plans designated as rights-of-way for vehicular access other than
driveways.
Street Classification:
? Arterial Street: A major thoroughfare which serves as a major traffic way for travel to other
communities and through the Town. The following roadways shall be considered arterial streets:
o West Gray Road (Route 202)
o Shaker Road (Route 26)
o Lewiston Road (Route 100)
o Wildlife Park Way (Route 26A)
o Portland Road (Route 100/26)
? Collector Street: A street with average daily traffic of between 500 and 5000 vehicles per, or
streets which serve as feeders to arterial streets, and collect traffic from sub-collectors and minor
streets.
? Cul-de-sac: A street with only one outlet and having the other end for the reversal of traffic
movement.
? Industrial or Commercial Street: Streets servicing industrial or commercial uses.
? Minor Residential Street: A street servicing only residential properties and which has an average
daily traffic of less than 250 vehicles per day.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 10
? Sub-collector Street: A street with average daily traffic of between 250 and 500 vehicles per, or
streets which serve as feeders to arterial streets or collectors, and collect traffic from minor
streets.
Subdivision: The term shall be defined as in Title 30-A M.R.S.A. §4401, sub-§4, as amended.
Generally, a legal subdivision is created when a lot or parcel of land is divided into three or more
lots in a single, five-year period. State law, however, has numerous exemptions and
qualifications that come into play in determining whether a subdivision of land requiring
Planning Board approval has occurred.
Subdivision Classification:
? Major Subdivision: A subdivision of land into five (5) or more lots or that involves the
construction of a new road and/or the extension of public water to serve the proposed lots.
? Minor Subdivision: A subdivision of land into four (4) or fewer lots and where there is no street
construction or extension of public water to serve the lots.
Town Engineer: Any registered professional engineer hired or retained by the municipality, either as
staff or on a consulting basis.
Tract or Parcel of Land: All contiguous land in the same ownership, provided that lands located on
opposite sides of a public or private road shall be considered each a separate tract or parcel of
land unless such road was established by the owner of land on both sides thereof.
Usable Open Space: That portion of the common open space which due to its slope, drainage
characteristics and soil conditions can be used for active recreation, horticulture or agriculture.
In order to be considered usable open space, the land must not be poorly drained or very poorly
drained, have ledge outcroppings, or areas with slopes exceeding ten (10%) percent.
ARTICLE 4 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE
SECTION 401.4 – PREPARATION OF AGENDAS
A. Deadline for Submitting Applications – In order to establish an orderly, equitable and expeditious
procedure for reviewing subdivisions and to avoid unnecessary delays in processing applications for
subdivision review, the Planning Office shall prepare a written agenda for each regularly scheduled
meeting. Applicants shall request to be placed on the Board's agenda at least twenty-one (21) days
in advance of a regularly scheduled meeting by submitting an application with all accompanying
submissions and fees.
B. Notifications – Upon determination that a complete application has been submitted for review, the
Board shall notify the applicant in writing. The Board shall also notify the Public Works Director,
Fire Chief and Superintendent of Schools of the proposed subdivision, the number of dwelling units
proposed, the length of roadways, and the size and construction characteristics of any multifamily,
commercial or industrial buildings. If the subdivision is located within the Wellhead zoning districts
or will be serviced by the Gray Water District, the Director of the District shall also be notified. The
Board shall request that these officials comment upon the adequacy of their department's existing
capital facilities to service the proposed subdivision. The Board shall determine whether to hold a
public hearing on the preliminary plan application.
C. Public Hearings – If the Board decides to hold a public hearing, it shall hold the hearing within thirty
days of determining that it has received a complete application, and shall publish a notice of the date,
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 11
time and place of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least two
times, the date of the first publication to be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. In addition,
the notice of the hearing shall be posted in at least two (2) prominent places within the municipality
at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. A copy of the notice shall be sent by First Class mail to
abutting landowners and to the applicant, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. For the purposes
of this section, the owners of the property shall be considered to be the parties listed by the tax
assessor for the Town of Gray as those against whom taxes are assessed. Failure of any property
owner to receive a notice of public hearing shall not necessitate another hearing or invalidate any
action of the Board.
D. Joint Meetings with Abutting Municipalities - If any portion of a subdivision crosses municipal
boundaries, all meetings and hearings to review the application must be held jointly by the reviewing
authorities from each municipality. All meetings and hearings to review an application for a revision
or amendment to a subdivision that crosses municipal boundaries must be held jointly by the
reviewing authorities from each municipality. In addition to other review criteria, the reviewing
authorities shall consider and make a finding of fact regarding the subdivision criteria. The
reviewing authorities in each municipality, upon written agreement, may waive the requirement
under this subsection for any joint meeting or hearing.
E. Outstanding Subdivision Violation(s): Any person or entity that has one or more outstanding
subdivision Notice(s) of Violation(s) at the time that they make application for any other subdivision
project shall not be placed on a Planning Board agenda nor reviewed by the Planning Board until all
subdivision violations have been corrected or resolved.
ARTICLE 5 – SKETCH PLAN MEETING AND SITE INSPECTION
401.5.1 – PURPOSE
Prior to the submittal of a subdivison application, the applicant shall request a pre-application
conference with the Planning Board. The purpose of the sketch plan meeting and on-site inspection is
for the applicant to present general information regarding the proposed subdivision to the Board and to
receive the Board's comments prior to the expenditure of substantial sums of money on surveying, soils
identification, wetland and vernal pool mapping, and engineering by the applicant.
401.5.2 – SKETCH PLAN MEETING PROCEDURE
A. The applicant shall present the Preapplication Sketch Plan and make a verbal presentation regarding
the site and the proposed subdivision.
B. Following the applicant's presentation, the Board may ask questions, point out potential problems or
issues for future discussions, including studies that may be needed, and make suggestions to be
incorporated by the applicant into the subsequent application. Substantive, lengthy discussions
about compliance with review standards or the consideration of waiver requests shall be postponed
until the subsequent review of the full application.
C. The Board will indicate whether a proposed subdivision should be classified as a major or minor
subdivision if that is in question.
D. The Board will discuss an appropriate contour interval for developed and undeveloped portions of
the project site based on input of the applicant and peer reviewers.
E. The date of the on-site inspection will be selected.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 12
401.5. 3 – SKETCH PLAN SUBMISSIONS
Fourteen (14) copies of the sketch plan and all supporting materials must be submitted twenty-one (21)
days prior to a regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting, in order to be placed on the Board’s
agenda. The sketch plan shall show, in simple sketch form, the proposed layout of streets, lots,
buildings and other features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan, which does not have to
be engineered and may be a freehand penciled sketch drawn to scale, shall show site conditions such as
steep slopes, wet areas and vegetative cover in a general manner.
The sketch plan shall be supplemented with a written project narrative, with general information to
describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and a full description of the proposed development.
The narrative should include general proposals for how utilities, roads and drainage systems, and any
common areas will be constructed, managed, and maintained. The sketch plan should be superimposed
on or accompanied by a copy of the Assessor's Map(s) on which the land is located. The sketch plan
shall be accompanied by:
A. A sketch plan application form, and a sketch plan application fee as set forth in the Schedule of Fees
adopted by the Town Council;
B. A copy of a portion of the U.S.G.S. topographic map of the area showing the outline of the proposed
subdivision; unless the proposed subdivision is less than 10 acres in size.
C. A copy of that portion of the Cumberland County Soil Survey covering the proposed subdivision,
showing the outline of the proposed subdivision development, and
D. A written project narrative as described above.
401.5.4 – ON-SITE INSPECTION
Within thirty (30) days of the sketch plan meeting, the Board shall hold an on-site inspection of the
property. The applicant shall place flagging at the centerline of any proposed streets, and at the
approximate intersections of the street centerlines and lot corners, prior to the on-site inspection. If the
proposed project includes buildings, the approximate corners of building footprints shall be flagged.
The on-site inspection is intended for members of the board to become familiar with the site in a manner
that cannot be matched by reading the project plans. During the on-site inspection the Board should
walk over those portions of the property which are proposed for development. While on the inspection,
the Board should pay close attention to drainage, slope, and indications of soils types; look at the sight
distances at proposed intersections or driveways; and look for neighboring land uses or conditions which
should be taken into account by the design of the subdivision. If there is deep snow on the ground, many
of the features which members need to see will not be visible, particularly wetlands and minor drainage
areas. Therefore on-site inspections should not be held when the ground is covered with snow.
On-site inspections are considered public meetings under 1 M.R.S.A. §§401-410, and notice shall be
provided as required by law. The public shall be allowed to accompany the Board, but no public
comment will be taken. The Board shall provide a written summary of its site walk observations at the
first meeting where the formal application is heard.
401.5.5 – FACTORS TO CONSIDER IN SKETCH PLAN REVIEW
A. General character and condition of the site;
B. Forest cover and predominant vegetation types;
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 13
C. Topography with respect to low flat areas prone to drainage problems and steep slope areas that pose
challenges to road construction and are prone to erosion. Also gullies that need to be crossed;
D. Streams and wetlands that will involve special environmental permitting;
E. Wildlife habitats of rare, threatened or endangered species identified by State agencies;
F. Historic land uses that may have involved contaminants;
G. Historic buildings that may warrant special preservation efforts;
H. Existing buildings and other man-made features that will be worked into the development or
removed;
I. Availability of public utilities or the need to depend on on-site water for household supplies and fire
protection, and on septic systems;
J. Traffic conditions on roads providing access to the site in terms of volume, speed, and sight
distances of possible entrance points, as well as condition of the existing road(s) to safely carry
additional traffic;
K. Legal rights of access to the property for roads and utilities;
L. Abutting uses that may warrant or require buffering of proposed buildings;
M. Low lying areas that may be subject to periodic flooding or are located in mapped flood plains.
N. Portions of the site ideally suited to development and those that should be avoided due to hazards or
constraints.
401.5.6 – NO SUBSTANTIVE REVIEW OR VESTED
The sketch plan meeting, the submittal or review of the sketch plan or the on-site inspection shall not be
considered the initiation of the review process for the purposes of bringing the plan under the protection
of Title 1 M.R.S.A., §302. The Planning Board will not be engaging in a substantive review of a
completed development approval application, and the applicant will not be exempt from any ordinance
changes that may be in progress.
ARTICLE 6 – MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
401.6.1 – MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE
A. Time Frames for Submission of Minor Subdivision Plan - Within six (6 months) after Sketch Plan
acceptance by the Board, the subdivider shall submit an application for the consideration of a Minor
Subdivision Plan. Failure to do so shall require re-submission of the Sketch Plan to the Board for
review. The Minor Subdivision Plan shall conform to the layout shown on the Sketch Plan plus any
recommendations made by the Board on design and/or documentation needed to verify compliance
with the criteria and standards of this Ordinance.
B. Fees and Review Escrows - All applications for preliminary plan shall be accompanied by reviews
and peer review escrows as established by the fee schedule adopted by the Town Council. Escrow
fees shall be deposited in a special escrow account designated for that subdivision application, to be
used by the Board for hiring independent consulting services to review planning, engineering, and
other technical submissions associated with the application, and to ensure compliance with the
Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision regulations. If the balance in this special account is drawn down
by seventy-five (75%) percent, the Board shall notify the applicant, and require that the balance be
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 14
brought back up to the original deposit amount. The Board shall continue to notify the applicant and
require a deposit as necessary whenever the balance of the escrow account is drawn down by
seventy-five (75%) percent of the original deposit, but the applicant shall be responsible for all peer
review costs incurred by the Town. Any balance in the escrow account remaining after a decision on
the final plan application by the Board shall be returned to the applicant. The applicant can reduce
peer review costs by ensuring that submissions are complete and carefully prepared.
C. Attendance at Meetings Required - The Board shall not review any preliminary plan application
unless the applicant or applicant’s representative attends the meeting. Should the applicant or
applicant’s representative fail to attend, the Board shall reschedule review of the application at a
subsequent meeting.
D. Receipt & Notification of Filing - Within seven (7) days of the receipt of the Preliminary Plan
application, the Board, or its designee, shall:
1. Issue a dated receipt to the applicant.
2. Notify in writing by First Class Mail all owners of abutting property that an application for
subdivision approval has been submitted, specifying the location of the proposed subdivision and
including a general description of the project. For the purposes of this section, the owners of the
property shall be considered to be the parties listed by the tax assessor for the Town of Gray as
those against whom taxes are assessed. Failure of any property owner to receive a notice of
public hearing shall not necessitate another hearing or invalidate any action of the Board.
If the proposed subdivision is located within a Wellhead Zoning District, notice shall also be sent
to the Gray Water District at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
3. Notify the clerk and the review authority of the neighboring municipalities if any portion of the
subdivision abuts or crosses the municipal boundary.
E. Determination of Completed Application - Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the preliminary
plan application, the Board shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the
applicant in writing of its determination. If the application is not complete, the Board shall notify
the applicant of the specific additional material needed to complete the application.
F. Public Hearing Notices - If the Board decides to hold a public hearing, it shall hold the hearing
within thirty (30) days of determining that it has received a complete application, and shall publish a
notice of the date, time and place of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality at least two times, the date of the first publication to be at least seven (7) days prior to
the hearing. In addition, the notice of the hearing shall be posted in at least two (2) prominent places
within the municipality at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. A copy of the notice shall be sent
by First Class mail to abutting landowners and to the applicant, at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing. For the purposes of this section, the owners of the property shall be considered to be the
parties listed by the tax assessor for the Town of Gray as those against whom taxes are assessed.
Failure of any property owner to receive a notice of public hearing shall not necessitate another
hearing or invalidate any action of the Board.
G. Time Frame for Planning Board Decision - Within thirty (30) days from the public hearing or within
sixty (60) days of determining a complete application has been received, if no hearing is held, or
within another time limit as may be otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board and the applicant, the
Board shall make findings of fact on the application, and approve, approve with conditions, or deny
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 15
the preliminary plan application. The Board shall specify in writing its findings of facts and reasons
for any conditions or denial.
H. Negotiated Exactions - All minor subdivisions shall be required to comply with the standards
established in Section 401.8.2 of this Subdivision Ordinance.
401.6.2 – REQUIRED SUBMISSIONS FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAN
A. Deadline & Submittals – The following items shall be submitted as part of the Minor Subdivision
Plan Application, unless the applicant submits a written waiver request, and is granted a waiver from
the submission requirement by the Planning Board, pursuant to Article 12. Twelve (12) copies of all
materials shall be delivered to the Town Office, at least twenty-one (21) days prior to a regularly
scheduled Planning Board meeting, in order for the application to be placed on the Board’s agenda.
The Board may require additional information to be submitted, as necessary, in order to determine
whether the criteria of Title 30-A M.R.S.A., §4404 for subdivisions are met.
B. Minor Subdivision Plan Format & Content - The minor subdivision plan shall be printed or
reproduced on paper, with all dimensions shown in feet or decimals of a foot. The preliminary plan
shall be drawn to a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch. Plans for subdivisions containing
more than 100 acres may be drawn at a scale of not more than 200 feet to the inch, provided all
necessary detail can easily be read. Three (3) sets of plans shall be no larger than 24 by 36 inches in
size. Nine (9) sets of 11 by 17 inch copies and one (1) universally accessible digital format e.g. PDF
of all plans shall be submitted. The application materials for preliminary plan approval shall include
the following information:
C. Proposed name of the subdivision and the name of the municipality in which it is located, plus the
Assessor's Map and Lot numbers.
D. Verification of right, title or interest in the property by deed, purchase and sales agreement, option to
purchase, or some other proof of interest.
E. A standard boundary survey of the parcel, giving complete descriptive data by bearings and
distances, made and certified by a professional land surveyor. The corners of the parcel shall be
located on the ground and marked by monuments. The entire parcel or tract shall be shown,
including all contiguous land in common ownership within the last five years, as required by Title
30-A M.R.S.A. section 4401. Any parcels that have been sold or transferred in the prior five years
shall be so noted on the plan.
F. A copy of the most recently recorded deed for the parcel. A copy of all deed restrictions, easements,
rights-of-way, or other encumbrances currently affecting the property.
G. A copy of any proposed deed restrictions intended to cover all or part of the lots, dwellings, or
common land in the subdivision.
H. An indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the subdivision. When sewage disposal is
to be accomplished by subsurface waste water disposal systems, test pit analyses, prepared by a
Licensed Site Evaluator or Certified Soil Scientist shall be provided. A map showing the location of
all test pits dug on the site shall be submitted.
I. An indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the subdivision. When water is to
be supplied by a public water supply, a written statement from the servicing water district shall be
submitted indicating there is adequate supply and pressure for the subdivision. (Note: If public
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 16
water lines must be extended from beyond the site location, a major subdivision application is
required).
J. The date the plan was prepared, north point, and graphic map scale.
K. The names and addresses of the record owner, applicant, and individual or company who prepared
the plan and adjoining property owners.
L. Wetland areas shall be delineated on the survey, regardless of size.
M. The location of all rivers, streams and brooks within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision. If any
portion of the proposed subdivision is located in the direct watershed of a great pond, the application
shall indicate which great pond.
N. The zoning district in which the proposed subdivision is located and the location of any zoning
boundaries affecting the subdivision.
O. The location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water mains, culverts, and drainage ways on
or adjacent to the property to be subdivided.
P. The location, names, and present widths of existing streets, highways, easements, building lines,
parks and other open spaces on or adjacent to the subdivision.
Q. The width and location of any streets, public improvements or open space shown upon the official
map and the comprehensive plan, if any, within the subdivision.
R. The location, boundaries, area, and property line setbacks of every proposed lot. The plan shall
contain sufficient data to allow the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, and
subdivision boundary line to be readily determined and be reproduced upon the ground. The
location, bearing and length of street lines, lot lines and parcel boundary lines shall be certified by a
professional land surveyor. The original reproducible plan shall be embossed with the seal of the
professional land surveyor and be signed by that individual.
S. If any portion of the subdivision is in a flood-prone area, the boundaries of any flood hazard areas
and the 100-year flood elevation, as depicted on the municipality's Flood Insurance Rate Map, shall
be delineated on the plan.
T. Areas within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision which have been identified by the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Beginning with Habitat Project or within the
comprehensive plan. If any portion of the subdivision is located within an area designated as a
unique natural area by the comprehensive plan or the Maine Natural Areas Program or Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries & Wildlife Beginning With Habitat Project the plan shall indicate
appropriate measures for the preservation of the values which qualify the site for such designation.
U. All areas within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision which are either listed on or eligible to be
listed on the National Register of Historic Places, or have been identified in the comprehensive plan
or by the Maine Historic Preservation Commission as sensitive or likely to contain such sites.
401.6.3 – ADDITIONAL INFORMATION THAT MAY BE REQUIRED BY THE PLANNING BOARD
The Planning Board may require any additional information not listed above, when it is determined
necessary by the Board based on factual information collected during the review process that such
additional information is needed to determine whether the statutory review criteria of Title 30-A
M.R.S.A. §4404 for subdivisions have been met. In determining what additional information will be
required to verify compliance with the statutory review criteria, the Board shall review the submission
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 17
and study requirements of Article 7 for preliminary major subdivision reviews and any applicable
standards of Article 13.
401.6.4 – APPROVAL AND FILING OF THE MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAN
A. Determination by the Planning Board - Upon determination by the Planning Board that the proposed
subdivision has met the requirements in Article 5 for preapplication review, the requirements of
Sections 401.6.1 through 401.6.3 for Minor Subdivision above, and the statutory review criteria of
Section 401.2 for all subdivisions, minor subdivision approval shall be affirmatively voted on by the
Board with findings, and the mylar copy shall be properly signed by a majority of the members of
the Board, using black ink.
B. Time Limit for Recording Approved Plan - After the Minor Subdivision Plan has had the mylar
approval entered upon it, a copy of the plan shall be returned to the subdivider. One signed copy,
including the sepia copy, shall be retained by the Town to be maintained in the Subdivision Plan
File. The Plan shall be filed by the applicant with the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds. Any
Subdivision Plan not so filed or recorded within ninety (90) days of the date upon which such Plan is
approved, shall become null and void, unless the particular circumstances of said applicant warrant
the Board to grant an extension which shall not exceed one additional period of ninety (90) days.
This 90-day period shall begin the day the plan is signed by the Planning Board. Any extension of
this 90-day period must be requested of the Planning Board before the first 90-day period expires.
C. Plan Recording & Receipt Before Building Permits –The applicant shall provide the Code
Enforcement Officer (CEO) with a receipt from the Registry of Deeds within that time limit stating
that the Plan has been filed and giving the Book and Page numbers. No building permits for an
approved plan will be issued until the plan has been registered with the Registry of Deeds and a
letter from the subdivider’s surveyor has been submitted to the Town stating that all permanent
survey markers have been placed for each lot.
401.6.5 – AMENDMENTS TO A PREVIOUSLY APPROVED MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAN
Prior to making any change, erasure, modification or revision to a Minor Subdivision Plan which has
been approved by the Board and endorsed in writing on the plan, the plan must be resubmitted to the
Board for their review and approval of the proposed modifications. A public hearing may be held
concerning a subdivision amendment as prescribed in Section 401.6.1 F above. All amended plans must
be signed by the Board and recorded in the Registry of Deeds within ninety (90) days of the date of
approval. Any amended plan not so filed or recorded within ninety (90) days of the date upon which
such plan is approved shall become null and void, unless the particular circumstances of said applicant
warrant the Board to grant an extension which shall not exceed one additional period of ninety (90)
days. The applicant shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) with a receipt from the Registry
of Deeds within that time limit stating that the plan has been filed and giving the book and page numbers
as provided in Section 401.6.4 above.
ARTICLE 7 – MAJOR SUBDIVISION PRELIMINARY PLAN APPLICATION
401.7.1 – PRELIMINARY PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE
A. Time Frames for Submission of Preliminary Plan - Within six (6) months after the on-site inspection
by the Board, the applicant shall submit an application for approval of a preliminary plan at least
twenty-one (21) days prior to a scheduled meeting of the Board. Applications shall be submitted by
mail or by hand to the municipal offices. Failure to submit an application within six (6) months shall
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 18
require resubmission of the Sketch Plan to the Board. The preliminary plan shall approximate the
layout shown on the Sketch Plan, plus any recommendations made by the Board.
B. Fees and Review Escrows - All applications for preliminary plan shall be accompanied by reviews
and peer review escrows as established by the fee schedule adopted by the Town Council. Escrow
fees shall be deposited in a special escrow account designated for that subdivision application, to be
used by the Board for hiring independent consulting services to review planning, engineering, and
other technical submissions associated with the application, and to ensure compliance with the
Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations. If the balance in this special account is drawn down
by seventy-five (75%) percent, the Board shall notify the applicant, and require that the balance be
brought back up to the original deposit amount. The Board shall continue to notify the applicant and
require a deposit as necessary whenever the balance of the escrow account is drawn down by
seventy-five (75%) percent of the original deposit, but the applicant shall be responsible for all peer
review costs incurred by the Town. Any balance in the escrow account remaining after a decision on
the final plan application by the Board shall be returned to the applicant. The applicant can reduce
peer review costs by ensuring that submissions are complete and carefully prepared.
C. Attendance at Meetings Required - The Board shall not review any preliminary plan application
unless the applicant or applicant’s representative attends the meeting. Should the applicant or
applicant’s representative fail to attend, the Board shall reschedule review of the application at its
next regular meeting.
D. Receipt & Notification of Filing - Within seven (7) days of the receipt of the Preliminary Plan
application, the Board, or its designee, shall:
1. Issue a dated receipt to the applicant.
2. Notify in writing by First Class Mail all owners of abutting property that an application for
subdivision approval has been submitted, specifying the location of the proposed subdivision and
including a general description of the project. For the purposes of this section, the owners of the
property shall be considered to be the parties listed by the tax assessor for the Town of Gray as
those against whom taxes are assessed. Failure of any property owner to receive a notice of
public hearing shall not necessitate another hearing or invalidate any action of the Board.
If the proposed subdivision is located within a Wellhead Zoning District, notice shall also be sent
to the Gray Water District at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
3. Notify the clerk and the review authority of the neighboring municipalities if any portion of the
subdivision abuts or crosses the municipal boundary.
E. Determination of Completed Application - Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the preliminary
plan application, the Board shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the
applicant in writing of its determination. If the application is not complete, the Board shall notify
the applicant of the specific additional material needed to complete the application.
F. Notifications of Completed Application - Upon determination that a complete application has been
submitted for review, the Board shall notify the applicant in writing. The Board shall also notify the
Public Works Director, Fire Chief and Superintendent of Schools of the proposed subdivision, the
number of dwelling units proposed, the length of roadways, and the size and construction
characteristics of any multifamily, commercial or industrial buildings. If the subdivision is located
within the Wellhead zoning districts or will be serviced by the Gray Water District, the Director of
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 19
the District shall also be notified. The Board shall request that these officials comment upon the
adequacy of their department's existing capital facilities to service the proposed subdivision. The
Board shall determine whether to hold a public hearing on the preliminary plan application.
G. Public Hearing Notices - If the Board decides to hold a public hearing, it shall hold the hearing
within thirty (30) days of determining that it has received a complete application, and shall publish a
notice of the date, time and place of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality at least two times, the date of the first publication to be at least seven (7) days prior to
the hearing. In addition, the notice of the hearing shall be posted in at least two (2) prominent places
within the municipality at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. A copy of the notice shall be sent
by First Class mail to abutting landowners and to the applicant, at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing. For the purposes of this section, the owners of the property shall be considered to be the
parties listed by the tax assessor for the Town of Gray as those against whom taxes are assessed.
Failure of any property owner to receive a notice of public hearing shall not necessitate another
hearing or invalidate any action of the Board.
H. Time Frame for Planning Board Decision - Within thirty (30) days from the public hearing or within
sixty (60) days of determining a complete application has been received, if no hearing is held, or
within another time limit as may be otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board and the applicant, the
Board shall make findings of fact on the application, and approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the preliminary plan application. The Board shall specify in writing its findings of facts and reasons
for any conditions or denial.
I. Conditions of Preliminary Approval - When granting approval to a preliminary plan, the Board shall
state the conditions of such approval, if any, with respect to:
1. The specific changes which it will require in the final plan;
2. The character and extent of the required improvements for which waivers may have been
requested and which the Board finds may be waived without jeopardy to the public health,
safety, and general welfare; and
3. The construction items for which cost estimates and performance guarantees will be required as
prerequisite to the approval of the final plan.
J. Relationship of Preliminary Approval to Final Plan - Approval of a preliminary plan shall not
constitute approval of the final plan or intent to approve the final plan, but rather it shall be deemed
an expression of approval of the design of the preliminary plan as a guide to the preparation of the
final plan. The final plan shall be submitted for approval by the Board upon fulfillment of the
requirements of these regulations and the conditions of preliminary approval, if any. Prior to the
approval of the final plan, the Board may require that additional information be submitted and
changes in the plan be made as a result of further study of the proposed subdivision or as a result of
new information received.
401.7.2 – REQUIRED SUBMISSIONS FOR PRELIMINARY PLAN
The following items shall be submitted as part of the Preliminary Plan Application, unless the applicant
submits a written waiver request, and is granted a waiver from the submission requirement by the
Planning Board, pursuant to Article 12 for waivers. Twelve (12) copies of all materials shall be
delivered to the Town Office, at least twenty-one (21) days prior to a regularly scheduled Planning
Board meeting, in order for the application to be placed on the Board’s agenda.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 20
A. Application Form - The application form and any accompanying information.
B. Location Map - The location map shall be drawn at a size adequate to show the relationship of the
proposed subdivision to the adjacent properties, and to allow the Board to locate the subdivision
within the municipality. The location map shall show:
1. Existing subdivisions in the proximity of the proposed subdivision.
2. Locations and names of existing and proposed streets.
3. Boundaries and designations of zoning districts.
4. An outline of the proposed subdivision and any remaining portion of the owner's property if the
preliminary plan submitted covers only a portion of the owner's entire contiguous holding.
C. Preliminary Plan Format & Content - The preliminary plan shall be printed or reproduced on paper,
with all dimensions shown in feet or decimals of a foot. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to a
scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch. Plans for subdivisions containing more than 100 acres
may be drawn at a scale of not more than 200 feet to the inch, provided all necessary detail can
easily be read. Three (3) sets of plans shall be no larger than 24 by 36 inches in size. Nine (9) sets of
11 by 17 inch copies and one (1) universally accessible digital format e.g. PDF of all plans shall be
submitted. The application materials for preliminary plan approval shall include the following
information:
1. Proposed name of the subdivision and the name of the municipality in which it is located, plus
the Assessor's Map and Lot numbers.
2. Verification of right, title or interest in the property by deed, purchase and sales agreement,
option to purchase, or some other proof of interest.
3. A standard boundary survey of the parcel, giving complete descriptive data by bearings and
distances, made and certified by a professional land surveyor. The corners of the parcel shall be
located on the ground and marked by monuments. The entire parcel or tract shall be shown,
including all contiguous land in common ownership within the last five (5) years, as required by
Title 30-A M.R.S.A. section 4401. Any parcels that have been sold or transferred in the prior
five years shall be so noted on the plan.
4. A copy of the most recently recorded deed for the parcel. A copy of all deed restrictions,
easements, rights-of-way, or other encumbrances currently affecting the property.
5. A copy of any proposed deed restrictions intended to cover all or part of the lots, dwellings, or
common land in the subdivision.
6. An indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the subdivision. When sewage
disposal is to be accomplished by subsurface waste water disposal systems, test pit analyses,
prepared by a Licensed Site Evaluator or Certified Soil Scientist shall be provided. A map
showing the location of all test pits dug on the site shall be submitted.
7. An indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the subdivision. When water is
to be supplied by a public water supply, a written statement from the servicing water district
shall be submitted indicating there is adequate supply and pressure for the subdivision.
8. The date the plan was prepared, north point, and graphic map scale.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 21
9. The names and addresses of the record owner, applicant, and individual or company who
prepared the plan and adjoining property owners.
10. Wetland areas shall be delineated on the survey, regardless of size.
11. The number of acres within the proposed subdivision, location of property lines, existing
buildings, vegetative cover type, unusually large specimen trees, if present, and other essential
existing physical features.
12. The location of all rivers, streams and brooks within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision. If
any portion of the proposed subdivision is located in the direct watershed of a great pond, the
application shall indicate which great pond.
13. The zoning district in which the proposed subdivision is located and the location of any zoning
boundaries affecting the subdivision.
14. The location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water mains, culverts, and drainage ways
on or adjacent to the property to be subdivided.
15. The location, names, and present widths of existing streets, highways, easements, building lines,
parks and other open spaces on or adjacent to the subdivision.
16. The width and location of any streets, public improvements or open space shown upon the
official map and the comprehensive plan, if any, within the subdivision.
17. The proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and lot areas.
18. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such dedication.
19. The location of any open space to be preserved or common areas to be created, and a general
description of proposed ownership, improvement and management.
20. The area on each lot where existing forest cover will be permitted to be removed and converted
to lawn, structures or other cover and any proposed restrictions to be placed on clearing existing
vegetation.
21. The proposed driveway access to the area of each lot that will be developed as indicated in
Subsection 20, and any drainage or topographic features that must be crossed to access the
proposed home site. [Adopted May 18, 2004]
22. If any portion of the subdivision is in a flood-prone area, the boundaries of any flood hazard
areas and the 100-year flood elevation, as depicted on the municipality's Flood Insurance Rate
Map, shall be delineated on the plan.
23. Areas within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision which have been identified by the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Beginning with Habitat Project or within the
comprehensive plan. If any portion of the subdivision is located within an area designated as a
unique natural area by the comprehensive plan or the Maine Natural Areas Program or Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries & Wildlife Beginning With Habitat Project the plan shall
indicate appropriate measures for the preservation of the values which qualify the site for such
designation.
24. All areas within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision which are either listed on or eligible to
be listed on the National Register of Historic Places, or have been identified in the
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 22
comprehensive plan or by the Maine Historic Preservation Commission as sensitive or likely to
contain such sites.
401.7.3 – ADDITIONAL REQUIRED PLANS AND STUDIES
The preliminary plan shall also include or be accompanied by the following information:
A. Contour Lines – Prepared by an engineer or surveyor at the interval specified by the Planning Board,
showing elevations in relation to mean sea level. Areas with sustained slopes greater than twentyfive
(25%) percent covering more than one acre shall be delineated.
B. Erosion & Sedimentation Control Plan - An erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared in
accordance with the Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Construction, Best
Management Practices, published by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection and the
Cumberland County Soil and Water Conservation District, 1991. The Board may waive submission
of the erosion and sedimentation control plan only if the subdivision is not in the watershed of a
great pond, and upon a finding that the proposed subdivision will not involve road construction or
grading which changes drainage patterns and if the addition of impervious surfaces such as roofs and
driveways is less than five (5%) percent of the area of the subdivision.
C. Stormwater Management Plan - A stormwater management plan, prepared by a registered
professional engineer in accordance with the most recent edition of Stormwater Management for
Maine: BMPS Technical Design Manual, published by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection, 2006. Another methodology may be used if the applicant can demonstrate it is equally
applicable to the site. The Board may waive submission of the stormwater management plan only if
the subdivision is not in the watershed of a great pond, and upon a finding that the proposed
subdivision will not involve road construction or grading which changes drainage patterns and if the
addition of impervious surfaces such as roofs and driveways is less than five (5%) percent of the
area of the subdivision.
D. Phosphorus Management Plan - If any portion of the proposed subdivision is in the direct watershed
of a great pond, has five (5) or more lots, and/or creates eight hundred (800) or more linear feet of
street and/or driveway, the following shall be submitted or indicated on the plan:
1. A phosphorus impact analysis and control plan conducted using the procedures set forth in DEP
Phosphorus Design Manual, Volume II of the Maine Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual, 2006. The analysis and control plan shall include all worksheets, engineering
calculations, and construction specifications and diagrams for control measures, as required by
the Technical Guide.
2. A long-term maintenance plan for all phosphorus control measures.
401.7.4 – REQUIRED SUBMISSIONS FOR WHICH A WAIVER MAY BE GRANTED
The following items shall be submitted as part of the Preliminary Plan Application, unless the applicant
submits a written waiver request, and is granted a waiver from the submission requirement by the
Planning Board, pursuant to Article 12, Waivers:
A. High-Intensity Soil Survey - Prepared by a registered soil scientist identifying the soil types down to
1/8 acre or less at a scale equivalent to the subdivision plan submitted. The soils shall be identified
in accordance with the National Cooperative Soil Survey. The map shall show the location of all test
pits used to identify the soils, and shall be accompanied by a log of each sample point identifying the
textural classification and the depth to a limiting factor such as seasonal high water table or bedrock
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 23
at that location. Single soil test pits and their evaluation for suitability for subsurface waste water
disposal systems shall not be considered to constitute high intensity soil surveys.
B. Hydrogeologic Assessment - A hydrogeologic assessment prepared by a certified geologist or
registered professional engineer, experienced in hydrogeology, when:
1. Any part of the subdivision is located over a sand and gravel aquifer, as shown on a map entitled
"Hydrogeologic Data for Significant Sand and Gravel Aquifers," by the Maine Geological
Survey, 1998, File No. 98-138, 144 and 147; or
2. The subdivision has an average density of more than one dwelling unit per 100,000 square feet.
C. The Board may require a hydrogeologic assessment in other cases where site considerations or
development design indicate greater potential of adverse impacts on groundwater quality. These
cases include extensive areas of shallow to bedrock soils; or cluster developments in which the
average density is less than one dwelling unit per 100,000 square feet but the density of the
developed portion is in excess of one dwelling unit per 80,000 square feet; and/or proposed use of
shared or common subsurface wastewater disposal systems. The hydrogeologic assessment shall be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of Section 401.13.9.
D. Traffic Generation and Safe Entrance Sight Distances - An estimate of the amount and type of
vehicular traffic to be generated on a daily basis and at peak hours. Trip generation rates used shall
be taken from the most recent available edition of the Trip Generation Manual, published by the
Institute of Transportation Engineers. Trip generation rates from other sources may be used if the
applicant demonstrates that these sources better reflect local conditions. If the Board waives the
requirement of submission of trip generation rates, the applicant shall provide verification of the
intersection sight distances for any existing or proposed streets and driveways that will serve the
subdivision.
E. Traffic Impact Analysis - For subdivisions involving twenty-eight (28) or more parking spaces in the
case of commercial subdivisions or projected to generate more than one hundred and forty (140)
vehicle trips per day, a traffic impact analysis, prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer with
experience in traffic engineering, shall be submitted. The analysis shall indicate the expected
average daily vehicular trips, peak-hour volumes, access conditions at the site, distribution of traffic,
types of vehicles expected, effect upon the level of service of the street giving access to the site and
neighboring streets which may be affected, and recommended improvements to maintain the desired
level of service on the affected streets.
401.7.5 – ADDITIONAL INFORMATION THAT MAY BE REQUIRED BY THE PLANNING BOARD
The Planning Board may require any additional information not listed above, when it is determined
necessary by the Board based on factual information collected during the review process that such
additional information is needed to determine whether the statutory review criteria of Title 30-A
M.R.S.A. §4404 for subdivisions have been met.
ARTICLE 8 - FINAL PLAN APPLICATION
401.8.1 – PROCEDURE
A. Time Frames for Submission of Final Plan - Within six months after the approval of the preliminary
plan, the applicant shall submit fourteen (14) copies of an application for approval of the final plan
with all supporting materials, at least twenty-one (21) days prior to a scheduled meeting of the
Board. Applications shall be submitted by mail or delivered by hand to the municipal offices. If the
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 24
application for the final plan is not submitted within six months after preliminary plan approval, the
Board shall require resubmission of the preliminary plan, except as stipulated below. The final plan
shall follow the layout shown on the preliminary plan, plus any changes required by the Board.
If an applicant cannot submit the final plan within six (6) months, due to delays caused by other
regulatory bodies or other reasons, the applicant may request an extension. Such a request for an
extension to the filing deadline shall be filed, in writing, with the Board prior to the expiration of the
filing period. In considering the request for an extension the Board shall make findings that the
applicant has made due progress in preparation of the final plan and in pursuing approval of the
plans before other agencies, and that municipal ordinances or regulations which may impact on the
proposed development have not been amended.
B. Fees and Review Escrows - All applications for final plan approval for a major subdivision shall be
accompanied by a review fee and peer review escrows as set in the Schedule of Fees adopted by the
Town Council. The Planning Board may continue to require the replenishment of the escrow
account for hiring independent consulting services to review the application for final plan approval,
along with any supporting materials, pursuant to the procedures of Section 401.7.1.B for review
escrows.
C. Outside Agency Approvals - Prior to submittal of the final plan application, the following approvals
shall be obtained in writing, where applicable:
1. Maine Department of Environmental Protection, under the Site Location of Development Act.
2. Maine Department of Environmental Protection, under the Natural Resources Protection Act or
Stormwater Law, or if an MEPDES wastewater discharge license is needed.
3. Maine Department of Human Services, if the applicant proposes to provide a public water
system.
4. Maine Department of Human Services, if an engineered subsurface waste water disposal
system(s) is to be utilized (2000 gallons per day capacity or greater).
5. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, if a permit under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act is required
(for wetland or vernal pool habitat alterations).
6. Maine Department of Transportation Traffic Movement Permit, and/or Highway
Entrance/Driveway Access Management Permit
7. If the Board is unsure whether a permit or license from a state or federal agency is necessary, the
applicant may be required to obtain a written opinion from the appropriate agency as to the
applicability of their regulations.
D. Historic Preservation Review - If the preliminary plan identified any areas listed on or eligible to be
listed on the National Register of Historic Places, in accordance with Section 401.7.2.C.23, the
applicant shall submit a copy of the plan and a copy of any proposed mitigation measures to the
Maine Historic Preservation commission prior to submitting the final plan application.
E. 911 Street Addressing Review - Written approval of any proposed street names from the Town of
Gray E911 Addressing Officer.
F. Attendance at Meetings Required - The Board shall not review any preliminary plan application
unless the applicant or applicant’s representative attends the meeting. Should the applicant or
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 25
applicant’s representative fail to attend, the Board shall reschedule review of the application at a
subsequent meeting.
G. Receipt & Notification of a Completed Application - Within seven (7) days of the receipt of the
Final Plan application, the Board, or its designee, shall issue a dated receipt to the applicant. Within
thirty (30) days of the receipt of the final plan application, the Board shall determine whether the
application is complete and notify the applicant in writing of its determination. If the application is
not complete, the Board shall notify the applicant of the specific additional material needed to
complete the application. Upon determination that a complete application has been submitted for
review, the Board shall notify the applicant in writing.
H. Notifications for Public Hearings - The Board shall determine whether to hold a public hearing on
the final plan application. If the Board decides to hold a public hearing, it shall hold the hearing
within thirty (30) days of determining it has received a complete application, and shall publish a
notice of the date, time and place of the hearing in a newspaper of local circulation at least two
times, the date of the first publication to be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. In addition,
the notice of the hearing shall be posted in at least two (2) prominent places within the municipality
at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing.
I. A copy of the notice shall be sent by First Class mail to abutting landowners and to the applicant, at
least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. For the purposes of this section, the owners of the property
shall be considered to be the parties listed by the tax assessor for the Town of Gray as those against
whom taxes are assessed. Failure of any property owner to receive a notice of public hearing shall
not necessitate another hearing or invalidate any action of the Board.
J. If the proposed subdivision is located within a Wellhead Zoning District, notice shall also be sent to
the Gray Water District at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
K. Performance Guarantee for Construction of Improvements - Before the Board grants approval of the
final plan, the applicant shall meet the performance guarantee requirements contained in Article 11.
The proposed amount and form of performance guarantee for infrastructure improvements shall be
submitted to the Board along with a letter of commitment from a qualified lending institution
indicating that the lender has reviewed the project details and is prepared to finance the project for
the amount needed to complete the project if approval is given. Issuance of the actual performance
guarantee shall be performed prior to release of the recording plan with Planning Board signatures.
L. Time Frame & Basis for Planning Board Decision - Within thirty (30) days from the public hearing
or within sixty (60) days of receiving a complete application, if no hearing is held, or within another
time limit as may be otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board and the applicant, the Board shall
make findings of fact, and conclusions relative to the criteria for approval contained in Title 30-A
M.R.S.A., §4404 and the standards of these regulations. If the Board finds that all the criteria of the
statute and the standards of these regulations have been met, they shall approve the final plan. If the
Board majority finds that any of the individual statutory criteria or the standards of this Ordinance
have not been met, the Board shall either deny the application or approve the application with
conditions to ensure all of the standards will be met by the subdivision. The reasons for any
conditions shall be stated in the records of the Board.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 26
401.8.2 – NEGOTIATED EXACTIONS
A. Purpose: Negotiated Exactions are intended to serve the following purposes:
1. Ensure that publically owned facilities and infrastructure are not adversely affected by new
residential and/or commercial development
2. Provide the administrative steps to establish a process to quantify the cumulative effects of a
development proposal
3. Establish mechanisms to minimize and ideally eliminate the necessity to expend public funds to
address implications of private development on public infrastructure
4. Ensure that new private development provided the same level of service available to existing
development
5. Establish a fair process to ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new growth
and development
6. Provide new growth and development that bears a proportional share of the cost new public
facilities needed to serve them
7. Accommodate orderly growth and development in a safe and fair manner
8. Protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Gray and those who utilize public
infrastructure in the Town
B. Authority:
1. In accordance with 30-A, M.R.S.A. Section 4404 (Subdivision), 30-A, M.R.S.A. Sections 1911
to 1916 (Home Rule), and 30-A M.R.S.A. 4354 (Fees), the Town of Gray Planning Board shall
have the authority to administer and require Negotiated Exactions as established in this Section
401.8.1 of the Town's Subdivision Ordinance.
2. The Planning Board shall have the authority to require the owner or applicant of a development
proposal meeting one or more of the thresholds established in Section 401.8.1.D to complete one
or more of the following as part and/or all of the Negotiated Exaction:
a. Roadway and/or intersection improvements to maintain existing capacity and/or retain the
current level of service
b. In order to maintain existing capacity and/or retain the current level of service, make
necessary improvements to public infrastructure or provide the necessary surety for such
improvements to occur
c. Donate land to the Town of Gray and/or State of Maine as necessary to complete public
infrastructure such as currently proposed and/or future road widening, intersection
improvements, or similar improvements
d. Acquire and/or purchase land or easement rights to be transferred to the Town of Gray and/or
State of Maine necessary to complete public infrastructure
e. Posting a bond, cash, or other financial sureties as established in this Section 401.8.1.
3. As established in Section 401.8.1.G.1, the fair value of any land area donated, acquired, or
purchased shall be duly considered by the Planning Board, Town Council and the Town as an
integral component in determining the Negotiated Exaction.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 27
C. Administrative Procedure:
1. As an integral part of the Planning Board's review of a development proposal, prior to final
approval, the Board shall have the authority to require the applicant to submit a written summary
of the cumulative anticipated implications of the proposed development upon public
infrastructure as established in this Section 401.8.1.D and F. The purpose of providing this
summary for the Board's review is to ensure that the Planning Board has sufficient information
upon which to make an informed decision to require a full assessment as detailed in Section
401.8.1.F below.
2. The Planning Board shall review the summary and determine if any aspects warrant obtaining
further information and/or if elements need to be verified by a duly qualified independent third
party chosen by the Board with input from Town Staff at the applicant's expense.
3. After the summary and necessary information is received, the Planning Board shall have the
authority to determine if a full assessment will be required.
4. In the event that the Planning Board determines that a full assessment is warranted based on the
standards in this Section 401.8.1, the applicant shall compile and submit this for the Board's
consideration using the requirements detailed in Section 401.8.1.F below and in accordance with
professionally accepted practices.
5. Once the Town Planner has determined that the assessment is sufficiently complete, the Planning
Board shall review the assessment and determine if further information and/or if elements need
to be verified by a duly qualified independent third party chosen by the Board with input from
Town Staff at the applicant's expense.
6. With input as necessary from duly qualified professionals to quantify the implications of the
proposed development, the Planning Board shall determine the cumulative responsibilities of the
applicant/developer in accordance with the options established in Section 401.8.1.G below.
7. Upon establishing a negotiated exactions agreement for an infrastructure improvement project,
the Planning Board shall describe an improvement benefit area(s) within which subsequent
development is likely to benefit from the required improvements. The proposed benefit area(s)
and the methodology to be used in assessing future allocation cost sharing and carrying cost
reallocation shall then be referred to the Town Council for enactment. Benefit area(s) enacted by
the Town Council shall be effective for the agreed upon period, not to exceed three (3) years
from the date of enactment.
8. Within each negotiated exactions benefit area enacted by the Town Council, all subsequent
development applications for site plan and/or subdivision approval shall be required to
participate in cost sharing and/or carrying costs for the infrastructure improvement project unless
the Planning Board determines that no benefit has been derived from the prior improvement
project.
9. If the improvement is not completed within the agreed upon period, the fee, plus interest, must
be returned to the applicant. If the improvement is made at a cost less than was anticipated, the
remaining portion shall be returned to the applicant(s) at amounts equal to their fair share of the
improvement.
10. The Town shall segregate the funds received from exaction agreements from the general revenue
fund and shall expend those funds solely for the purpose that was intended.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 28
11. Prior to final approval for the project, the Planning Board and/or Town Staff shall solicit input
from the Town's Counsel to ensure that the necessary legal assurances have been established and
formally executed to ensure the completion of the improvements, payments, etc. as finally
determined by the Planning Board in accordance with this Section 401.8.1.
D. Applicability: Except as specifically exempted in Section 401.8.1.E, development proposals that
adversely effects existing public infrastructure by creating demand(s) upon, or the need for, public
facilities causing one or more of the following, as determined by the Planning Board, are required to
comply with this Section 401.8.1:
1. Project(s) that lower the level of service (LOS) nearby intersection(s) including but not limited to
the following:
a. Adjusting signal timing and/or upgraded signals
b. Adding turn lane(s)
c. Widening portions of the intersection
d. Constructing roadway portions adjacent to intersections for proper alignment i.e. taper lanes,
etc.
e. Adding length to existing turn lane(s)
2. Project(s) that reduce the capacity of a roadway segment
3. Project(s) that place additional demand upon publically owned stormwater facilities
4. Project(s) that create additional stormwater that adversely affects publically owned land or
facilities
5. Project(s) that require extending, upgrading, or increasing the water main size of a public water
supply
6. Project(s) that add additional wastewater to a publically owned and/or operated treatment facility
7. Project(s) that place special demands upon the Gray Public Safety Department such as a
requirement for special equipment to serve the project
8. Project(s) that increase the workload on the Gray Public Works Department excepting winter
maintenance as established in the Gray Street Ordinance (Chapter 400)
9. Project(s) that increase the demand for police or law enforcement
10. Project(s) that place additional demands on publically owned recreational facilities
11. Project(s) that place demands on publically owned bicycle and/or pedestrian infrastructure
specifically including sidewalks and bicycle lanes
12. Project(s) that involve a new use, change of use, or expansion of an existing use
E. Exemptions: The following developments are specifically exempt from this Section 401.8.1:
1. Existing, proposed, or expanded public facility(ies) owned by the Town of Gray
2. Reconstruction of a building or structure located on property which was damaged or destroyed
by fire or other casualty or which was voluntarily demolished during the past year provided that
all of the following are met:
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 29
a. No additional dwelling unit(s) are created.
b. The use is not changed.
c. The use is not expanded.
3. Alteration, remodeling rehabilitation, and/or reconstruction of any existing legal nonresidential
structure where none of the following are associated with the proposed development:
a. No net increase in square footage of the structure
b. The use is not changed
c. There is not an expansion of an existing use
d. No new use(s) are proposed
F. Conducting the Assessment:
1. The Planning Board may require the applicant to participate in municipally or state-owned, offsite
capital improvements. In accordance with 401.8.1.D where it appears that the proposed
development will result in a negative impact or decline in the level of service of any existing offsite
capital improvement, the Planning Board shall assess and establish the applicant’s level of
participation in the off-site capital improvement.
2. In conducting the assessment, the Planning Board shall consider the following:
a. The status of the system and service as a result of the analysis and any potential relationship
to items noted and scheduled in the comprehensive plan and capital improvement program.
b. The net effect of the proposed development on the capacity of the capital improvement,
indicating the percentage share caused by the development.
c. A cost estimate for this capital improvement so as to meet the increased demand, a
breakdown of the applicant’s share of that cost, and an estimate of the remaining capacity
and post improvement capacity available to developments other than the applicant.
G. Improvement Responsibilities:
1. The fair value of any land area donated, acquired, or purchased by the owner/applicant shall be
duly considered by the Planning Board, Town Council and the Town as an integral component in
determining the Negotiated Exaction.
2. Once the applicant’s share of capital improvement impact has been established by the Planning
Board, the Board shall select the method in which the applicant must participate in the capital
improvement. The following alternatives are available:
a. The applicant makes the improvement:
(i) The applicant must agree to make the necessary infrastructure improvements, providing
all initial financial carrying costs, establish a construction schedule, and post a
performance guarantee to cover all associated costs. The applicant may recover the
improvement costs (including engineering and design, construction, and financing
expenses) within ten (10) years after improvements are made and in accordance with a
specified level of service range associated with the improvement.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 30
(ii) For the applicant to recover these costs, subsequent developments must realize a benefit
by using the infrastructure improvements financed by the applicant. Cost reimbursement
for the applicant shall be established as subsequent developments go through the
subdivision or site plan review process.
(iii) Calculations shall include adjustments for time-price differentials using the coupon issue
yield equivalent of 52-week United States Treasury Bills (1-year Treasury Rate) as an
index. Payments shall be made prior to the release of the signed final plan for recording
purposes or the building permit where no recording mylar is involved.
b. Cost Sharing for Subsequent Development:
(i) Allocation Cost Sharing for Subsequent Development(s). In arriving at the appropriate
cost share for subsequent development, applicants shall use the same methodology as that
utilized by the initial applicant. In applying the methodology, subsequent applicants shall
establish their cost based on the percentage utilization of the improvements in terms of
post-construction level of service.
(ii) Reallocation of Carrying Costs. At the request of the developer and at the discretion of
the Planning Board, the Town may also require subsequent developments to share in the
initial financial carrying costs of the necessary infrastructure improvements. If so
determined, the carrying costs shall be shared between the initial and subsequent
development(s) in direct proportion to their relative impact on the capital improvement.
Once apportioned, the initial and subsequent development(s) are eligible for cost
reimbursement from subsequent development(s) as described above.
c. Town makes improvements: The Town may agree to complete the improvements. The
applicant shall pay the required share of the cost to the Town prior to the release of the
signed final plan or building permit, said payment to be held in a reserve fund until the
improvement is completed. Subsequent developments that realize a benefit by using the
infrastructure improvements financed by the Town shall also pay a fair share contribution.
d. Cost Sharing agreement between Applicant and/or Town and/or MDOT to complete
infrastructure improvements and/or partial contribution toward future Town infrastructure
Improvement related to development application and/or land acquisition.
401.8.3 – REQUIRED FINAL PLAN SUBMISSIONS
A. Format & Content - Format & Content- The final plan shall consist of one or more maps or drawings
drawn to a scale of not more than one hundred feet to the inch. Plans for subdivisions containing
more than one hundred acres may be drawn at a scale of not more than two hundred feet to the inch
provided all necessary details can easily be read. Plans shall be no larger than 24 by 36 inches in
size. Space shall be reserved on the plan for endorsement by the Board. Three (3) full-sized (24 by
36 inches) paper copies and two (2) stable-based transparency e.g. mylar of the recording plan(s) to
be recorded at the Registry of Deeds, three (3) full-sized sets of paper copies of all the final plan
sheets, and any supporting documents shall be submitted. Nine (9) 11 by 17 inch copies and a one
(1) universally accessible digital format e.g. PDF of all plans shall be submitted.
B. Required Information on the Plans - The final plan shall include or be accompanied by the following
mandatory submissions of information:
1. Completed final plan application form and final plan application submissions checklist.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 31
2. Proposed name of the subdivision and the name of the municipality in which it is located, plus
the assessor's map and lot numbers.
3. The number of acres within the proposed subdivision, location of property lines, existing
buildings, watercourses, and other essential existing physical features.
4. An indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the subdivision.
5. An indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the subdivision.
a. When water is to be supplied by an existing public water supply, a written statement from the
servicing water district shall be submitted indicating the district has reviewed and approved
the water system design.
b. A written statement shall be submitted from the Fire Chief approving all hydrant locations or
other fire protection measures deemed necessary.
c. When water is to be supplied by private wells, evidence of adequate ground water supply and
quality shall be submitted by a well driller or a hydrogeologist familiar with the area. Where
there is question as to the quantity or quality of groundwater supplies for potable water, the
Plan shall carry a note requiring the developer to provide a tested well prior to sale of the lot.
6. The date the plan was prepared, north point, graphic map scale.
7. The names and addresses of the record owner, applicant, and individual or company who
prepared the plan.
8. The location of any zoning boundaries affecting the subdivision.
9. If different than those submitted with the preliminary plan, a copy of any proposed deed
restrictions intended to cover all or part of the lots or dwellings in the subdivision.
10. The location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water mains, culverts, and drainage ways
on or adjacent to the property to be subdivided.
11. The location, names, and present widths of existing and proposed streets, highways, easements,
buildings, parks and other open spaces on or adjacent to the subdivision. The plan shall contain
sufficient data to allow the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, and
boundary line to be readily determined and be reproduced upon the ground. These lines shall be
tied to reference points previously established. The location, bearing and length of street lines,
lot lines and parcel boundary lines shall be certified by a professional land surveyor. The
original reproducible plan shall be embossed with the seal of the professional land surveyor and
be signed by that individual.
12. Street plans, meeting the requirements of Section 401.13.16.
13. The width and location of any proposed new streets or public improvements or open space
within the subject property that are shown upon the official map, in the comprehensive plan, or
Capital Improvements Program, if any.
14. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such dedication.
Written offers to convey title to the municipality of all public ways and open spaces shown on
the Plan, and copies of agreements or other documents showing the manner in which open
spaces to be retained by the developer or lot owners are to be managed and maintained shall be
submitted. These may include homeowners’ association or condominium bylaws and
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 32
declarations. If proposed streets and/or open spaces or other land is to be offered to the
municipality, written evidence that the Town Council is willing to accept the property interest(s)
and that the Town Attorney is satisfied with the legal sufficiency of the written offer to convey
title shall be included.
15. The boundaries of any flood hazard areas and the 100-year flood elevation as depicted on the
municipality's Flood Insurance Rate Map, shall be delineated on the plan.
16. The location and method of disposal for land clearing and construction debris.
17. All studies and plans submitted and made part of the preliminary plan approval.
18. Copies of all outside agency reviews and permits.
401.8.4 – FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAN APPROVAL AND FILING
A. Violation of Prior Approvals - No plan shall be approved by the Board as long as the applicant is in
violation of the provisions of a previously approved subdivision within the municipality.
B. Documentation of Final Plan Board Decisions - Upon findings of fact and determination that all
standards in Title 30-A M.R.S.A., §4404, and these regulations have been met, and upon voting to
approve the subdivision, the Board shall sign the final plan. The Board shall specify in writing its
findings of facts and reasons for any conditions or denial. One copy of the signed plan shall be
retained by the Board as part of its permanent records. One copy of the signed plan shall be
forwarded to the tax assessor. One copy of the signed plan shall be forwarded to the Code
Enforcement Officer. Any subdivision not recorded in the Registry of Deeds within ninety (90) days
of the date upon which the plan is approved and signed by the Board shall become null and void,
unless the particular circumstances of said applicant warrant the Board to grant an extension which
shall not exceed one additional period of ninety (90) days. This 90-day period shall begin the day the
plan is signed by the Planning Board. Any extension of this 90-day period must be requested of the
Planning Board before the first 90-day period expires.
C. Plan Recording & Receipt Before Building Permits –The applicant shall provide the Code
Enforcement Officer (CEO) with a receipt from the Registry of Deeds within that time limit stating
that the Plan has been filed and giving the Book and Page numbers. No building permits for an
approved plan will be issued until the plan has been registered with the Registry of Deeds and a
letter from the subdivider has been submitted to the Town stating that all permanent survey markers
have been placed for each lot.
D. Phasing of Projects to Match Planned Capacity Expansion of Municpal Facilities. At the time the
Board grants final plan approval, it may permit the Plan to be divided into two or more sections
subject to any conditions the Board deems necessary in order to ensure the orderly development of
the Plan. If any municipal or quasi-municipal department head notified of the proposed subdivision
informs the Board that their department or district does not have adequate capital facilities to service
the subdivision, the Board shall require the plan to be divided into two or more sections subject to
any conditions the Board deems necessary in order to allow the orderly planning, financing and
provision of public services to the subdivision. If the expansion, addition or purchase of the needed
facilities is included in the municipality's capital improvements program, the time period of the
phasing shall be no longer than the time period contained in the capital improvements program for
the expansion, addition or purchase. (Note: Applicants may also request approval of a phasing plan
under Section 401.11.5 for performance guarantees).
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 33
E. Changes to the Approved Subdivision Plan - No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall
be made in any final plan after approval has been given by the Board and endorsed in writing on the
plan, unless a revised final plan is first submitted and the Board approves any modifications, in
accordance with the provisions of Article 9. The Board shall make findings that the revised plan
meets the criteria of Title 30-A M.R.S.A., §4404, and the standards of these regulations. In the event
that a Plan is recorded without complying with this requirement, it shall be considered null and void,
and the Board shall institute proceedings to have the plan stricken from the records of the Registry of
Deeds.
F. Approval of a Subdivision Plan does not Constitute Acceptance of any Property Interests by the
Town of Gray - The approval by the Board of a subdivision plan shall not be deemed to constitute or
be evidence of any acceptance by the municipality of any street, easement, or other open space
shown on such plan. When a park, playground, or other recreation area shall have been shown on
the plan to be dedicated to the municipality, approval of the plan shall not constitute an acceptance
by the municipality of such areas. The Board shall require the plan to contain appropriate notes to
this effect. The Board may also require the filing of a written agreement between the applicant and
the Town Council covering future deed and title dedication, and provision for the cost of grading,
development, equipment, and maintenance of any such dedicated area.
G. Failure to Complete Substantial Construction - Except in the case of a phased development plan,
failure to complete substantial construction of the subdivision within five (5) years of the date of
approval and signing of the plan shall render the project in violation of this Ordinance. Upon
determining that a subdivision's approval has expired under this paragraph, the Board shall have a
notice placed in the Registry of Deeds to that effect.
ARTICLE 9 - REVISIONS TO MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLANS
401.9.1 – PROCEDURE
An applicant for a revision to a previously approved plan shall, at least twenty-one (21) days prior to a
scheduled meeting of the Board, request to be placed on the Board's agenda. If the revision involves the
creation of additional lots or dwelling units, the procedures for preliminary plan approval shall be
followed. If the revision involves only modifications of the approved plan, without the creation of
additional lots or dwelling units, the procedures for final plan approval shall be followed.
401.9.2 – SUBMISSIONS
The applicant shall submit a copy of the approved plan as well as fourteen (14) copies of the proposed
revisions. The application shall also include enough supporting information to allow the Board to make
a determination that the proposed revisions meet the standards of these regulations and the criteria of the
statute. The revised plan shall indicate that it is the revision of a previously approved and recorded plan
and shall show the title of the subdivision and the book and page or cabinet and sheet on which the
original plan is recorded at the Registry of Deeds.
401.9.3 – SCOPE OF REVIEW
The Board's scope of review shall be limited to those portions of the plan which are proposed to be
changed.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 34
ARTICLE 10 - INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
401.10.1 – INSPECTION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
A. At least five days prior to commencing construction of required improvements, the subdivider or
builder shall:
1. Notification - Notify the Town Engineer and Code Enforcement Officer in writing of the time
when proposed to construction of such improvements will commence, so that the Town can
arrange for inspections to assure that all municipal specifications, requirements, and conditions
of approval are met during the construction of required improvements, and to assure the
satisfactory completion of improvements and utilities required by the Board.
2. Inspection Fees - Deposit with the Town Manager a check in the amount specficied in the
Schedule of Fees adopted by the Town Council for the inspection of the project infrastucture
construction. The fee shall be based on two (2) percent of the cost of construction of the road and
utilities, or the estimated cost of inspection estimated by the Town Engineer. [Amended Dec 7,
2010]
B. Notification of Needed Corrections - If the Town Engineer finds upon inspection of the
improvements that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with
the plans and specifications filed by the subdivider, the Town Engineer shall so report in writing to
the Town Manager, Planning Board, and the subdivider and builder. The Town Manager shall take
any steps necessary to assure compliance with the approved plans.
C. Approval of Minor Field Changes - If at any time it appears necessary or desirable to modify the
required improvements before or during the construction of the required improvements, the Town
Engineer is authorized to approve minor modifications due to unforeseen circumstances such as
encountering hidden outcrops of bedrock, natural springs, etc. The Town Engineer shall issue any
approval under this section in writing and shall transmit a copy of the approval to the Planning
Board. For major modifications, such as relocation of rights-of-way, property boundaries, changes
of grade by more than one (1%) percent etc., the subdivider shall obtain permission from the Board
to modify the plans in accordance with Article 9 for amended plans.
D. Close of Construction Season Inspection - At the close of each summer construction season the
Town shall, at the expense of the subdivider, have the site inspected by a qualified individual. By
October 1 of each year during which construction was done on the site, the inspector shall submit a
report to the Board based on that inspection, addressing whether storm water and erosion control
measures (both temporary and permanent) are in place, are properly installed, and appear adequate.
The report shall also include a discussion and recommendations on any problems which were
encountered. The developer shall implement any recommendations in the inspection report by
November 1.
E. Certification of Surveying Monuments - Prior to the sale of any lot, the subdivider shall provide the
Town Engineer and Code Enforcement Officer with a letter from a professional land surveyor,
stating that all monumentation shown on the plan has been installed.
F. Certification of Street Construction for Public Acceptance - Upon completion of street construction
and prior to a vote by the Town Council to accept a street for public ownership and maintenance, a
written certification signed by a professional engineer shall be submitted to the Town Council at the
expense of the applicant, certifying that the proposed public way meets or exceeds the design and
construction requirements of these regulations. If there are any underground utilities, the servicing
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 35
utility shall certify in writing that they have been installed in a manner acceptable to the utility. "As
built" plans shall be submitted to the Town Council with the request for street acceptance.
G. Developer Responsibility to Maintain Streets - The subdivider shall be required to maintain all
improvements and provide for snow removal on streets and sidewalks until acceptance of the
improvements by the municipality or control is placed with a lot owners' association.
401.10.2 – VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
A. No Plan to be Recorded without Prior Planning Board Approval - No plan of a division of land
within the municipality which would constitute a subdivision shall be recorded in the Registry of
Deeds until a final plan has been approved by the Board in accordance with these regulations.
B. No Land to be Conveyed or Offered - A person shall not convey, offer or agree to convey any land
in a subdivision which has not been approved by the Board and recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
C. All Lots to be Shown on Approved Plan - A person shall not sell, lease or otherwise convey any land
in an approved subdivision which is not shown on the plan as a separate lot.
D. No Utility to Serve Non-approved Lots - No public utility, water district, sanitary district or any
utility company of any kind shall serve any lot in a subdivision for which a final plan has not been
approved by the Board.
E. No Site Development without Approvals - Development of a subdivision without Board approval
shall be a violation of law. Development includes grading or construction of roads, grading of land
or lots, or construction of buildings which require a plan approved as provided in these regulations
and recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
F. No Lot Sales without Infrastructure Completion - No lot in a subdivision may be sold, leased, or
otherwise conveyed before the street upon which the lot fronts and utilities to serve the lot are
completed in accordance with these regulations up to and including the entire frontage of the lot
unless an approved performance guarantee is in place to ensure street costruction and utilities
completion. No home on a lot or unit in a multi-family development shall be occupied before the
street upon which the unit is accessed and the utilities to serve the residences are serviceable to the
satisfaction of the Town Engineer and Code Enforcement Officer.
G. Development to Follow Approved Plans – All development activity within an approved subdivision
shall follow the plans approved by the Planning Board and any conditions of approval applied by the
Board.
H. Remedies - Violations of the above provisions of this Ordinance shall be punished in accordance
with the provisions of Title 30-A M.R.S.A., §4452.
ARTICLE 11 - PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES
401.11.1 – TYPES OF GUARANTEES
With submittal of the application for final plan approval, the applicant shall provide one of the following
performance guarantees for an amount adequate to cover the total construction costs of all required
improvements, taking into account the time-span of the construction schedule and the inflation rate for
construction costs:
A. Cash - Either a certified check payable to the municipality or a savings account or certificate of
deposit naming the Town of Gray as owner, for the establishment of an escrow account;
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 36
B. Letter of Credit - An irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution approved by the Town
Attorney establishing funding for the construction of the subdivision, from which the Town may
draw if construction is inadequate.
C. Conditional Agreement – A restriction on the sale of lots and issuance of building permits within the
subdivision until the required improvements are completed. A letter of credit or cash fund shall be
required to cover the cost of erosion controls and site stabilization. The restriction on lot sales and
building permits shall be lifted at any point in the construction process where a performance
guarantee under subsections A or B above is posted for the remaining improvements. The owner of
a subdivision approved by the Planning Board prior to November 10, 2008 (December 10 effective
date) may ask to amend the subdivision approval to add or substitute a conditional agreement
provision under this subsection. Such an amendment will require the review and approval of the
Planning Board and must comply with all of the requirements of this subsection, but may not request
any other plan changes under the design requirements or review standards. Approval of a plan
amendment under this subsection shall not extend the time periods established by Section 401.8.3(C)
or (G). [Amended March 17, 2009]
The conditions and amount of the performance guarantee shall be determined by the Planning Board
with the advice of the Town Engineer, Public Works Director, and Town Attorney.
401.11.2 – CONTENTS OF GUARANTEES
The performance guarantee shall contain a construction schedule, cost estimates for each major phase of
construction taking into account inflation, provisions for inspections of each phase of construction,
provisions for the release of part or all of the performance guarantee to the developer, and a date after
which the applicant will be in default and the municipality shall have access to the funds to finish
construction. Said default date shall be at least sixty (60) days prior to expiration of the performance
guarantee.
401.11.3 – CASH ESCROW ACCOUNT
A cash contribution to the establishment of an escrow account shall be made by either a certified check,
the direct deposit into a savings account, or the purchase of a certificate of deposit. For any account
opened by the applicant, the municipality shall be named as owner. Any interest earned on the escrow
account shall be returned to the applicant unless the municipality has found it necessary to draw on the
account due to default of the developer.
401.11.4 – LETTER OF CREDIT
An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other lending institution with offices in the region, shall
indicate that funds have been set aside for the construction of the subdivision for the duration of the
project and may not be used for any other project or loan.
401.11.5 – PHASING OF DEVELOPMENT
The Board may approve plans to develop a major subdivision in separate and distinct phases. This may
be accomplished by limiting final approval to those lots abutting that section of the proposed subdivision
street which is covered by a performance guarantee. When development is phased, road construction
shall commence from an existing public way. Final approval of lots in subsequent phases shall be given
only upon satisfactory completion of all requirements pertaining to previous phases and with posting of
a new performance guarantee for the next phase. Preliminary subdivision approval of all development
phases in a phased subdivision shall establish vested rights against future ordinance changes provided
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 37
that adequate design documentation is submitted to verify that all project phases meet all ordinance
requirements in effect at the time of final approval of the first project phase.
401.11.6 – RELEASE OF GUARANTEE
Prior to the release of any part of the performance guarantee, the Town Manager or his/her designee
shall determine to its satisfaction, in part upon the report of the Town Engineer or other qualified
individual retained by the municipality and any other agencies and departments who may be involved,
that the proposed improvements meet or exceed the design and construction requirements for that
portion or phase of the subdivision for which the release is requested.
401.11.7 – DEFAULT
If upon inspection, the Town Engineer or other qualified individual retained by the municipality finds
that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the plans and
specifications filed as part of the application, he or she shall so report in writing to the Code
Enforcement Officer, the Town Manager, the Board, and the applicant or builder. The Town Manager
shall take any steps necessary to preserve the municipality's rights.
401.11.8 – IMPROVEMENTS TO BE COVERED BY GUARANTEES
Performance guarantees shall be tendered for all public or common improvements required to meet the
standards of these regulations including but not limited to the construction of the streets, storm water
management facilities, public sewage collection or disposal facilities, public water systems, and erosion
and sedimentation control measures.
ARTICLE 12 - WAIVERS
401.12.1 – WAIVERS OF CERTAIN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AUTHORIZED.
Where the Board makes written findings of fact that there are special circumstances of a particular
parcel proposed to be subdivided, or that the application is simple and minor in nature, it may waive
portions of the submission requirements, unless prohibited by these regulations or Maine statutes,
provided the applicant has demonstrated that the performance standards of these regulations and the
criteria of the subdivision statute have been or will be met, the public health, safety, and welfare are
protected, and provided the waivers do not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the
comprehensive plan, the zoning ordinance, or these regulations.
401.12.2 – WAIVERS OF CERTAIN IMPROVEMENTS AUTHORIZED.
Where the Board makes written findings of fact that due to special circumstances of a particular lot
proposed to be subdivided, the provision of certain required improvements is not requisite to provide for
the public health, safety or welfare, or are inappropriate because of inadequate or lacking connecting
facilities adjacent to or in proximity of the proposed subdivision, it may waive the requirement for such
improvements, subject to appropriate conditions, provided the waivers do not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of the comprehensive plan, the Zoning Ordinance, or these regulations,
and further provided the performance standards of these regulations and the criteria of the subdivision
statute have been or will be met by the proposed subdivision.
In granting any waivers for required improvements, the Planning Board shall make findings that:
A. The need for a waiver is based on unique circumstances relating to the specific site and development
application and that these conditions would not be expected to be encountered elsewhere;
B. The application of the standards is not requisite to public health, safety, and general welfare;
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 38
C. The waiver would not qualify for relief granted by the Board of Appeals under Article 9.
D. The granting of the waiver in other situations would not have the effect of amending the Ordinance
requirements; and,
E. Appropriate conditions are applied.
401.12.3 – WAIVER OF PROCEDURAL STEPS
The Board may allow an applicant to combine the final plan and preliminary plan application steps into
one procedure, upon making all of the following written findings of fact:
A. No approvals are required from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection under the Site
Location of Development Act, Stormwater Law, or Natural Resources Protection Act, other than a
“Permit by Rule;”
B. The Board agrees to approve a waiver from the requirement to submit a stormwater management
plan and sedimentation and erosion control plan, as ordinarily required by Article 7 or Article 8; and
C. The application contains all other applicable submissions required for both the preliminary and final
plan steps, except for those items for which a waiver of a required submission has been requested
and granted.
401.12.4 – CONDITIONS FOR WAIVERS
Unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance, waivers may only be granted in accordance with Sections
401.12.1, 401.12.2 and 401.12.3 above. When granting waivers, the Board shall set conditions so that
the purposes of these regulations are met.
401.12.5 – WAIVERS TO BE SHOWN ON FINAL PLAN.
When the Board grants a waiver under Section 401.12.2 to any of the improvements required by these
regulations, the final plan, to be recorded at the Registry of Deeds, shall indicate the waivers granted and
the date on which they were granted.
ARTICLE 13 - PERFORMANCE & DESIGN STANDARDS
The performance and design standards in this article are intended to clarify and expand upon the
statutory review criteria found in Section 401.2. In reviewing a proposed subdivision, the Board shall
review the application for conformance with the following performance and design standards and make
findings that each has been met prior to the approval of a final plan. In all instances, the burden of proof
shall be upon the applicant to present adequate information to indicate all performance and design
standards and statutory criteria for approval have been or will be met.
401.13.1 – BASIC SUBDIVISION LAYOUT
A. Blocks.
Where street lengths exceed one thousand (1,000) feet between intersections with other streets, the
Board may require a utility/pedestrian easement, at least twenty (20) feet in width, to provide for
underground utility crossings and/or a pedestrian pathway of at least five feet in width constructed in
accordance with design standards for sidewalks below. Maintenance obligations of the easement
shall be included in the written description of the easement.
B. Lots.
1. Wherever possible, side lot lines shall be perpendicular to the street.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 39
2. The subdivision of tracts into parcels with more than twice the required minimum lot size shall
be laid out in such a manner as either to provide for or preclude future division. Deed
restrictions and notes on the plan shall either prohibit future divisions of the lots or specify that
any future division shall constitute a revision to the plan and shall require approval from the
Board, subject to the criteria of the subdivision statute, the standards of these regulations and
conditions placed on the original approval.
3. If a lot on one side of a stream (as defined in the DEP Minimum Shoreland Zoning Guidelines)
or road fails to meet the minimum requirements for lot size, it may not be combined with land on
the other side of the stream or road to meet the minimum lot size.
4. The ratio of lot length to width, outside of the shoreland zone, shall not be more than three to
one. Flag lots and other odd shaped lots in which narrow strips are joined to other parcels in
order to meet minimum lot size requirements are prohibited. If any lots in the proposed
subdivision have shore frontage on a river, stream, brook, or great pond as these features are
defined in Title 38, section 480-B, none of the lots created within the subdivision shall have a lot
depth to shore frontage ratio greater than 5 to 1.
5. In areas served by a postal carrier, lots shall be numbered in such a manner as to facilitate mail
delivery. Even numbers shall be assigned to lots on one side of the street, and odd numbers on
the opposite side. Where the proposed subdivision contains the extension of an existing street or
street approved by the Board, but not yet constructed, the lot numbers shall correspond with the
existing lot numbers. The lot numbering shall be reviewed by the E-911 Addressing Officer and
the comments shall be considered by the Board.
6. In accordance with Tables 402.5.4.A & B of the Zoning Ordinance, the Planning Board shall
have the authority to reduce the minimum street frontage to fifty (50) percent of the required
frontage but in no case less than sixty (60) feet of street frontage, whichever is greater, for lots in
a Planning Board approved residential subdivision for one or more lots having street frontage
only on a cul-de-sac. In such instances, street frontage shall be measured along the outside radius
of the cul-de-sac. Lots which have any street frontage not on a cul-de-sac radius as well as lots in
a commercial subdivision shall not be eligible for reduced street frontage.
C. Utilities.
Utilities serving lots with a street frontage of one hundred and fifty (150 ft.) feet or less shall be
installed underground.
D. Monuments.
1. Stone or precast concrete monuments shall be set at all street intersections and points of
curvature, but no further than seven hundred and fifty (750 ft.) feet apart along street lines
without curves or intersections.
2. Stone or precast concrete monuments shall be set at all corners and angle points of the
subdivision boundaries where the interior angle of the subdivision boundaries is 135° or less.
3. Stone or concrete monuments shall be a minimum of four inches square at the top and three feet
in length, and set in the ground at final grade level. After they are set, drill hole 1/2 inch deep
shall locate the point or points described above.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 40
4. All other subdivision boundary corners and angle points, as well as all lot boundary corners and
angle points shall be marked by suitable monumentation, as required by the Maine Board of
Registration of Land Surveyors.
401.13.2 – SUFFICIENT WATER
A. Public Water:
1. A subdivision located partially or wholly within the Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA)
McKin Superfund Site shall provide public water to all parts and all development within the
entire project.
2. When a subdivision is to be served by a public water system, the complete supply system within
the subdivision including fire hydrants, shall be installed at the expense of the applicant. The size
and location of mains, gate valves, hydrants, and service connections shall be reviewed and
approved in writing by the Gray Water District and the Fire Chief.
3. Subdivisions not located partially or wholly within the EPA McKin Superfund Site shall not be
required to supply public water provided that adequate drinking water and sufficient fire
protection measures are adhered to as required in this Ordinance and other applicable standards.
B. Drinking Water:
1. When a proposed subdivision is not served by public water, water supply shall be from
individual wells. Due to the increased chance of contamination from surface water, dug wells
shall be prohibited.
2. Individual wells shall be sited and constructed to prevent infiltration of surface water, and
contamination from subsurface waste water disposal systems and other sources of potential
contamination.
3. Wells shall not be constructed within 100 feet of the traveled way of any street, if located
downhill from the street, or within 50 feet of the traveled way of any street, if located uphill of
the street. This restriction shall be included as a note on the plan and deed restriction to the
effected lots.
4. Lots shall be designed to accommodate the placement of wells and septic systems meeting the
requirements of the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and Well Driller and
Pump Installer Rules, which generally require a one hundred (100) foot separation between wells
and septic systems. Additional restrictions on well locations may be required per hydrogeologic
assessments under Section 401.13.9.A.6.
5. Water Quality: Water supplies shall meet primary drinking water standards contained in the State
of Maine Rules Relating to Drinking Water. If existing water quality contains contaminants in
excess of the secondary drinking water standards in the Maine Rules Relating to Drinking Water,
that fact shall be disclosed in a note on the plan to be recorded at the Registry of Deeds.
C. Fire Protection:
1. The developer shall provide adequate Fire Protection by one or more of the following methods
meeting applicable standards approved by the Gray Department of Public Safety:
a. Fire Hydrant(s);
b. Underground reservoir(s); and/or
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 41
c. Sprinkler system(s).
2. A suitable accessway to the hydrant or other water source shall be constructed. An easement
shall be granted to the Town of Gray granting access to and maintenance of hydrants or
reservoirs where necessary.
3. When a subdivision is to be served by public water, all of the following apply:
a. Applicable standards detailed above in 401.13.2.A.2
b. Fire hydrants connected to a public water supply shall be located such that no building is
more than five hundred (500) feet from a hydrant
c. Hydrants or other provisions for drafting water shall be provided to the specifications of the
Gray Department of Public Safety.
4. For underground reservoirs, a minimum storage capacity of 10,000 gallons shall be provided.
Additional storage of 2,000 gallons per lot or principal building shall be provided. The Board
may require additional storage capacity upon a recommendation from the Gray Department of
Public Safety based on factors such as distance to a secondary water supply. Minimum pipe size
connecting to storage vaults shall be six inches.
5. Sprinklers utilized to meet fire protection for this Section 401.13.2.C shall be designed and
installed to the following specifications:
a. Developers of a subdivision shall submit plans for Fire Protection to the Gray Department of
Public Safety for review and approval
b. Residential sprinklers shall follow National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 13D and
13R for life safety
c. Commercial sprinklers shall follow NRPA 13
d. Commercial sprinkler systems will have a Fire Department connection that is in an accessible
location and clearly marked outside the building
e. All sprinkler systems using more than six (6) sprinkler heads shall be approved by the State
of Maine Department of Public Safety/Fire Marshall's Office.
401.13.3 – EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION AND IMPACT ON WATER BODIES
A. The proposed subdivision shall prevent soil erosion and sedimentation from entering waterbodies,
wetlands, and adjacent properties.
B. The procedures outlined in the erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be implemented during
the site preparation, construction, and clean-up stages.
C. Cutting or removal of vegetation along waterbodies shall not increase water temperature or result in
shoreline erosion or sedimentation.
D. Topsoil shall be considered part of the subdivision and shall not be removed from the site except for
surplus topsoil from roads, parking areas, and building excavations.
401.13.4 – SEWAGE DISPOSAL
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 42
A. The applicant shall submit evidence of site suitability for subsurface sewage disposal prepared by a
Maine Licensed Site Evaluator in full compliance with the requirements of the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
B. The site evaluator shall certify in writing that all test pits which meet the requirements for a new
system represent an area large enough for a disposal area on soils which meet the Disposal Rules.
C. On lots in which the limiting factor has been identified as being within fifteen (15) inches or less of
the surface, a second site with suitable soils shall be shown as a reserve area for future replacement
of the disposal area. The reserve area shall be shown on the plan and restricted in the deed so as not
to be built upon.
D. In no instance shall a disposal area be on a site which requires a New System Variance from the
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
E. In no instance shall a lot be approved that has its septic system located on an easement on another
lot.
401.13.5 – SOLID WASTE
If the additional solid waste from the proposed subdivision exceeds the capacity of the municipal solid
waste facility, causes the municipal facility to no longer be in compliance with its license from the
Department of Environmental Protection, or causes the municipality to exceed its contract with a nonmunicipal
facility, the applicant shall make alternate arrangements for the disposal of solid waste. The
alternate arrangements shall be at a disposal facility which is in compliance with its license. The Board
may not require the alternate arrangement to exceed a period of five years.
401.13.6 – IMPACT ON NATURAL BEAUTY, AESTHETICS, HISTORIC SITES, WILDLIFE HABITAT, RARE
NATURAL AREAS OR PUBLIC ACCESS TO THE SHORELINE
A. Preservation of Natural Beauty and Aesthetics.
1. The plan shall, by notes on the final plan and deed restrictions, limit the clearing of trees to those
areas designated on the plan.
2. Except in areas of the municipality designated by the comprehensive plan as growth areas, the
subdivision shall be designed to minimize the visibility of buildings from existing public roads.
Outside of designated growth areas, a subdivision in which the land cover type at the time of
application is forested, shall maintain a wooded buffer strip no less than fifty (50) feet in width
along all existing public roads. The buffer may be broken only for driveways and streets.
3. The Board may require the application to include a landscape plan that will show the
preservation of any existing large specimen trees, the replacement of trees and vegetation, and
graded contours.
4. Unless located in areas designated as a growth area in the Comprehensive Plan, building
locations shall be limited in open fields, and shall be located to the maximum extent possible,
through clustering or control of building locations, within forested portions of the subdivision.
When the subdivision contains no forest or insufficient forested portions to include all buildings,
the subdivision shall be designed to minimize the appearance of buildings when viewed from
existing public streets. When a proposed subdivision street traverses open fields, the plan shall
include the planting of street trees. Street trees shall include a mix of tall shade trees and
medium height flowering species. Trees shall be planted no more than fifty feet apart.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 43
B. Retention of Open Spaces and Natural or Historic Features.
1. If any portion of the subdivision is located within an area designated by the comprehensive plan
as open space or greenbelt, measures for preservation of that portion shall be included in the
project design.
2. If any portion of the subdivision is located within an area designated as a unique natural area by
the comprehensive plan or the Maine Natural Areas Program the plan shall indicate appropriate
measures for the preservation of the values which qualify the site for such designation.
3. If any portion of the subdivision is designated a site of historic or prehistoric importance by the
comprehensive plan, National Register of Historic Places, or the Maine Historic Preservation
Commission, appropriate measures for the protection of the historic or prehistoric resources shall
be included in the plan. When the historic features to be protected include buildings, the
placement and the architectural design of new structures in the subdivision shall compatible with
the historic structures. The Board shall seek the advice of the Maine Historic Preservation
Commission in reviewing such plans.
4. The subdivision shall reserve sufficient undeveloped land to provide for the recreational needs of
the occupants. The percentage of open space to be reserved shall depend on the identified needs
for outdoor recreation in the portion of the municipality in which the subdivision is located
according to the Comprehensive Plan, the proposed lot sizes within the subdivision, the expected
demographic makeup of the occupants of the subdivision, and the site characteristics, but shall
constitute no less than five (5%) percent of the area of the subdivision. In determining the need
for recreational open space the Board shall also consider the proximity of the subdivision to
neighboring dedicated open space or recreation facilities; and the type of development. Sites
selected primarily for scenic or passive recreation purposes shall have such access as the Board
may deem suitable and no less than 25 feet of road frontage.
5. Subdivisions with an average density of more than three (3) dwelling units per acre shall provide
no less than fifty percent of the open space as usable open space to be improved for ball fields,
playgrounds or other similar active recreation facilities. A site intended to be used for active
recreation purposes, such as a playground or a play field, should be relatively level and dry, have
a total frontage on one or more streets of at least two hundred (200 ft.) feet, and have no major
dimensions of less than two hundred (200 ft.) feet.
6. Land reserved for open space purposes shall be of a character, configuration and location
suitable for the particular use intended.
7. Where land within the subdivision is not suitable or is insufficient in amount for open space and
recreation needs of the development, a payment in lieu of dedication as set by the Town Council
may be substituted for the reservation of all or part of the open space requirement. The payment
in lieu of dedication shall be deposited into a municipal land open space or outdoor recreation
facility acquisition or improvement fund.
C. Protection of Significant Wildlife Habitat.
If any portion of a proposed subdivision lies within:
1. Two hundred and fifty (250 ft.) feet of the following areas identified and mapped by the
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Beginning with Habitat Project Primary Maps 1 and
2 or the Comprehensive Plan as:
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 44
a. Habitat for species appearing on the official state or federal lists of endangered or threatened
species;
b. High and moderate value waterfowl and wading bird habitats, including nesting and feeding
areas;
c. Critical spawning and nursery areas for Atlantic sea run salmon as defined by the Atlantic
Sea Run Salmon Commission; or
2. Other important habitat areas identified in the comprehensive plan or in the Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife Beginning with Habitat Project Primary Maps 1 and 2;
the applicant shall demonstrate that there shall be no undue adverse impacts on the habitat and
species it supports. There shall be no cutting of vegetation within such areas, or within the strip of
land extending at least seventy-five (75 ft.) feet from the edge or normal high-water mark of such
habitat areas without prior consultation with and submission of comments from the Regional
Biologist of the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife. The Board may require a report
to be submitted, prepared by a wildlife biologist, selected or approved by the Board, with
demonstrated experience with the wildlife resource being impacted. This report shall assess the
potential impact of the subdivision on the significant habitat and adjacent areas that are important to
the maintenance of the affected species and shall describe any additional appropriate mitigation
measures to ensure that the subdivision will have no undue adverse impacts on the habitat and the
species it supports.
H. Protection of Important Shoreland Areas.
3. Any existing public rights of access to the shoreline of a water body shall be maintained by
means of easements or rights-of-way, or should be included in the open space with provisions
made for continued public access.
4. Within areas subject to the state mandated shoreland zone, within a strip of land extending one
hundred (100 ft.) feet inland from the normal high-water line of a great pond or any tributary to a
great pond, and seventy-five (75 ft.) feet from any other water body or the upland edge of a
wetland, a buffer strip of vegetation shall be preserved. The plan notes shall contain the
following restrictions:
a. Tree removal shall be limited to no more than forty (40%) percent of the volume of trees four
(4 in.) inches or more in diameter measured at 4 1/2 (4.5 ft.) feet above the ground level on
any lot in any ten year period.
b. There shall be no cleared opening greater than two hundred and fifty (250 sq. ft.) square feet
in the forest canopy as measured from the outer limits of the tree crown.
c. However, a footpath not to exceed ten feet in width as measured between tree trunks is
permitted provided that a cleared line of sight to the water through the buffer strip is not
created. Adjacent to a great pond, or a tributary to a great pond, the width of the foot path
shall be limited to six (6) feet.
d. In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat adjacent to great ponds, and tributaries
to great ponds, existing vegetation under three feet in height and other ground cover shall not
be removed, except to provide for a footpath or other permitted uses as described above.
e. Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom third of the tree is permitted.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 45
5. Within areas subject to the state mandated shoreland zone, beyond the buffer strip designated
above, and out to two hundred and fifty (250 ft.) feet from the normal high water line of a water
body or upland edge of a wetland, cleared openings for development, including but not limited
to, principal and accessory structures, driveways and sewage disposal areas, shall not exceed in
the aggregate, twenty-five (25%) percent of the lot area or ten thousand (10,000 sq. ft.) square
feet, whichever is greater, including land previously developed.
I. Reservation or Dedication and Maintenance of Open Space and Common Land, Facilities and
Services.
6. All open space common land, facilities and property shall be owned by:
a. The owners of the lots or dwelling units by means of a lot owners' association;
b. An association which has as its principal purpose the conservation or preservation of land in
essentially its natural condition; or
c. The municipality.
7. Further subdivision of the common land or open space and its use for other than non-commercial
recreation, agriculture, or conservation purposes, except for easements for underground utilities,
shall be prohibited. Structures and buildings accessory to non-commercial recreational or
conservation uses may be erected on the common land. When open space is to be owned by an
entity other than the municipality, there shall be a conservation easement deeded to the
municipality prohibiting future development.
8. The common land or open space shall be shown on the final plan with appropriate notations on
the plan to indicate:
a. It shall not be used for future building lots; and
b. Which portions of the open space, if any, may be dedicated for acceptance by the
municipality.
9. The final plan application shall include the following:
a. Covenants for mandatory membership in the lot owners' association setting forth the owners'
rights, interests, and privileges in the association and the common property and facilities, to
be included in the deed for each lot or dwelling.
b. Draft articles of incorporation of the proposed lot owners' association as a not-for-profit
corporation; and
c. Draft by-laws of the proposed lot owners' association specifying the responsibilities and
authority of the association, the operating procedures of the association and providing for
proper capitalization of the association to cover the costs of major repairs, maintenance and
replacement of common facilities. Provisions dealing with matters not relating to the criteria
and standards of the Subdivision Ordinance such as requirements for minimum home sizes
and prohibitions on satellite dishes shall be separated and shall not be enforceable by the
Town of Gray.
10. In combination, the documents referenced in paragraph E 1. through 4. above shall provide for
the following.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 46
a. The homeowners' association shall have the responsibility of maintaining the common
property or facilities.
b. The association shall levy annual charges against all owners of lots or dwelling units to
defray the expenses connected with the maintenance, repair and replacement of common
property and facilities and tax assessments.
c. The association shall have the power to place a lien on the property of members who fail to
pay dues or assessments.
d. The developer or subdivider shall maintain control of the common property, and be
responsible for its maintenance until development sufficient to support the association has
taken place.
401.13.7 – CONFORMANCE WITH ZONING ORDINANCE AND OTHER LAND USE ORDINANCES
All lots, other than those found within cluster developments approved pursuant to section 401.13.13,
shall meet the minimum dimensional requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for the zoning district in
which they are located. The proposed subdivision shall meet all applicable performance standards or
design criteria from the Zoning Ordinance and other land use ordinances.
401.13.8 – FINANCIAL AND TECHNICAL CAPACITY
A. Financial Capacity
The applicant shall have adequate financial resources to construct the proposed improvements and
meet the criteria of the statute and the standards of these regulations. When the applicant proposes
to construct the buildings as well as the subdivision improvements, the applicant shall have adequate
financial resources to construct the total development. In making the above determinations the
Board shall consider the proposed time frame for construction and the effects of inflation. Provision
of a commitment letter from a lending institution offering to finance construction of the specific
project for amounts confirmed by the Town’s peer reviewers shall constitute demonstration of
financial capacity when combined with a performance guarantee meeting the requirements of Secton
401.11.
B. Technical Ability
1. The applicant shall retain qualified contractors and consultants to supervise, construct and
inspect the required improvements in the proposed subdivision.
2. In determining the applicant's technical ability the Board shall consider the applicant's previous
experience, the experience and training of the applicant's consultants and contractors, and the
existence of violations of previous approvals granted to the applicant.
401.13.9 – IMPACT ON GROUND WATER QUALITY OR QUANTITY
A. Ground Water Quality
1. When a hydrogeologic assessment is submitted, the assessment shall contain at least the
following information:
a. A map showing the basic soils types.
b. The depth to the water table at representative points throughout the subdivision.
c. Drainage conditions throughout the subdivision.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 47
d. Data on the existing ground water quality, either from test wells in the subdivision or from
existing wells on neighboring properties.
e. An analysis and evaluation of the effect of the subdivision on ground water resources. In the
case of residential developments, the evaluation shall, at a minimum, include a projection of
post development nitrate-nitrogen concentrations at any wells within the subdivision, or at
the subdivision boundaries; or at a distance of 1,000 feet from potential contamination
sources, whichever is a shortest distance.
f. A map showing the location of any subsurface waste water disposal systems and drinking
water wells within the subdivision and within 200 feet of the subdivision boundaries.
2. Projections of ground water quality shall be based on the assumption of drought conditions
(assuming sixty (60%) percent of annual average precipitation).
3. No subdivision shall increase any contaminant concentration in the ground water at any
subdivision water supply well or any project boundary to more than the Primary Drinking Water
Standards. No subdivision shall increase any contaminant concentration in the ground water at
said locations to more than the Secondary Drinking Water Standards. A hydrogeological
evaluation demonstrating that the groundwater concentrations of nitrate as nitrogen meet the
Maximum Contaminant Level standard of 10 mg/L of the EPA’s National Primary Drinking
Water Regulations at the project boundaries. Where past land activities, such as agriculture,
indicate the potential for high background levels of nitrate nitrogen or other groundwater
contaminants, the Planning Board may require testing to determine background levels and may
place limitations on total groundwater discharges to ensure safe drinking water supplies for
existing and/or proposed households.
4. If ground water is to be used for potable purposes and contains contaminants in excess of the
primary standards, the applicant shall demonstrate how water quality will be improved or treated.
5. If ground water contains contaminants in excess of the secondary standards, the subdivision shall
not cause the concentration of the parameters in question to exceed one hundred and fifty (150%)
percent of the ambient concentration.
6. Subsurface waste water disposal systems and drinking water wells shall be constructed as shown
on the map submitted with the assessment. If construction standards for drinking water wells or
other measures to reduce ground water contamination and protect drinking water supplies are
recommended in the assessment, such as required well exclusion zones, those standards shall be
included as a note on the final plan, and as restrictions in the deeds to the affected lots.
7. Whenever the Board determines that there is a potential that some lots in the proposed
subdivision may have difficulty obtaining a well with adequate quantity and quality for potable
water, the developer shall be required to drill wells and verify the water supply before the lot is
sold.
B. Ground Water Quantity
1. Any water table drawdowns beyond the subdivision boundaries, due to groundwater withdrawals
by the proposed subdivision, shall not adversely impact groundwater supply availability to
existing wells nor cause structural damage (e.g., settlement).
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 48
2. A proposed subdivision shall not result in a lowering of the water table at the subdivision
boundary by increasing runoff with a corresponding decrease in infiltration of precipitation. This
standard shall be met by one of the following measures:
a. Limiting the impervious surfaces within the project site to no more than 10 (10%) percent of
the land surface.
b. Providing analysis by a hydrogeologist or qualified engineer that soil and substrate
conditions are such that a groundwater drawdown due to increased runoff will not
significantly reduce infiltration or cause long term settlements in clay that could result in
structural damage. Upon recommendation of peer review consultants engaged by the Town,
the Board may require test borings to verify assumptions made by the hydrologist or
engineer.
c. Installation of groundwater infiltration measures to ensure that water table recharge is not
depleted by more than ten (10%) percent.
401.13.10 – FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.
When any part of a subdivision is located in a special flood hazard area as identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency:
A. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
B. Adequate drainage shall be provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
C. The plan shall include a statement that structures in the subdivision shall be constructed with their
lowest floor, including the basement, at least one foot above the 100-year flood elevation. Such a
restriction shall be included in any deed, lease, purchase and sale agreement, or document
transferring or expressing an intent to transfer any interest in real estate or structure, including but
not limited to a time-share interest. The statement shall clearly articulate that the municipality may
enforce any violation of the construction requirement and that fact shall also be included in the deed
or any other document previously described. The construction requirement shall also be clearly
stated on the plan.
401.13.11 – IDENTIFICATION OF FRESHWATER WETLANDS, RIVERS, STREAMS OR BROOKS
Freshwater wetlands within the proposed subdivision shall be identified in accordance with the 1987
Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual, published by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers. Any rivers, streams, or brooks within or abutting the proposed subdivision shall be
identified.
401.13.12 – STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
A. Stormwater management for major subdivisions shall incorporate appropriate treatment measures for
water quantity and quality to meet the requirements specified below for development of the lots as
well as the infrastructure to support the project. Each application shall include maximum developed,
disturbed and impervious areas for each lot based upon the definitions contained within DEP
Chapter 500 Stormwater Management.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 49
B. For major subdivisions that require DEP review under the Site Location of Development Act
(SLDA), a stormwater management plan shall be submitted which complies with the SLDA and the
requirements of DEP Chapter 500 Stormwater Management.
C. For major subdivisions that do not require a SLDA permit, but require a DEP permit under the
Stormwater Law, a stormwater management plan shall be submitted which complies with the
requirements of DEP Chapter 500 Stormwater Management.
D. For major subdivisions outside of the watershed of a Great Pond, that require neither a SLDA
permit, nor a DEP Stormwater permit a stormwater management plan shall be submitted which
complies with the Basic and General Standards of DEP Chapter 500 Stormwater Management.
E. For the purposes of these regulations, the watershed boundaries shall be as delineated in the
Comprehensive Plan, or as depicted in the drainage divide data layer provided by the Maine Office
of GIS. Due to the scale of the map there may be small inaccuracies in the delineation of the
watershed boundary. Where there is a dispute as to exact location of a watershed boundary, the
Board or its designee and the applicant shall conduct an on-site investigation to determine where the
drainage divide lies. If the Board and the applicant can not agree on the location of the drainage
divide based on the on-site investigation, the burden of proof shall lie with the applicant to provide
the Board with information from a professional land surveyor showing where the drainage divide
lies.
F. For major and minor subdivisions within the watershed of a Great Pond, that require neither a DEP
SLDA permit nor a DEP Stormwater Permit, a stormwater management plan shall be submitted
which complies with the Basic Standards of DEP Chapter 500 Stormwater Management. In
addition, the stormwater management plan shall comply with the Phosphorous Standard of Chapter
500. If the Great Pond is not severely blooming as listed in MDEP Chapter 502, then the stormwater
management plan shall comply with either the General Standard or the Phosphorous Standard of
Chapter 500 at the Applicant’s choice.
G. For all major subdivisions, regardless of size, a stormwater management plan shall be submitted
which complies with the Flooding Standard of DEP Chapter 500 Stormwater Management. For a
project that does not require a DEP SLDA Permit, the Planning Board upon a request by the
Applicant may waive the Flooding Standard, in the event that greater than seventy-five (75%)
percent of the impervious and developed areas (as defined in Chapter 500) for both the lots and
infrastructure are treated through the use of buffers in accordance with Chapter 500.
401.13.13 – RESIDENTIAL OPEN SPACE SUBDIVISIONS
A. Purpose:
1. The purpose of these Residential Open Space Subdivision standards is to encourage greater
flexibility and more creative design for the development of single-family projects. It is intended
to encourage a pattern of residential development which will result in the following attributes:
a. Preservation of Gray's rural character by retention of open space and its natural resource
values as determined by the Planning Board with input from appropriate organizations, other
Town staff, and State departments.
b. To the greatest practical extent, preservation of existing landscape features and the utilization
of such features in a harmonious fashion.
c. Protection of environmentally sensitive areas.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 50
d. Economical and efficient building arrangement, traffic circulation, and utility construction.
e. Outdoor recreational facilities that may be better utilized and located than would otherwise
be provided under more conventional land development.
2. Section 401.13.13.I establishes the purposes of locating individually owned lots in relation to the
configuration of the open space. Parties must pay particular attention to this section to ensure that
the overall layout of land development is consistent with these standards.
B. Dimensional Standards:
1. Table 401.13.13.B.1 entitled "Residential Open Space Subdivision Dimensional Standards
Table" is hereby incorporated into this Ordinance (please see appendix __ of this Ordinance).
2. The Planning Board shall have the authority to reduce setbacks to those stated in Table
401.13.13.B.1.
3. Neither the Planning Board nor the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority to further
reduce the setbacks for the entirety of a project.
4. The Planning Board's ability to change setbacks within the project as detailed in Table
401.13.13.B.1 shall not be construed as granting variances to relieve hardship, and the action of
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not be required.
5. All other space standards except those specifically allowed in Table 401.13.13.B.1 for the
respective district shall apply to the Residential Open Space Subdivision.
6. Notwithstanding Section 401.13.1.B.4 of this Subdivision Ordinance specifying the maximum
ratio of lot length to width, the Planning Board shall have the authority to adjust lot
configurations consistent with these standards including the Residential Open Space
Dimensional Standards Table (Section 401.13.13.B.1) of this Ordinance.
7. Notwithstanding standards regarding open space, common land, facilities and services
established in Section 401.13.16.E of this Ordinance, all open space areas in Residential Open
Space Subdivisions shall meet and maintain standards in this Section 401.13.13.
C. Lot Density Calculations and Density Bonuses:
1. In no case shall the maximum number of lots exceed the gross density specified for the
respective zoning district established in Table 402.5.4.A of the Zoning Ordinance. In all cases
where the number lots permitted equals a decimal number, the number shall be rounded to the
nearest whole number.
2. The maximum number of lots shall be calculated by using the Net Residential Density
calculations contained in Section 401.13.18 of this Subdivision Ordinance and may be adjusted
in accordance with this Section 401.13.13.C.
3. The Planning Board shall approve a density bonus that increases the number of lots if the project
meets any one or more of the criteria established in this Section 401.13.13.C of the Subdivision
Ordinance. The allowance for increased density may be cumulative up the maximum gross
density for the respective Zoning District.
4. As determined by the Planning Board as an integral part of the review of the project,
subdivisions that meet one or more of the following shall be eligible for a five percent (5%)
increased number of lots for each of the following:
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 51
a. Developed trail network in commonly owned open space.
b. Links to trails outside the perimeter of the project.
c. A contiguous area of land larger than five (5) acres that is permanently protected by a
recorded easement for agricultural purposes.
d. A contiguous area of land larger than five (5) acres containing mature growth forest that is
permanently protected from timber harvesting by a recorded easement.
e. Two (2) or more acres of land, which is not otherwise required to be protected, of valuable
wildlife and/or environmentally sensitive areas that is permanently protected from
development, other than walking trails.
f. Each 10% of additional deeded common open space, above the minimum required in Table
401.13.13.B.1.
5. As determined by the Planning Board as an integral part of the review of the project,
subdivisions that meet one or more of the following shall be eligible for a ten percent (10%)
increased number of lots for each of the following:
a. A recorded easement granting the public rights to utilize trails in the common open space
portion of the project.
b. Each 10% of sustainable affordable single-family housing units permanently protected by
recorded deed covenants which establish fixed maximum sale prices regarding the fee
transfer of title; each 10% of such permanent affordable single family dwelling housing unit
is allowed a 10% density bonus increase.
c. Providing public water throughout the project for properties not otherwise required to be
served by public water, such as properties in the McKin Superfund area.
6. As determined by the Planning Board as an integral part of the review of the subdivision,
projects designed, constructed, and memorialized in recorded deed covenants approved by the
Planning Board to be occupied by persons at least 55 years of age shall be eligible for a fifteen
percent (15%) increased number of lots.
D. General Requirements:
1. Residential Open Space Subdivisions are allowed in the Rural Residential & Agricultural, Lake
District, Medium Density, and Well Head-2 Zoning Districts in accordance with applicable
standards.
2. Only single-family dwellings shall be permitted in Residential Open Space Subdivisions. Only
one single-family dwelling shall be permitted on each individually owned lot. Accessory
Apartments are specifically prohibited in Residential Open Space Subdivisions. A note on the
face of the final signed recorded plan and/or included in deeds for each individually owned
parcel shall memorialize these use limitations.
3. Accessory residential uses other than Accessory Apartments that are permitted in the respective
Zoning District may be permitted unless specifically disallowed as part of the Planning Board's
approval. In such cases, the use parameters shall be memorialized on the face of the final signed
recorded plan and a clear note in the deeds for each lot.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 52
4. All deeds for individually owned lots in the project as well as the face of the final recorded
subdivision plan shall contain the following language; "Lot uses in this Residential Open Space
Subdivision are limited to those single-family residential uses that are permitted in the Zoning
Ordinance".
5. Except for standards specifically established in this Section 401.13.13 of this Subdivision
Ordinance, Residential Open Space Subdivisions shall meet all other applicable requirements of
the Subdivision Ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance.
6. In accordance with Section 401.13.15.C.1 of this Subdivision Ordinance, the Planning Board
shall have the right to require that reserve rights-of-way be established and clearly shown on the
face of the recorded plan if adjacent properties may be suitable for future development as
determined by the Board. In such cases, lots and building envelopes shall be established and
shown on the face of the final signed recorded plan to allow the construction of this future access
with respect to applicable setbacks and standards.
7. Open space shall be shown on the subdivision plan, and with appropriate notation on the face of
the final signed recorded plan, that it shall not be further divided for any other use.
8. An Open Space Subdivision located on a lot that is in more than one Zoning District shall be
subject to all applicable provisions for each respective District.
9. All recreation areas in the project, including trails, and any limitations on their use shall be
shown on the face of the final recorded plan. The Planning Board may require that the
homeowner’s association documents and/or deeds for individual lots include provisions that
ensure that the potential buyers are aware of the use and limitations of the recreational areas.
10. The Town of Gray will not be responsible for enforcement of the use of any open space or
recreational areas including trails.
11. No individual lot or dwelling unit shall have direct vehicular access onto a public road existing at
the time of development specifically including a Town or State road.
12. In order to achieve maximum efficiency of lot layout, up to two (2) lots accessed by back lot
development easements shall be permitted in an Open Space Subdivision.
13. Shore frontage for each lot shall not be reduced below the minimum normally required by the
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
14. Underground utilities shall be required.
E. Water Supply & Wastewater Disposal Requirements:
1. In the event that the applicant proposes a privately owned common water supply (not Gray
Water District) serving multiple lots or dwelling units, provisions shall be taken to ensure that
there will be adequate separation from the water supply wellhead to any potential wastewater
disposal components. If a privately owned common water supply is to be installed, all residential
structures in the project shall be connected to this system. The applicant shall demonstrate to the
Planning Board that sufficient measures have been taken to ensure that the on-going maintenance
needs of a privately owned common water supply will be addressed such as necessary inclusions
in the homeowners association documents.
2. Subsurface wastewater disposal systems for all lots and dwellings in a Residential Open Space
Subdivision shall be on one of the following:
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 53
a. a separate disposal field located on the same individually owned lot as the dwelling.
b. shared wastewater disposal field(s) by two to a maximum of four lots meeting applicable
standards.
c. a centralized collection system and wastewater disposal components for the entire project
meeting applicable standards.
3. During the Planning Board's review of the Open Space Subdivision, the Board shall ensure that
neither the test pit nor any portion of the proposed subsurface wastewater disposal system,
including the disposal field and associated fill extensions, will be located within any minimum
buffer to the perimeter of the project. In order to ensure that these standards are met, the
Planning Board shall have the authority to require that a fully completed HHE-200 showing fill
extensions, the perimeter buffer, and nearby stormwater buffer locations be submitted as part of
the review.
4. When wastewater disposal is to be located on the same individually owned lot as the dwelling,
the Planning Board shall have the authority to require the applicant to demonstrate that there are
at least two locations on each individual lot that can practically accommodate a subsurface
wastewater disposal field in accordance with the Maine Subsurface Wastewater Rules.
5. The maintenance responsibilities for all component(s) of a shared or centralized wastewater
disposal system shall be the appropriate association(s). The face of the final signed recorded plan
as well as the respective deeds shall include necessary easements for the on-going maintenance
of the wastewater disposal system components.
6. A centralized collection and treatment system(s) or shared wastewater disposal system(s) shall
not be located on any individually owned lot and shall not be counted as part of the minimum
required open space. The location(s) of all proposed centralized collection and treatment
system(s) or shared wastewater disposal system(s) shall be approved by the Planning Board with
their respective location(s) shown on the face of the final signed recorded subdivision plan.
7. In the event that a centralized collection and treatment of wastewater disposal is proposed, all
lots and/or dwelling units in the project shall utilize this centralized wastewater disposal system
with the understanding that there may be one or more systems utilized. In addition, all of the
following standards shall apply:
a. The applicant shall demonstrate that at least one (1) site on each lot has suitable soils for
wastewater disposal.
b. In instances where one or more of the design flow(s) exceeds one thousand (1,000) gallons
per day is proposed, the applicant shall demonstrate that there is at least one (1) additional
back-up site that is practically usable for each such proposed wastewater disposal field that
could accommodate the wastewater disposal field.
c. All land areas utilized for the purposes of wastewater disposal fields for centralized
collection of wastewater shall not be counted as part of the minimum required open space.
d. In the event that a centralized collection and treatment system is proposed for a location in
the open space that is not shown on the face of the recorded subdivision plan, the plan must
be amended in accordance with applicable procedures before any permits for the system(s)
are issued.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 54
F. Standards for individually owned lots:
1. Each individually owned lot in a Residential Open Space Subdivision shall have a building
envelope sufficient to allow the development of customary residential uses as determined by the
Planning Board. The dimensional standards are established in Table 401.13.13.B.1. The Planning
Board shall ensure that there is ample space for access, for siting principal and accessory
residential structures, and as appropriate, for locating a well and subsurface wastewater disposal
system.
2. The Planning Board shall have the authority to require detailed proposed lot layouts for
individually owned lots that demonstrate the proposed lot is capable of being developed for
customary residential purposes. These lot layout plans shall include all necessary lot
improvements. The Board shall also have the authority to require the applicant to demarcate
these building envelopes via survey to ensure that the potential owners of the lot are aware of the
applicable limitations.
3. The Planning Board shall ensure that neither the test pit nor any portion of the proposed
subsurface wastewater disposal system, including the disposal field and associated fill
extensions, will be located within any minimum buffer to the perimeter of the project. In order to
ensure that this standard is met, the Planning Board shall have the authority to require that a fully
completed HHE-200 showing fill extensions, the perimeter buffer, and nearby stormwater buffer
locations be submitted as part of the review.
G. Standards for required setback buffers around the perimeter:
1. The Planning Board shall permit appropriate reductions in dimensional standards established in
Table 401.13.13.B.1 upon a showing that the perimeter buffer is reserved in an appropriate
location, shape, topography, size, condition, and nature of growth that will preserve for the
residents of the project desirable common area, tree cover, scenic areas or natural features, and
that adequate provisions for such dedication have been completed.
2. Setback buffers to the perimeter of the subdivision, whether to any road, side, or rear setback,
shall be part of the open space for the project and in no event shall these areas be owned in
entirety by any individual lot owner. The ownership and maintenance of these setback buffers to
the perimeter of the subdivision shall be the same as the open space for the Subdivision.
3. Stormwater measures that compromise the required buffering standards shall not be permitted in
the front perimeter buffer facing the road that provides access to the project. Stormwater
measures in the side and/or rear perimeter buffer(s) shall only be permitted with Planning Board
approval in instances when the applicant demonstrates that no other practicable solution is
available.
4. The Homeowner/Lot owner association documents shall include language that clearly states that
the association is responsible for the maintenance of the perimeter buffer.
5. The full depth of all required setback buffers to the perimeter of the subdivision shall consist of
dense, mature natural vegetation as determined by the Planning Board. In the event that existing
conditions do not meet this requirement at the time the application is before the Planning Board,
the Board shall have the authority to require the applicant to plant trees and other appropriate
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 55
vegetation to establish an adequate buffer within a reasonable time period as determined by the
Planning Board during its review of the project. In order to ensure that the required setback
buffer to the perimeter of the subdivision meets applicable standards, the Planning Board shall
also have the authority to require the applicant to post a bond or acceptable surety sufficient to
ensure that the planted vegetation remain healthy and can be replanted if necessary as specified
in Section 401.13.13.G.6.
6. When the Planning Board has determined that the applicant must post a bond or acceptable
surety, qualified professionals shall provide proposed surety amounts for consideration by the
Planning Board. Based on these submittals, input from Town Staff and the Town's consulting
engineer, and any peer reviews that may be necessary, the Planning Board shall determine the
amount of the surety that is one hundred and twenty-five (125) percent of the surety amount. The
final type of surety, and the associated time frame, shall be determined by the Town's legal
counsel based on input from Town staff. No Building Permits for any lot or dwelling unit in the
subdivision shall be issued until this bond has been duly established.
H. Standards for Open Space areas:
1. For purposes of the Planning Board's review of Residential Open Space Subdivisions, usable
open space shall mean land that can reasonably be accessed and utilized by persons owning
individual lots in the subdivision. The land shall be capable of practically functioning as
recreational areas including but not limited to uses such as trails or other appropriate activities.
2. Open space portions of the project shall have the following traits as determined by the Planning
Board:
a. be as continuous as possible.
b. contain an area that is sufficiently large to serve appropriate recreational purposes.
c. be suitably configured to be utilized for appropriate recreational purposes.
d. be located to allow for reasonable access by persons owning lots in the subdivision.
e. as appropriate, the natural topography shall allow for areas to be improved for recreational
purposes such as ballfields.
3. Open space shall be defined as lands permanently dedicated to one or more of the following
uses: agricultural, cultivation, grazing, gardening, forestry, natural resource conservation,
wetland protection, wildlife habitat, undeveloped park land, scenic preservation, outdoor
recreation or open space areas, including buffers, that are part of an integrated or interconnected
open space system.
4. The following areas shall be excluded from open space calculations:
a. Full width of all roads and right-of-way(s) necessary for vehicular access to individually
owned lots.
b. All areas of the subdivision that are to be individually owned specifically including all lots
utilized for single family dwellings.
c. Areas devoted to common wastewater disposal field(s).
5. Lands dedicated by easement for use as recreation or park facilities open to the public or as
private facilities for use by owners of lots in the subdivision shall be included in the open space
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 56
and counted toward the open space requirement. Lands occupied by impervious paths or similar
for common recreational facilities, not including tennis courts or buildings, may be counted as
open space provided that such impervious surfaces constitute no more than five percent (5%) of
the total required open space.
I. Configuration and Location of Open Space:
1. The configuration of the open space shall strive to preserve areas of the parcel that are
environmentally sensitive or contain unique natural areas.
2. To the maximum extent possible, the open space shall be comprised of large unbroken tracts and
the Planning Board shall discourage areas of open space connected together by narrow strips of
land.
3. All lots in the Open Space Subdivision shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of the
commonly owned open space to ensure practicable access.
4. The Planning Board shall ensure that the configuration, location, and size of the minimum
required contiguous usable open space to have direct access immediately adjacent to the road
that is required in line #6 of the Dimensional Table in Section 401.13.13.B.1 of this Ordinance
will meet the needs of the subdivision as well as possible subsequent phases of the project. The
purpose of this minimum required contiguous usable open space area is to reserve a readilyaccessed
area immediately adjacent to the road within the subdivision to be utilized by those
families living in the project to afford a host of purposes including a gathering location, construct
a playground, have a commonly used field, etc.
5. When reviewing the location(s) of proposed road(s), lots, and open space, the Planning Board
shall consider the following criteria and purposes:
a. The overall layout of the project including the location of individually owned lots, roads, and
configuration of open space shall promote optimal locations designed to minimize adverse
effects on surrounding properties.
b. Individual lots, building envelopes, buildings, and streets designed to minimize the alteration
of natural site features to be preserved.
c. The usability of open space intended for recreation or public use determined by the size,
shape, topographic and location requirements of the particular purpose proposed for the site.
d. Consider current or planned uses for abutting parcels adjacent to the subdivision and ensure
that the layout of the subdivision augments these uses to the maximum extent practicable.
e. Open space including irreplaceable natural features located on the tract such as stream beds
and setbacks, significant stands of trees, individual trees of significant size, and rock
outcroppings.
f. Open space intended for recreation or public use shall be easily accessible to pedestrians.
g. The suitability of open space intended for scenic value and purposes to achieve the best
possible relationship between development and the land.
h. Maximize connections to recreational resources and facilities adjacent to the parcel being
subdivided.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 57
i. To the maximum extent practically feasible, preserve habitat functionally necessary for
wildlife.
J. Ownership & Use of Open Space:
1. The fee ownership of the minimum required open space shall be either the Homeowners
Association or remain fractional by the lot owners in the subdivision. The use of the open space
shall be consistent with applicable Town standards specifically including those in this
Subdivision Ordinance. The face of the final recorded plan shall contain a note regarding this
requirement.
2. The developer or the subsequent homeowners association may choose to grant a conservation
easement to the Town of Gray or an association/ land trust legally constituted for conservation
purposes.
3. In the event that the developer chooses to include open space in excess of that required, that extra
portion is not required to be fractionally owned by the lot owners in the subdivision.
4. Subject to obtaining the necessary permits, open space shall be usable by persons owning lots in
the Residential Open Space Subdivision for the following purposes:
a. Passive recreation.
b. Construction/use of recreational trails.
c. Construction /use of ball fields.
d. Construction of small accessory structures related to allowed uses.
e. Playground.
f. Community park/open space.
5. In no event shall the open space be utilized for any commercial purpose, specifically including
recreation, other than the periodic timber harvesting in accordance with a plan compiled by a
qualified professional designed to re-establish and maintain the Open Space and perimeter
buffer.
6. The Homeowners association documents must contain clear language specifying that it is
responsible for the maintenance of the common open space in accordance with these standards.
7. The following shall be required for the formation of a community association consisting of the
residents or owners of the development:
a. The formation and incorporation by the developer of one or more appropriate community
associations shall be required prior to final approval;
b. Covenants for mandatory membership in the association(s) setting forth the owners' rights,
interests, and privileges in the association(s) and the common land shall be approved by the
Planning Board and the necessary language included in the deed, not by reference, for each
lot;
c. The community association(s) shall have the responsibility of maintaining the open space and
operating and maintaining recreational facilities and lands;
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 58
d. If deemed necessary by the association(s), the association(s) shall levy charges against all
property owners to defray the expenses connected with the maintenance of the open space
and recreational facilities and lands;
e. The developer shall maintain control of such open space and be responsible for its
maintenance until development sufficient to support the association(s) has taken place.
401.13.14 – COMPLIANCE WITH TIMBER HARVESTING RULES.
The Board shall ascertain that any timber harvested on the parcel being subdivided, has been harvested
in compliance with rules adopted pursuant to Title 12, M.R.S.A section 8869, subsection 14. If a
violation of rules adopted by the Maine Forest Service to substantially eliminate liquidation harvesting
has occurred, the Planning Board must determine prior to granting approval for the subdivision that 5
years have elapsed from the date the landowner under whose ownership the harvest occurred acquired
the parcel. The Planning Board may request technical assistance from the Department of Conservation,
Bureau of Forestry to determine whether a rule violation has occurred, or the Board may accept a
determination certified by a forester licensed pursuant to Title 32, chapter 76. If the Bureau agrees to
provide assistance, it shall make a finding and determination as to whether a rule violation has occurred.
If the Bureau notifies the Planning Board that it will not provide assistance, the Board may require a
subdivision applicant to provide a determination certified by a licensed forester. For the purposes of this
subsection, "liquidation harvesting" has the same meaning as in Title 12, M.R.S.A section 8868,
subsection 6 and "parcel" means a contiguous area within one municipality owned by one person or a
group of persons in common or joint ownership.
401.13.15 – TRAFFIC CONDITIONS AND STREETS
A. General Goals
The Planning Board shall review the potential internal and external traffic impacts of all proposed
subdivisions in order to ensure that:
1. The subdivision transportation system provides safeguards against hazards to vehicles, bicyclists
and pedestrians in interior subdivision streets and access connections to external streets;
2. The subdivision transportation system is designed to avoid traffic congestion on any street;
3. The subdivision transportation system provides safe and convenient circulation for vehicles,
bicyclists and pedestrians on interior subdivision streets and access connections to external
streets;
4. The subdivision transportation system is designed to be compatible with the estimated Average
Annual Daily Traffic of the street, the land uses accommodated by the street, and the lot density
of the street; and
5. The subdivision transportation system will reflect the natural and built setting of the proposed
subdivision site.
B. General Access Standards.
All subdivision accesses connecting with external streets shall meet the following standards:
1. Accesses connecting to any state or state-aid highway shall meet the minimum access permitting
requirements of the Maine Department of Transportation “Highway Driveway and Entrance
Rules”
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 59
2. Accesses that are expected to carry more than 100 passenger vehicle equivalent trips in the peak
hour shall meet the minimum access permitting requirements of the Maine Department of
Transportation “Rules and Regulations Pertaining to Traffic Movement Permits.”
3. The street giving access to the subdivision and neighboring streets and intersections which can
be expected to carry traffic generated by the subdivision shall have the capacity or be suitably
improved to accommodate that traffic and avoid unreasonable congestion. No subdivision shall
reduce the Level of Service (LOS) of streets or intersections neighboring the subdivision to a
LOS of “E” or below, unless:
a. The comprehensive plan has indicated that Levels of Service "E" or "F" are acceptable for
that street or intersection; or
b. The level of service of the road or intersection will be raised to D or above through road or
intersection improvements and/or by transportation demand management techniques; or
c. The applicant provides evidence that it is not possible to raise the level of service of the road
or intersection to D or above by road or intersection improvements or by transportation
demand management techniques, but improvements will be made or transportation demand
management techniques will be used such that the proposed development will not increase
delay at a signalized or unsignalized intersection, or otherwise worsen the operational
condition of the road or intersection in the horizon year; or
d. Improvements cannot reasonably be made because the road or intersection is located in Gray
Village or because implementation of the improvements will adversely affect a historic site
as defined in 06-096 CMR 375(11) (Preservation of Historic Sites) and transportation
demand management techniques will be implemented to the fullest extent practical; or
e. The development is located in a designated growth area, in which case the applicant shall be
entitled to an exception from the level of service mitigation requirements set forth under the
General Standards in this Section. This exception applies even if part or all of the traffic
impacts of the proposed development will occur outside the boundaries of the designated
growth area. This exception does not exempt the development from meeting safety
standards, and greater mitigation measures may be required than otherwise provided in this
subsection if needed to address safety issues; or
f. In the case of unsignalized intersections, if traffic with the development in place would not
meet the warrant criteria for signalization or turning lanes, as set forth in the Federal
Highway Administration's "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices," (1988), then the
Planning Board upon consultation with the Town Engineer may reduce the mitigation
requirement for those measures so long as the resulting traffic conditions provide for safe
traffic movement.
4. Accesses to non-residential subdivisions or to multifamily developments shall be designed to
avoid queuing of entering vehicles on any street. The need for left turn storage treatment shall be
evaluated for the subdivision using the guidelines set forth in the Maine DOT Highway Design
Guide and standard practices of the Maine DOT.
C. General Internal Subdivision Street Standards [Adopted Dec 7, 2010]
All internal subdivision streets shall meet the following minimum standards.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 60
1. The street or street system of the proposed subdivision shall be designed to coordinate with
existing, proposed, and planned streets. Wherever a proposed development abuts unplatted land
or a future development phase of the same development, the street right of way shall be extended
to the property line as deemed necessary by the Planning Board with input from the Town
Planner and Town Engineer to provide access to abutting properties or to logically extend the
street system. If possible, local streets in the subdivision shall connect with surrounding streets
to permit convenient movement of traffic between residential neighborhoods, to reduce service
vehicle mileage, to permit looping of utilities, and/or facilitate emergency access and evacuation,
but such connections should not have the effect of encouraging the use of such streets by
substantial through traffic unless the street is designed for such purpose.
2. As determined by traffic engineering studies performed by qualified professionals, where
necessary to safeguard against off-site hazards to vehicle drivers, bicyclists and pedestrians
and/or to avoid traffic congestion, the Planning Board with input from the Town Engineer may
require turning lanes, traffic directional islands, frontage roads, sidewalks, bike lanes, and traffic
controls within the subdivision and/or on existing public streets that are impacted by the
development.
3. Street Names and Signs Lighting.
Streets which join and are in alignment with streets of abutting or neighboring properties shall
bear the same name. Street names shall not continue beyond a new intersection unless the street
is a direct continuation of that street through the intersection with no turning movements. Names
of new streets shall not duplicate, nor bear phonetic resemblance to the names of existing streets
within the municipality, and shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Board based on
input of the Department of Public Safety. No street name shall be the common given name of a
person. The developer shall either install street name, traffic safety and control signs meeting
municipal specifications or reimburse the municipality for the costs of their installation.
4. Street Lighting.
Street lights meeting Central Maine Power Company standards shall be installed at all
intersections and dead end turnarounds.
5. During street construction, the entire right of way shall not be cleared unless clearing is
necessary for utilities, drainage or other infrastructure necessities, or to remove trees that will
shade pavement in winter. Following street construction, the developer or contractor shall
conduct a thorough clean-up of stumps and other debris from the entire right of way created
during the street construction process. If on-site disposal of the stumps and debris is proposed,
the disposal site shall be indicated on the plan, and be suitably covered with fill and topsoil,
limed, fertilized, and seeded.
401.13.16 – SPECIFIC ACCESS AND STREET DESIGN STANDARDS [ADOPTED DEC 7, 2010]
A. Access Control.
1. To the maximum extent possible, all subdivision accesses shall be constructed perpendicular to
the external street providing access to the subdivision. No subdivision access shall intersect the
external street at an angle of less than seventy-five (75°) degrees based upon a showing that the
perpendicular alignment is not possible. In such cases the right of way shall be curved to achieve
a perpendicular alignment at the intersection for a distance of seventy-five (75 ft.) feet.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 61
2. Where a major subdivision abuts an arterial or major collector street (all numbered State routes
in Gray), no lot may have vehicular access directly onto the arterial or collector street. Minor
subdivisions on arterials and major collectors shall have shared driveways subject to the
requirements of the Street Ordinance and MDOT permitting requirements. Access restrictions
on such lots shall be noted on the subdivision plan and in the deeds.
3. Where a lot has frontage on two or more streets, the access to the lot shall be provided to the lot
across the frontage and to the street where there is lesser potential for traffic congestion and for
hazards to traffic and pedestrians. This restriction shall appear as a note on the subdivision plan
and as a deed restriction to the affected lots. In cases where creating an access to a lesser
traveled way is problematic, the Planning Board, with input from the Town Engineer, may allow
an access on the higher volume street if the access does not significantly detract from public
safety. For accesses on higher volume streets, the Board shall consider the functional
classification of the external street, the length of frontage on the external street, the intensity of
traffic generated by the proposed subdivision, the geography along the frontage of the public
way with lesser potential for traffic, and the distance to the public way with lesser potential for
traffic.
4. Cross (four-corner) street intersections shall be aligned on opposite sides of the through street. If
it is not possible to align the intersecting streets, a distance of at least two hundred (200’) feet
shall be maintained between centerlines of offset intersecting streets and between new
intersections on the same side of a street. This intersection alignment rule shall apply to both
external and internal intersections.
5. The minimum centerline curve radius shall be two hundred (200’) feet. For road sections with
greater than five (5%) percent grade, the centerline radius shall be increased by fifty (50’) feet
for every one (1%) increase in grade above five (5%).
6. Minimum Sight Distance Standards
a. Minimum sight distance requirements for all subdivision accesses connecting to external
streets shall be contingent on the posted speed of the external street connecting to the
subdivision access. On roads that are designated by the Maine Department of Transportation
as Mobility or Retrograde Arterials, the third column in Table 13.16-1 shall apply.
TABLE 13.16-1 REQUIRED ROAD ACCESS SAFE SIGHT DISTANCES
Posted Speed
(MPH)
Sight Distance
(Feet)
Mobility Sight Distance1
(Feet)
20 155 225
25 200 300
30 250 380
35 305 480
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 62
40 360 580
45 425 710
50 495 840
55 & over 570 990
1 Mobility or Retrograde Arterials are critical travel corridors identified by MDOT. In Gray, the only such
designated corridor is Route 26 from Cumberland through to New Gloucester.
b. The measurement of sight line distances shall be from a point at a distance of ten (10) feet
from the edge of the travel way at a height of three and one half (3.5) feet above the level of
the surface of the travel way to the top of an object four and one quarter (4.25) feet above the
surface of the travel way in the center of the approach lane.
c. Where sight line distances cannot be met at proposed new intersections, portions of the right
of way as well as portions of abutting lots under the control of the applicant may be cleared
of all growth (except isolated trees) and obstructions to achieve required sight distances. The
applicant shall provide documentation that areas cleared to improve sight distances will be
maintained in that condition. If approved by the Town Engineer and Public Works Director,
the grade of the approach road may be modified to achieve improved visibility.
7. Proposed Subdivisions on Existing Substandard Roads [Adopted 5-17-2011]
When a proposed subdivision is to be located on an existing road, whether publicly or privately
owned, not meeting the design and construction standards of Table 401.13.16-2, the existing
road shall be upgraded per the following requirements:
a. The existing road shall be upgraded to meet the design requirements for a Rural Public
Easement street from the intersection of the new subdivision street(s) with the existing road
to the point where a paved public road provides access. The limit of dwelling units shall not
apply to the existing substandard road if it is upgraded.
b. The applicant for subdivision shall prepare plans for the road improvements meeting the
requirements of Section 401.13.16 B.1.a. through c.
c. The existing substandard road shall be upgraded to meet the drainage requirements of
Section 401.13.16 B.3,
d. Construction improvements on the existing road shall meet the standards of Section
401.13.16 C. 2 through 5 for road base and paving specifications.
e. The Planning Board may grant waivers per the criteria of Section 401.12.2 of the
construction standards for spot locations on the existing road per recommendations of the
Town Engineer provided that the overall condition of the substandard road is brought up to
the ordinance standards.
B. Street Design Standards
1. General Requirements
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 63
a. The Planning Board shall not approve any subdivision plan unless proposed streets are
designed in accordance with the specifications contained in these regulations. Approval of
the final plan by the Board shall not be deemed to constitute or be evidence of acceptance by
the municipality of any street or easement (see Section 401.13.16 2. f below).
b. Applicants shall submit to the Planning Board, as part of the preliminary plan, detailed
construction drawings showing a plan view, profile, and typical cross-section of the proposed
streets. The plan view shall be at a scale of one inch equals no more than fifty feet. The
vertical scale of the profile shall be one inch equals no more than five feet. The plans shall
include the following information:
(i) Date, scale, and north point, indicating magnetic or true.
(ii) Intersections of the proposed street with existing streets.
(iii) Intersections of other existing or proposed streets within 300 feet of proposed
intersections.
(iv) Roadway and right-of-way limits including edge of pavement or aggregate base, edge
of shoulder, clear zone, sidewalks, and curbs.
(v) Kind, size, location, material, profile and cross-section of all existing and proposed
drainage structures and their location with respect to the existing natural waterways or
drainage systems that could be affected by the proposed development, and proposed
drainage ways and stormwater management systems.
(vi) Complete curve data shall be indicated for all horizontal and vertical curves.
(vii) Turning radii at all intersections.
(viii) Centerline gradients.
(ix) Size, type, vertical clearance and locations of all existing and proposed overhead and
underground utilities, to include but not be limited to water, electricity, telephone,
lighting, and cable television.
(x) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan showing interim and final control
provisions.
(xi) For streets that are to be located within the watershed of a great pond (Little Sebago
Lake, Crystal Lake, or Forest Lake), a phosphorous impact plan in conformance with
the recommendations presented in Phosphorous Control in Lake Watersheds published
by Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
c. Upon receipt of plans for a proposed street the Planning Board shall forward one copy to
Public Works Director, and the Town Engineer for review and comment. Plans for streets
which are not proposed to be accepted by the municipality shall be sent to the Town Engineer
for review and comment.
d. Where the applicant proposes improvements within existing public streets, the proposed
design and construction details shall be approved in writing by the Public Works Director or
the Maine Department of Transportation, as appropriate.
e. Private Roads.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 64
(i) Where the subdivision streets are to remain private roads, the following words shall
appear on the recorded plan:
“All roads in this subdivision shall remain private roads to be maintained by the
developer or the lot owners and shall not be accepted or maintained by the Town except
for roads that meet requirements for winter maintenance under a public easement.”
(ii) A road maintenance agreement or homeowners’ association framework, prepared by the
applicant’s attorney and approved by the Town Attorney shall be recorded with the deed
of each property to be served by a common private road. The agreement or association
framework shall provide for a method to initiate and finance a private road and maintain
that road in good condition, and a method of apportioning maintenance costs to current
and future users.
2. Street Design
a. These design standards shall control the roadway, shoulders, clear zones, curbs, sidewalks,
drainage systems, culverts, and other appurtenances associated with the street, and shall be
met by all streets within a subdivision, unless waivers are granted by the Planning Board with
input of the Town Engineer and in keeping with the waiver criteria of Article 12.
b. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is
placed with the municipality.
c. All streets in approved residential subdivisions shall meet the variable design standards of
Table 13.16-2 (Commercial and multi-family subdivision access drives shall meet the
requirements of Chapter 402.10.11 for site plan review).
d. All residential subdivision streets in the Medium Density (MD) and Village Center (VC)
Zoning Districts shall meet the standards for Village Public Streets or Sub-collector streets.
Subdivision streets in other zoning districts shall meet the standards for Local Minor Street,
Rural Public Easement, Rural Public Street, or Sub-collector based on the number of
dwelling units served by the street.
e. In determining the classification of streets where a loop configuration is formed and vehicles
have multiple access options, the classification should be based on an analysis of routes and
destinations on individual road segments rather than the full street length. Starting at an
intersection with an existing street, proposed new streets shall meet the highest applicable
classification of Table 401.13.16-2 based on the total number of dwelling units expected to
travel that street or street segment. At each internal intersection, the street classification shall
be reduced to reflect the number of dwelling units served.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 65
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 66
1 Where road grading extends beyond the specified right of way width, the right of way shall be widened at that location to
include the areas of extended grading
2 Increase to 1 percent grade with open drainage system
3 Road sections of less than 500 feet length can add 2 percent to the maximum grade provided that such sections are separated
by a minimum distance of 500 feet and do exceed the limitations of Section 401.13.16.A.5 for horizontal curvature of the
road.
4 Streets serving more than 100 homes shall meet the sub-collector standards with four (4 in) inch pavement per Section
401.13.16 C.2.
5 Upgrades of existing roads under Section 401.13.16.7 may be done on a “three-rod road” with a right
of way measuring 49.5 feet. [Adopted 5-17-2011]
f. Dead End Streets
(i) In addition to the design standards in Table 401.13.16-2, dead-end streets shall be
constructed to provide a cul-de-sac (circular) turnaround with a travel lane and width
equal to the minimum width required for the internal subdivision street.
(ii) The maximum length of a dead end street shall be three thousand (3000 ft) feet.
C. TABLE 401.13.16-2
ITEM Sub-collector
Streets
Village Public
Street
Rural Public
Street
Rural Public
Easement Street
Minor Rural
Street
A. Minimum width right of way1 60 ft 60 ft 50 ft 50 ft5 50 ft
B. Minimum grade .5 percent2 .5 percent2 1 percent 1 percent 1 percent
C. Maximum grade 8 percent 8 percent 10 percent 10 percent3 10 percent3
D. Maximum grade within 75 ft of
intersection
3 percent 3 percent 3 percent 3 percent 3 percent
E. Width of shoulders on each
side
4 ft (paved) 4 ft (paved) 4 ft (paved) 2 ft (gravel) 2 ft (gravel)
F. Minimum travel way width 22 ft 20 ft 20 ft 18 ft 16 ft
G. Aggregate sub-base course
gravel
15 inches 15 inches 15 inches 15 inches 15 inches
H. Aggregate upper base
crushed gravel
3 inches 3 inches 3 inches 3 inches 3 inches
I. Bituminous paving 3-1/4 inches 3-1/4 inches 3-1/4 inches 3-1/4 inches
J. Sidewalks (one side min.):
Minimum width
Aggregate sub-base course
gravel
Aggregate upper base
crushed gravel
Bituminous paving
5 ft
8 inches
2 inches
2 inches
5 ft
8 inches
2 inches
2 inches
K. Minimum curb radii:
90 degree intersections
Less than 90 degrees
40 ft
40 ft
25 ft
30 ft
25 ft
30 ft
15 ft
20 ft
15 ft
20 ft
L. Minimum dwelling units 51 4 26 11 2
M. Maximum dwelling units 1004 50 50 25 10
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 67
(iii) A turn around shall be provided for every fifteen hundred (1500 ft) feet of dead end
road.
(iv) A minimum of one (1) paper street following the interconnection criteria of Section
401.13.15. C. 1. shall be provided for every fifteen hundred (1500 ft) feet of dead end
road.
(v) The length of a dead end street shall be measured from the centerline of the street it
accesses to the center of the turnaround.
(vi) The maximum number of homes on a dead end street shall be twenty-five (25).
(vii) The minimum outside travel way radius for cul-de-sac turnarounds shall be forty-two
(42 ft) feet and the minimum right of way radius shall be sixty (60 ft) feet.
(viii) Where the cul-de-sac is in a wooded area prior to development, a stand of trees shall be
maintained within the center of the cul-de-sac, or be replanted in the event that safe and
healthy retention of the trees is not feasible.
(ix) The Planning Board shall require the reservation of a twenty (20 ft) foot easement in
line with the street to provide continuation of pedestrian traffic or utilities to the next
street. The Board may also require the reservation of a right-of-way easement equal to
the right of way width of the internal subdivision street in line with the street to provide
continuation of the road where future subdivision is possible.
(x) A T-turn around is permissible for residential subdivisions carrying an ADT of one
hundred (100 ft) or less. The turnaround area easement shall be located fifty (50 ft) feet
from the street terminus and shall have a width equal to the street right of way width, a
five (5 ft) foot lot line radius, and a total depth of fifty (50 ft) feet. The travel way of
the turnaround shall be the same width as the street it serves and be forty (40’) feet in
depth, and shall have a curb radius of fifteen (15 ft) feet. The plan shall contain a note
indicating that the turnaround easement area will be vacated and returned to the lot that
contains it in the event the street is extended in the future.
(xi) All driveways located on T-turnarounds shall be located so as to facilitate plowing and
storage of snow in accordance with the requirements of Section 401.13.17 E.
g. Street classifications and public street acceptance policies.
(i) Sub-collectors, Village Public Streets, and Rural Public Streets generally are designed for
full public ownership and maintenance. Sub-collectors and Rural Public Streets carry
high volumes of traffic and/or provide through connections between existing streets that
improve traffic flows through the community.
(ii) Rural Public Easement Streets are designed for public winter maintenance under the
Town’s private road public easement policy. Minor Rural Streets are designed for full
private ownership and maintenance under a maintenance agreement or homeowners’
association framework.
(iii) All new public streets/easements shall not be isolated from existing public
streets/easements by intervening private streets. New public streets/public easements
must either intersect existing public streets/easements or there shall be a continuous path
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 68
from new public street/easements through other new public streets to one or more
existing public streets.
(iv) All decisions to accept public ownership or public easements, however, are subject to the
discretionary authority of the Town Council, and all proposed streets shall be covered by
a private maintenance agreement or homeowners’ association framework until they are
accepted by the Town. Upon receiving preliminary subdivision approval, applicants are
required to seek indication of whether the Town Council is willing to accept public
ownership of fee interests or public easements.
3. Stormwater Design Standards
a. In order to drain stormwater from the surface of roadways, streets shall be crowned such that
the pavement slopes from the centerline to the shoulder at a pitch of ¼ inch per foot. For
gravel roads, the crown pitch shall be increased to ½ inch per foot.
b. No storm water shall be permitted to drain across a street or across an intersection.
c. An adequate piped storm drainage system including appurtenances such as catch basins and
manholes shall be provided for proper drainage of storm water collected in Sub-collector and
Village Public Streets for sides with esplanades and sidewalks. Appropriate conveyances for
outlets to drainage systems must be provided. A minimum easement width of thirty (30 ft)
feet is required along the centerline of any pipe system or drainage course. If ponding will
occur at culvert inlets or if permanent erosion control measures extend outside of the right of
way, then easements on abutting property are required.
d. All storm water systems for streets shall be designed to meet the criteria of a twenty-five (25-
yr) year storm based on rainfall data from the National Weather Service in Gray. Road
culverts shall be designed to meet the criteria for a fifty (50-yr) year storm with the low point
in the road profile treated to pass storm flows in excess of a 50-year storm without washing
out the street. Road culverts shall be aligned to maintain the direction of natural drainage
courses rather than causing such drainage to change directions. Flows shall be computed by a
method acceptable to the Town Engineer. Design computations of flows shall be submitted
for approval.
e. The minimum driveway culvert size shall be fifteen (15 in) inches. Larger culverts may be
required in some locations based on a stormwater management analysis and plan. Culvert
inlets and outlets shall be properly treated with erosion control measures.
f. Existing downstream drainage facilities shall be studied to determine the effect of
development on downstream drainage. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Town Engineer that the storm drainage will not, in any way, overload existing
downstream drainage systems, including any modifications that may be needed to those
downstream systems to prevent erosion and/or flooding.
g. All subdivision streets that lack a piped drainage system shall convey storm water in open
ditches or swales meeting the standards and specifications of this ordinance.
h. All sideslopes of a street shall be graded at a maximum slope of three (3 ft) feet horizontal to
one (1 ft) foot vertical from the shoulder to the ditch bottom. Sideslope steepness may be
increased to minimize impacts on wetlands or other natural features provided that guardrail
and erosion control measures are installed to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 69
i. All sideslopes shall be finished with loam or other suitable mixture to a minimum compacted
depth of four (4 in) inches and seeded or planted as appropriate.
j. The final grade level of ditch bottoms shall be a minimum of six (6 in) inches below the
subgrade level of the street. The sub-base course gravel shall taper and pitch from the travel
way and street shoulders to the ditch base for proper drainage of the road base. The base of
the ditch shall be a minimum of two (2 ft) feet in width.
k. All ditch backslopes shall be graded at a maximum slope of two (2 ft) feet horizontal to one
(1 ft) foot vertical. All backslopes shall be finished with loam or other suitable mixture to a
minimum compacted depth of four (4 in) inches and seeded or planted as appropriate.
Erosion control mesh shall be installed on all slopes that are steeper than one (1 ft) foot
horizontal to three (3 ft) feet vertical.
l. Where a cut results in exposed ledge, a side slope no steeper than one (1 ft) foot horizontal to
four (4 ft) feet vertical is permitted.
4. Closed Drainage Construction Materials & Standards
a. Pipes: All drainage piping shall be of plastic or reinforced concrete materials in accordance
with Maine Department of Transportation Standard Specifications.
b. Manholes: Manholes shall be of precast concrete section construction. Precast sections shall
meet the requirements of ASTM Designation C-478. Cones shall be truncated. Castings
shall be of cast iron meeting Town of Gray standards. Brick inverts shall be shaped to the
crown of the pipe for sizes up to eighteen (18) inches, and to spring line for larger pipes.
c. Catch Basins: Catch Basins shall be of precast concrete construction. Castings shall be
square cast iron as required for the particular inlet condition with the gratings perpendicular
to the curb line. All catch basins shall be provided with a Type 1 curb face inlet and
transition stones if necessary.
d. All trenching shall be accomplished in accordance with all appropriate Federal and State
safety requirements.
e. Maximum trench width at the pipe crown shall be the outside diameter of the pipe plus two
(2) feet.
f. Pipe shall be bedded in a granular material with a minimum depth of six (6 in) inches below
the bottom of the pipe and extending to six (6 in) inches above the top of the pipe.
g. Drain alignment shall be straight in both horizontal and vertical alignment.
h. Manholes shall be provided at all changes in vertical and horizontal alignment, and at all
junctions. On straight runs, manholes shall be placed at intervals of no more than threehundred
(300 ft) feet.
i. Catch basin leads shall enter the drainage system only at manholes. The difference in
elevation between the inverts of the lead and the main drain shall not exceed twelve (12 in)
inches.
j. All drain outlets shall be riprapped to prevent erosion. Facilities for energy dissipation shall
be provided (e.g., plunge pools).
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 70
k. When used, underdrains shall be laid with perforation down with a backfill of three-quarter
(3/4 in) inch crushed stone wrapped in a filter fabric envelope.
5. Curbing Standards
a. Curbs shall be installed for stormwater purposes and/or to protect the pavement edge from
unraveling along parking lanes or in very intensive developments where heavy use may
erode the planted area at the edge of the pavement. Curbs for stormwater management shall
be contingent on the stormwater design standards specified in Sections 401.13.12 and
401.13.16.A.3.d above.
b. Curbing shall be in accordance with Section 609 of the Maine Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications except as follows:
(i) Curbing shall be limited to Type 1 (granite stone curbing) and Type 3 (bituminous
concrete curbing), or other acceptable materials.
(ii) Bituminous concrete curbing, or other acceptable material, shall have a minimum reveal
of six (6 in) inches.
(iii) All curb radii will be of Type 1 (granite stone curbing).
(iv) All curbing on roads proposed for full public ownership and maintenance (paving and
plowing) shall be vertical or sloped Type 1 (granite stone curbing).
C. Street Construction Standards
All construction shall comply with the latest revision of the Maine Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications. In the event of a conflict between the MDOT Standard Specifications and
this Chapter, the more stringent standards shall apply.
1. Roadway Preparation:
a. Before any clearing has started on the right-of-way, the center line and side lines of the new
road shall be staked or flagged at fifty (50 ft) foot intervals for curved sections and one
hundred (100 ft) foot intervals for straight sections. The centerline of the roadway shall be
the centerline of the right-of-way.
b. Before grading is started, the entire area within the right-of-way necessary for traveled way,
shoulders, clear zones, sidewalks, drainage-ways, and utilities shall be cleared of all stumps,
roots, and brush. All shallow ledge, large boulders and tree stumps shall be removed from
the cleared area.
c. All organic materials, boulders, or other deleterious material shall be removed below the
subgrade of the roadway. On soils which have been identified by the Town Engineer as not
suitable for roadways, a Maine Department of Transportation approved stabilization
geotextile shall be used (MDOT Standard Specifications Section 203).
d. All underground utilities shall be installed prior to paving to avoid cuts in the pavement.
Building storm drains and water service connections shall be installed to the edge of the
right-of-way prior to paving.
2. Bases and Pavement Thicknesses
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 71
The minimum thickness of material after compaction shall meet the specifications in Table
13.16-3:
Table 13.16-3
Minimum Street Materials Thicknesses
Street Materials Thickness Standards Subcollector
Aggregate Subbase Course
Without base gravel 18 inch
With base gravel 15 inches
Crushed Aggregate Base Course
(if necessary)
3 inches
Hot Bituminous Pavement
Total Thickness 3 ¼ inches 4 inches
Surface Course (9 mm) 1 ¼ inches 1 ½ inches
Base Course (19 mm) 2 inches 2 ½ inches
Surface Gravel (if permissible) 3 inches
3. Base/Subbase Screening.
a. The Aggregate subbase course shall be sand or gravel of hard durable particles free from
vegetative matter, lumps or balls of clay and other deleterious substances. The gradation of
the part that passes a three inch square mesh sieve shall meet the screening requirements of
Table 13.16-4. Aggregate for the subbase shall contain no particles of rock exceeding six
inches in any dimension.
b. If the Aggregate Subbase Course is found to be not fine-gradable because of larger stones,
then a minimum of three inches of Aggregate Base Course shall be placed on top of the
subbase course. The Aggregate Base Course shall be screened or crushed gravel of hard
durable particles free from vegetative matter, lumps or balls of clay and other deleterious
substances. The gradation of the part that passes a three inch square mesh sieve shall meet
the grading requirements of Table 13.16-5. Aggregate for the base shall contain no particles
of rock exceeding two inches in any dimension.
Table 13.16-4
Aggregate Subbase Grading Requirements
Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing
Square Mesh
1/4 inch 25-70%
No. 40 0-30%
No. 200 0-30%
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 72
4. Pavement Specifications
All pavement installations shall meet the specifications of the Maine Department of
Transportation Standards and Specifications Section 401 for Hot Mix Asphalt (HMA).
5. Pavement Joints
Where pavement joins an existing pavement, the existing pavement shall be cut along a smooth
line and form a neat, even, vertical joint.
D. Street Survey Monument Standards
1. Stone survey marker monuments with metal detection shall be set at all street corners, angle
points. and all points of curvature in each street.
2. Each survey marker shall be set with the top between six (6 in) and twelve (12 in) inches above
the finished grade except that the top shall be flush with the finished grade wherever it is located
in an area to be plowed for removal of snow or is to be pavement, lawn, or a decorative planting
area.
3. The preferred material for all lot corner markers shall be rebar five-eighths (5/8 in) inch in
diameter. Alternate acceptable materials for lot corner markers shall be iron pipe one (1 in) inch
in diameter and stone monuments four (4 in) inches square.
4. All monuments are to be not less than thirty-six (36 in) inches in total length unless they are
drilled at least three (3 in) inches into solid ledge or rock.
5. All monuments shall have the Surveyor’s identification suitably attached.
E. Sidewalks.
The Planning Board may require sidewalks along the project frontage and to off-site destinations in
any situation where the proximity of the proposed subdivision to existing or proposed neighborhood
businesses, schools, community facilities, or other pedestrian destinations suggest sidewalks will be
needed. The Planning Board shall determine if sidewalks will be installed on one side or both sides
of the internal street(s).
1. Location.
Sidewalks may be located adjacent to the curb or shall be located a minimum of five (5’) feet
from the curb facing or edge of shoulder if the street is not curbed.
2. Bituminous Sidewalks.
a. The “subbase” aggregate course shall be no less than twelve inches thick after compaction.
Table 13.16-5
Grading Requirements
Sieve Designation Sieves Percentage by Weight Passing Square
Mesh
1/2 inch 45-70%
1/4 inch 30-55%
No. 40 0-20%
No. 200 0-5%
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 73
b. All pavement installations shall meet the specifications of the Maine Department of
Transportation Standards and Specifications Section 401 for Hot Mix Asphalt (HMA).
401.13.17 – DRIVEWAY DESIGN STANDARDS [ADOPTED MAY 18, 2010]
A. Proposed private driveways shall be located and designed in profile and grading to be suitable to
provide safe access to and from a property at all times for occupants, guests, and emergency vehicles
to all buildings and structures.
B. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all private driveways shall be
considered in their relation to existing or planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public
convenience and safety, their appropriate relation to the proposed use of land, and to minimize
conflict with the flow of traffic. Grades of private driveways shall conform in general to the terrain
and as closely as possible to the original topography.
C. Where topographic or drainage conditions on proposed lots and building sites indicate the need for
steep driveway access and/or potential impacts on wetlands or other natural features, the Planning
Board may require that the driveways be designed by the project engineer and shown on the
subdivision plans. Changes to those driveway designs are allowed subject to the submission of
alternative engineering specifications approved as part of a driveway permit and will not require
amendment of the subdivision plan if approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
D. Private driveways shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from the tangent point of the travel
way edge radius of any intersection of streets.
E. Private driveways on street end turnarounds shall be located so as not to interfere with snow storage
requirements for winter maintenance. Locations of such driveways are subject to review and
approval by the Public Works Director.
F. When a corner lot is bounded by streets of two different classifications, private driveways to the
corner lot shall gain access from the street of lower classification unless, in the opinion of the Town
Engineer, there is good reason to do otherwise (e.g., on the higher classification road the driveway
can be located more distant from the intersection or sight distances are improved).
G. There shall be a minimum turning radius of twenty (20) feet at the intersection of a private driveway
with the street. If necessary, the width of the travel way of the driveway shall be increased in the
vicinity of the intersection to provide for this turning radius.
H. Private driveways shall be located so that the edge of the shoulder closest to a property line is at least
ten (10) feet from that property line unless the following conditions are met for a driveway shared
between abutting properties:
1. The driveway shall have a minimum travel way width of fourteen (14’) feet for the first twenty
five (25’) feet before dividing into separate driveways.
2. Deeded rights to the driveway shall be issued for all lots serviced by the common driveway and a
maintenance agreement specifying rights and responsibilities for its maintenance signed by the
parties shall be filed with the driveway permit application.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 74
401.13.18 – NET RESIDENTIAL AREA AND DENSITY
A. Applicability:
1. All Subdivisions shall be required to conform to the Net Residential Area (NRA) and Net
Residential Density (NRD) standards listed in this section 401.13.18 of the Subdivision
Ordinance.
2. The NRA and NRD standards utilize the drainage classification of the soils and other NRD
standards to calculate the maximum density. In order to accurately apply the soil drainage
classification standards to calculate the NRA/NRD, applicants for a subdivision shall complete
and submit the Soil Survey Requirements in 401.13.18.C in this section as part of the formal
submittal.
B. Definitions: For the purposes of calculating NRA/NRD for subdivisions, the following definitions
shall be applicable:
1. Developed Areas shall consist of one or more of the following:
a. Areas within right-of-ways where road(s) are intended to be constructed or may be
constructed in a future phase(s) of the development.
b. Areas utilized for the construction of stormwater control and treatment measures including
level lip spreaders, detention ponds, and areas adjacent to stormwater measures designed to
receive stormwater in sheetflow.
c. All portions of lots intended to be individually owned in a Residential Open Space
subdivision.
d. Portions of building envelopes for lots in a traditional subdivision as established on the face
of final signed recorded plan and supporting documentation.
e. Portions of a subdivision, including a Residential Open Space Subdivision, that are intended
to be utilized for the construction of recreational facilities involving drainage improvements,
leveling, filling, etc. such as for creating ballfields.
f. Portions of a Residential Open Space Subdivision intended to be utilized for the minimum
contiguous usable open space with immediate access to the roadway as required in Table
401.13.13.B.1 of this Subdivision Ordinance.
g. Portions of a Subdivision intended to be utilized for a common or shared subsurface
wastewater disposal field.
2. Forested Wetland: Land areas that are freshwater wetlands dominated by woody vegetation that
is six (6) meters or more or taller
3. Freshwater Wetland: Land below the upland edge of freshwater wetlands consisting of swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas, other than forested wetlands, which are inundated or saturated
by surface ground water at a frequency and for a duration sufficient to support, and which under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soils
4. Less Developed Areas shall consist of one or more of the following:
a. Areas within Residential Open Space Subdivisions intended to remain undeveloped.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 75
b. Commonly owned land utilized for non-intensive recreational purposes such as developing
trails, etc. as memorialized on the face of the final signed recorded plan.
c. Areas of a traditional subdivision to remain undeveloped and memorialized as such by one or
more of the following means as determined by the Planning Board based on
recommendations by Town Staff:
(i) on the face of the final signed recorded subdivision plan.
(ii) within the Homeowners/Lot owners association.
(iii) in the deeds for the appropriate lot(s).
(iv) demarcated on the land on the appropriate lot(s) with permanent markers and/or pins.
d. Portions of lots in a traditional subdivision that are part of an individually owned lot that are
not part of the established building envelope as shown on the face of final signed recorded
subdivision plan and clearly referenced within the respective deed(s).
5. Net Residential Area (NRA): The net area of a parcel or site that is generally suitable for
development in its natural state. The residential area shall be determined by subtracting
unsuitable and marginal areas from the gross land area as calculated in this Section 401.13.18 of
the Subdivision Ordinance.
6. Net Residential Density (NRD): Net residential density shall mean the number of dwelling units
allowed on a parcel or site after the unsuitable land is deducted and the minimum area per lot (or
dwelling unit in the case of multi-family) for the District is applied to the remaining land area.
C. Soil Survey Requirements:
1. The use of soil terms, drainage classification, terminology, and soil survey classification shall be
consistent with those accepted by the Maine Association of Professional Soil Scientists.
2. Applicants for any subdivision are required to provide information regarding on-site soils from a
Certified Soil Scientist (CSS) that document the on-site findings for the criteria established in
this Section 401.13.18.C. Soils information for the purposes of determining Net Residential
Density shall not be deemed acceptable if submitted by a Licensed Site Evaluator (LSE).
3. Soils information for the subdivision must be determined by one of the following methods:
a. High-intensity (Class A) soil survey delineating soil types with a minimum map unit size of
one-eighth (1/8th) of an acre may be required by the Planning Board as established in Section
401.7.4.A of this Subdivision Ordinance.
b. When a high-intensity soil survey is not required, Developed Areas of a Subdivision shall be
required to submit a field verified soil survey that maps the following information at the
respective inclusion size:
(i) Three (3) acre maximum inclusion size for soils of the following drainage classifications:
Excessively Drained, Somewhat Excessively Drained, Well Drained and Moderately
Well Drained.
(ii) One-half (1/2) acre maximum inclusion size for soils of the following drainage
classifications: Somewhat Poorly Drained, Poorly Drained, and Very Poorly Drained.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 76
c. When a high-intensity soil survey is not required, Less Developed Areas of a Subdivision
shall be required to submit a field verified soil survey illustrating the following:
(i) Requisite portions of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) published soil
survey with field verification of soil type boundaries for the following drainage
classifications: Excessively Drained, Somewhat Excessively Drained, Well Drained, and
Moderately Well Drained. The submitted soils documentation from the CSS must be
adjusted to reflect the information obtained from field verification.
(ii) Two (2) acre maximum inclusion size for Poorly Drained and Very Poorly Drained soils
which may be combined.
(iii) Two (2) acre maximum inclusion size for Somewhat Poorly Drained soils.
D. Calculation of Net Residential Area and Density:
1. For land areas that are in more than one category, the more restrictive deduction shall be
applicable unless specifically established in this section 401.13.18.
2. 100% of the following land areas within the subdivision shall be deducted for the purposes of
calculating Net Residential Area:
a. Slopes 25% or steeper;
b. Land which is not able to be practically accessible, usable, or unavailable due to its location
and/or existing site condition(s) such as being cut off from the main parcel;
c. All land areas within the 100-year floodplain FEMA FIRM Maps regardless of any other
classification;
d. Land below the normal high water mark of any waterbody;
e. Land below the upland edge of freshwater wetlands except Forested Wetlands that are to
remain undeveloped and not located in a 100-year floodplain (see 401.13.18.D.3.c);
f. All lands that have been determined to be a liquidation harvesting per standards established
in Title 30-A, M.R.S., Section 4404, subsection 20;
g. Unusable areas larger than 1,500 sq. ft. such as significant rock outcroppings, etc.;
h. Portions of gravel pit(s) that will not be reclaimed when the project is complete; additional
sureties may be required in such instances;
i. Poorly drained soils unless located in a Forested Wetland that are to remain undeveloped and
not located in a 100-year floodplain (see 401.13.18.D.3.c);
j. Very poorly drained soils.
3. 50% of the following land areas within the subdivision shall be deducted for the purposes of
calculating Net Residential Area:
a. Somewhat poorly drained soils;
b. Land designated as Resource Protection that remain undeveloped;
c. Forested Wetlands that remain undeveloped not located in a 100-year floodplain;
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 77
d. Boundaries of the areas on the parcel, to remain undeveloped, containing the following with
field verification as necessary:
(i) significant wildlife habitat as mapped by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife (IF&W);
(ii) significant wildlife habitat as determined by the applicant in consultation with the Maine
IF&W;
(iii) endangered botanical resources as mapped by the Maine Natural Areas Program;
(iv) endangered botanical resources as determined by the applicant consultation with the
Maine Department of Conservation.
4. For land areas listed in Section 401.13.18.D.3 to remain undeveloped, the Planning Board shall
determine the method(s) utilized to memorialize such areas including but not limited to one or
more of the following:
a. on the face of the final signed recorded subdivision plan;
b. within the Homeowners/Lot owners association;
c. in the deeds for the appropriate lot(s);
d. demarcated on the land on the appropriate lot(s) with permanent markers and/or pins.
5. Roads & ROW's deduction: After the total of both 401.13.18.D.2 and 3 are deducted from the
total parcel, the remaining area shall be deducted by ten (10) percent or the actual area of the
parcel utilized for roads, parking, and proposed or future vehicular rights-of-way, whichever is
greater.
6. Net Residential Density: The net residential density shall be calculated by dividing the land area
determined as the net residential area in this section 401.13.18 by the minimum lot area (or
dwelling unit for multi-family) for respective Zoning District as established in Table 402.5.4A of
the Town of Gray Zoning Ordinance to determine the maximum number of lots or dwelling units
permitted.
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 78
Table 401.13.13.B.1
Residential Open Space Subdivision Dimensional Standards Table
Line
#
RRA LD MD WH-2
1 Zoning District Standard: frontage/Min. lot size/min.area per DU
200' front
80K/40K
200' front
80K/80K
150' front
40K/40K-
20K
200' front
175K/175K
2 Min. Orig. parcel size eligible for ROS SD 10 acre 10 acre 10 acre 20 acre
3 Max. density: # indiv. Lots/Orig. parcel size (SF) 1/80K 1/80K 1/40K 1/175K
4 Minimum total OS to Orig. parcel (percentage) 35 40 30 40
5 Minimum useable OS to Orig. parcel (percentage) 20 25 15 25
6 Minimum contiguous usable OS area (SF)-ready access, adj. to road 60K 80K 50K 80K
7 Minimum Individually Owned lot size (SF) 35K 40K 30K 50K
8 Min. buildable land area each Individually Owned lot (SF) 30K 35K 25K 40K
9 Max. Impervious cover/lot coverage (buildings) for indiv. lot 25%/15% 20%/15% 25%/15% 20%/15%
10 Min. Indiv. Owned street frontage/width (feet) 125 125 100 150
11 Min. Indiv. Owned lot front setback (feet) 40 50 35 50
12 Min. Indiv. Owned lot rear setback (feet) 20 20 15 20
13 Min. Indiv. Owned lot side setback (feet) 20 20 15 20
14 Building envelope @ min. frontage/setbacks (feet); width x depth 85 x 220 85 x 250 70 x 250 110 x 260
Min. setback buffers to perimeter of SD Standards:
15 To Town or State Road (feet) 75 100 75 100
16 To all other roads (feet) 60 75 60 75
17 Abutting Side property line (feet) 30 40 30 40
18 Abutting Rear property line (feet) 30 40 30 40
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 79
AMENDED MAY 16, 2017 / EFFECTIVE JUNE 15, 2017
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 401 SUBDIVISION\CH 401 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.DOCX 80
ARTICLE 14 - APPEALS
401.14.1 – APPEALS TO SUPERIOR COURT
Any party may take an appeal within thirty (30) days of the vote on the original decision, to Superior
Court from any order, relief or denial in accordance with Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Article 80B.
This time period may be extended by the court upon motion for good cause shown. The hearing before
the Superior Court must be without a jury.
401.14.2 – PLANNING BOARD RECONSIDERATION
The Planning Board may reconsider any decision reached under this section at its next regular meeting
following issuance of that decision. The Board may conduct additional hearings and receive additional
evidence and testimony as provided in this subsection.
CHAPTER 402A
MOBILE HOME PARK ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Enacted December5, 1989
Amended April 3, 1992
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 402A.1 – TITLE ........................................................................................................................ 2
SECTION 402A.2 – AUTHORITY ........................................................................................................... 2
SECTION 402A.3 – SCOPE AND PURPOSE .......................................................................................... 2
SECTION 402A.4 – DEFINITIONS .......................................................................................................... 2
SECTION 402A.5 – MOBILE HOME PARK USE .................................................................................. 4
SECTION 402A.6 – UTILITY SERVICE ................................................................................................. 4
SECTION 402A.7 – PERMIT FOR A PARK ............................................................................................ 5
SECTION 402A.8 – MOBILE HOME PARK DEVELOPMENT ............................................................ 5
SECTION 402.A.9 – PERMITS FOR MOBILE HOME UNITS IN PARKS .......................................... 8
SECTION 402A.10 – LICENSES .............................................................................................................. 8
SECTION 402A.11 – INSPECTION OF MOBILE HOME PARKS ........................................................ 9
SECTION 402A.12 – COMPLIANCE ..................................................................................................... 10
SECTION 402A.13 – STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS ............................................................ 10
SECTION 402A.14 – SEPTIC SYSTEMS .............................................................................................. 14
SECTION 402A.15 – ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM......................................................... 14
SECTION 402A.16 – FIRE PROTECTION ............................................................................................ 14
SECTION 402A.17 – ENFORCEMENT ................................................................................................. 14
SECTION 402A.18 – APPEALS ............................................................................................................. 15
SECTION 402A.19 – VARIANCES ........................................................................................................ 15
SECTION 402A.20 – REPEALING CLAUSE ........................................................................................ 15
SECTION 402A.21 – SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.................................................................................. 15
O:\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS ORDINANCE.DOCX 2
SECTION 402A.1 – TITLE
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Mobile Home Park Ordinance of the Town of
Gray, Maine.”
SECTION 402A.2 – AUTHORITY
This ordinance is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws of the State of Maine.
Regulation of the development, construction, expansion and/or alteration of mobile home parks and the
attachments of reasonable conditions to such activities are exercise of valid police powers. These
regulations for design, construction, and administrative review of mobile home parks are established to
ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of the park residents and the community at large.
SECTION 402A.3 – SCOPE AND PURPOSE
This ordinance shall govern the location, establishment, expansion, and operation of all mobile home
parks within the corporate limits of the Town of Gray, Maine.
It is the intent of this Ordinance to establish a Mobile Home Park Overlay Zone. This zone applies to all
lands identified as mobile home park overlay zones on the Town of Gray, Maine Zoning Map.
Where the boundaries of the MHPOZ as delineated on the zoning map are in dispute, the Planning
Board, with the advice from the town staff and the Gray Water District, shall interpret the intent and
purpose of the zoning map to determine their location.
In the event of approval of a proposed mobile home park, these regulations shall take precedence over
the zoning underlying the specific tract proposed for development.
In determining the suitability of a tract of land for use as a mobile home park, the factors to be
considered shall include as a minimum:
A. Soil suitability for high-density residential uses;
B. Safe and adequate access to the public street system;
C. The capacity of the public street to be accessed;
D. Public water shall be provided;
E. Tracts adjacent to developed areas, especially higher density areas, shall be preferred to tracts which
“leap-frog” vacant tracts.
SECTION 402A.4 – DEFINITIONS
A. Accessory Buildings: Any building customarily incidental to the principal buildings which may
include a garage, porch, storage, tool or work shed.
B. Health Authority: The Town Health Officer or State Department of Human Services.
C. License: An authorization, or written evidence thereof, issued by the Town of Gray, to maintain and
operate a mobile home park.
D. Manufactured Housing: As defined by State Statute- (30-A.M.R.S.A. Sec. 4358 (1)(A)).
E. Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land under unified ownership approved by the municipality for the
placement of 3 or more manufactured homes.
O:\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS ORDINANCE.DOCX 3
F. Mobile Home Park Lot: The area of land on which an individual home is situated within a mobile
home park and which is reserved for use by the occupants of that home. A municipality may require
a lot to be designated on a mobile home park plan.
G. Mobile Home Stand: That part of a mobile home park which has been improved of the placement
of one mobile home including all required appurtenant structures and having provisions for available
utility connections.
H. Non-Conformities: Lots, structures, uses of land and structures and characteristics of uses, which
are prohibited under the term of this Ordinance but permitted to continue unless there is a
compelling reason, such as imminent danger to health, to eliminate the non-conformity.
I. Parking Space: A minimum of nine (9) feet in width by eighteen (18) feet in length.
J. Park Management: The person who owns or has charge, care, or control of the mobile home park.
K. Permanent Buildings: Buildings or structures permanently affixed to foundations and not including
mobile homes or their accessory buildings on mobile home park lots.
L. Permit: An authorization, and written evidence thereof, issued by the Town of Gray, to: construct,
alter, and extend a mobile home park; or, to move or relocate a mobile home.
M. Person: Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private association or corporation.
N. Pitched, Shingled Roof: A roof with a pitch of two or more vertical units for every twelve
horizontal units of measurement and which is covered with asphalt or fiberglass composition
shingles or other materials, but specifically excludes corrugated metal roofing materials.
O. Public Water Supply: Services, facilities and resource supply provided exclusively by the Gray
Water District.
P. Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle type portable structure without a permanent foundation, which can
be towed, hauled, or driven and primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for
recreational, camping, and travel use and including but not limited to travel trailers, truck campers,
camping trailers, and self-propelled motor homes.
Q. Sewer Connection: All pipes, fitting, and appurtenances from the drain outlet of the mobile home to
the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewage system serving the
manufactured/mobile home park.
R. Septic System: An underground system with a septic tank used for the decomposition of domestic
wastes.
S. Sewer System and Treatment: Man-made devices for the collection, treatment, and disposal of
sewage.
T. Street: Any street, area, avenue, boulevard, drive, public place, or highway designed for or
commonly used for the purpose of travel by vehicles within the corporate limits of the Town.
Distinctions are made in this Ordinance between public streets, which are those outside the
boundaries of the mobile home park, and private streets, which are those within the mobile home
park.
U. Trailer: A structure standing on wheels, towed or hauled by another vehicle and used for short-term
human occupancy, carrying materials, goods, or objects, or as a temporary office.
V. Travel Trailer: A recreational vehicle that is towed by a car or a truck.
O:\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS ORDINANCE.DOCX 4
W. Water Connection: The connection consisting of all pipes, fitting, and appurtenances from the
water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within the mobile home.
X. Water Riser Pipe: That portion of the water supply system servicing the mobile home park which
extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at each mobile home
lot.
SECTION 402A.5 – MOBILE HOME PARK USE
A. Mobile home parks shall be located within the Mobile Home Park Overlay Zone as adopted by the
Town of Gray.
No portion of the Park shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet to any public way.
The placement of recreational vehicles and trailers is specifically prohibited by this Ordinance.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to connect utilities to or to occupy a mobile home in a mobile
home park within the Town of Gray unless the park is duly licensed under the terms of this
ordinance.
C. Permitted Uses
1. Manufactured Housing as defined by State Statute (30 – A.M.R.S.A. Sec. 4358 (1)(A)).
2. Open Space in the park for recreational use of park residents only.
3. Specifically recognized accessory uses:
a. Park Management Office
b. Community or recreation building within the park provided for use by park residents only.
c. Laundry building provided for use by park residents only.
d. Service equipment building for storage of park maintenance equipment only
e. Storage facilities for use by park residents only.
D. Conditional Use: Home Occupations
E. Non-Conformities
1. Any mobile home park in existence in the municipality prior to adoption of this ordinance that
complies with all applicable legal requirements then in effect is deemed to be legal nonconforming
and is not subject to the provisions of this chapter except those concerning use of
gas, fuel, and fire protection.
2. An individual mobile home may be replaced or relocated within a legally non-conforming
mobile home park if such mobile home is blocked and anchored in compliance with the
requirements of the Town of Gray, and if connections are made in compliance with the
requirements of the Town of Gray.
SECTION 402A.6 – UTILITY SERVICE
Utility services (water, sewer system, septic system, solid waste, electric) shall be provided only to
mobile home parks licensed in accordance with this ordinance.
O:\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS ORDINANCE.DOCX 5
All utility services shall be provided in accordance with applicable codes and regulations adopted by the
Town of Gray and the State of Maine and which are in force at the time of park plan approval.
SECTION 402A.7 – PERMIT FOR A PARK
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, construct, or extend any mobile home park within the
limits of Gray unless a plan for the park has been approved by the Planning Board and unless that person
holds a valid permit issued by the Town of Gray in the name of such person for the specific
construction, alteration, or extension proposed.
B. All applications shall be accompanied by the deposit of an application fee of one hundred and fifty
dollars ($150)
C. When, upon review of the application, the Planning Board is satisfied that the proposed plan meets
the requirements of this ordinance, it shall authorize the Code Enforcement Officer to issue a permit.
SECTION 402A.8 – MOBILE HOME PARK DEVELOPMENT
A. Master Plan
1. Plan required – It shall be unlawful for any person to place, construct, expand, or operate any
mobile home park within the limits of the Town of Gray, unless a plan for the park has been
approved by the Planning Board.
2. Pre-application – Generally, prior to the official filing of a mobile home park plan, the developer
shall consult with the Town Planner for briefing and advice on the procedures, policies,
specifications, and standards required by the Town for mobile home park development.
A sketch plan, or concept plan, shall be submitted to save the developer time and expense in
reaching general agreement with the Town as to the form of the plan and the objectives of these
regulations.
Ten copies of the Sketch Plan, or concept plan, shall be submitted to the Town Planner at least
10 days prior to the date of the next Planning Board meeting.
Form and Content – Concept plan or pre-application shall show the following:
a. General Park Plan Information
(i) Site conditions (i.e. existing buildings; treed areas; deer yards; etc.)
(ii) Proposed development;
(iii) Data on land characteristics (i.e.: dimensions; legal description);
(iv) Existing and proposed facilities with utilities;
(v) Number and size of lots;
(vi) Areas and uses adjacent to the subject tract;
(vii) Proposed physical improvements.
b. Location Map
(i) Relationship to existing community with a one (1) mile radius.
O:\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS ORDINANCE.DOCX 6
(ii) Development name, location, scale, north arrow, and date.
c. Plan
(i) Proposed layout
(ii) Streets
(iii) Lots
(iv) Other features (i.e.: Laundromat; open space; office; landscaping; etc.)
(v) May be made directly on a print of the topographic survey, if available.
The Planning Board shall review the sketch plan, or concept plan, and notify the developer of
any changes, modifications, or amendments prior to the submission of the final park plan.
3. Application and Processing of Final Park Plan – The developer shall comply with all applicable
requirements and regulations as stated in all applicable State and local regulations.
The developer/owner shall submit twenty (20) copes of the final plan with all required items,
including all fees, to the Town Planner at least seventeen (17) working days prior to the date on
which proper consideration is to be given by the Planning Board. No incomplete final plan
application shall be accepted by the Town Planner.
The Planner shall review the park plan as to its conformity with the Comprehensive Plan, the
recorded plan and the standards and specifications set forth herein or referred to herein.
The park plan shall also be reviewed by the Town Manager, Town Engineer, Director of Public
Works, Director of Parks and Recreation, Law Enforcement, Fire Chief, Rescue, Unit, Post
Office, Code Enforcement Officer, Superintendent of the Gray Water District, and the
Superintendent of Schools. They shall convey their recommendations concerning the plan to the
Town Planner at least 10 days prior to the date on which proper consideration is to be given by
the Planning Board. The Town Planner shall relate the comments to the Planning Board at the
meeting for which such plan is scheduled for consideration.
The planner shall present the park plan to the Planning Board with comments and
recommendations of staff of any other person or agency.
The Planning Board shall study the plan and all recommendations, taking into consideration the
requirements of these regulations. Particular attention will be given to the health, safety, and
welfare of the park occupants, the arrangement, location, and width of streets, their relation to
the topography of the land, sewage disposal, drainage, lot sizes and arrangements, the further
development of adjoining lands as yet unsubdivided, and the requirements of other ordinances,
policies, and plans as adopted by the Town of Gray.
Within thirty (30) days from the date on which the Planning Board first reviews the Mobile
Home Park, the Planning Board shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove such plan.
In the event of disapproval, the Board will advise the applicant of the specific changes or
additions it will require in the layout, and the character and extent of required improvements and
reservations which it will require as a prerequisite to the approval of the plan.
4. Form and Content
O:\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS ORDINANCE.DOCX 7
a. The plan shall be drawn on sheets twenty-four (24) inches wide and thirty six (36) inches
long. It shall be drawn to a minimum scale of 100 feet to one inch. The plan shall also show
the following:
(i) Name and address of the record owner; owner’s representative, if applicable; and the
project engineer or surveyor.
(ii) Present name of the mobile home park and any other names under which the park has
been reviewed, if any.
(iii) Mobile home park boundary, indicated by heavy lines, and its computed acreage.
(iv) Location, on the site and adjacent to the site, of all existing and proposed:
(01) Buildings and structures.
(02) Streets and other rights-of-way and easements.
(03) Locations and sizes of utilities.
(04) Street paving widths.
(05) Curb return radii.
(06) Parking areas.
(07) Screening.
(08) Natural and environmental features including wetlands, streams, water bodies, etc.
(v) Present tract designation
(vi) Description by metes and bounds of the perimeter of the mobile home park and its
location with respect to an original survey of which it is a part.
(vii) Primary control points or descriptions and ties to such control points to which all
dimensions, and angle, bearings, lot numbers and similar data shall be referred.
(viii) Exact location, dimensions, tract designation, and name of existing and proposed
residential lots, parks, public areas, and other related sites within the mobile home
park.
(ix) The location, dimensions, and flow line or existing water courses and drainage
structures on the site or adjacent to it.
(x) Date of survey, scale, and north arrow.
(xi) Key map, drawn at a satisfactory scale to show the relationship of the property to
adjacent existing streets and identifying features for a distance of at least one-half mile.
(xii) Contour lines on a basis of five vertical feet in terrain with a slope of two percent (2%)
or less, and on a basis of two vertical feet in terrain with a slope of more than two
percent (2%).
(xiii) A number or letter to identify each lot, or site, and each block.
(xiv) Front setback lines shown graphically on all lots and sites. Rear and side yard lines
shall be described either graphically or as a note on the plan.
O:\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS ORDINANCE.DOCX 8
(xv) Location of corporate limit line if it traverses the mobile home park or forms part of its
boundary.
(xvi) Other conditions on the site, both physical and technical, when deemed necessary for
complete review, and to evaluate impacts on groundwater and adjacent properties (i.e.
hydrogeologic studies, erosion control plans).
(xvii) Index sheet if site plan is drawn on more than one sheet showing the entire mobile
home park at a scale determined by the Town Planner.
B. REVISION OF PLAN AFTER APPROVAL
No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any plan of a mobile home park
after approval has been given by the Planning Board, unless said changes, erasures, modifications, or
revisions are first submitted to and approved by the Planning Board.
C. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PARK MANAGEMENT
1. The person to whom a license for a mobile home park is issued shall operate the park in
compliance with this ordinance and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park.
2. The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile home on its mobile home
stand in accordance with this ordinance.
3. The park management shall maintain a register containing the names of all mobile home owners
identified by lot number or street address. Such register shall be available to any herein
authorized person inspecting the park.
D. RESPONSIBILITY OF PARK OCCUPANT
1. The park occupant shall comply with a applicable requirements of this ordinance and shall
maintain his mobile home lot, its facilities, and equipment in good repair and in a clean and
sanitary condition.
2. The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of his mobile home and accessory
structures on its mobile home stand and proper installation of all utility connections in
accordance with the instructions of the park management and State and Town codes.
SECTION 402.A.9 – PERMITS FOR MOBILE HOME UNITS IN PARKS
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, construct, or extend a mobile home in a mobile home
park unless that person holds a valid permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer in the name of
such person for the specific placement, construction alteration, or extension proposed.
B. All applications for permits shall be made on a form provided by the Town and shall be
accompanied by or have already on file with the Town approved master plans and licenses as
provided for in this ordinance.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review permit applications and inspect the premises to
determine that the same complies with this ordinance and any other applicable codes and ordinances
relative to the location, construction, arrangement, safety, and sanitary facilities of the mobile home.
SECTION 402A.10 – LICENSES
A. APPLICATION AND RENEWAL
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any mobile home park within the limits of the Town of
O:\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS ORDINANCE.DOCX 9
Gray unless he holds a valid license issued annually by the Town Council in the name of such person
for the specific mobile home park. All applications for licenses shall be made to the Town Manager.
After inspection by the CEO and by other Town staff and agencies as required by the CEO, and
recommendation to the Town Council, the Council shall issue a license upon compliance by the
applicant with provisions of this ordinance.
Application for original licenses shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, accompanied by an
affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the application and by the deposit of a fee and shall
contain at a minimum: the name and address of the applicant; the location and legal description of
the mobile home park; and a master plan of the mobile home park.
Applicants for renewals of licenses shall be made in writing by the holders of the licenses, shall be
accompanied by the deposit fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), and shall contain any change
in the information submitted since the original license was issued or the latest renewal granted.
B. A license issued to any person for park operation shall not be transferrable in any way should the
park be sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of in interest or control. The unused
portion of the license renewal fee shall be pro-rated and refunded to the license holder. A new
application for license must be applied for by any new owner or holder of interest in any park in
accordance with Section 10.A of this ordinance.
C. DENIAL OR SUSPENSION
In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer recommends denial of a renewal of a park license or
suspends a license in effect, notice of such decision shall be sent to the applicant. At its earliest
possible convenience, the Town Council shall conduct a public hearing regarding the denial or
suspension. Notice of such hearing shall be sent to the park owner, park manager, and all residents
of the park.
In conducting its hearing, the Town Council shall review the issues which pertain to the specific
situation. The Council shall review:
1. Park compliance with state and local regulations
2. Health, safety, and general welfare issues
3. Water and sewage facilities
4. Compliance of the park with its approved plan
5. Other issues which may be deemed relevant
The Town Council shall either approve, approve with conditions, or support the denial of the
park license. If the applicant should disagree with the action of the Town Council, he may
appeal by filing a civil action in Superior Court.
SECTION 402A.11 – INSPECTION OF MOBILE HOME PARKS
The Code Enforcement Officer or his agent is hereby authorized to make such inspections as are
necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this Ordinance and shall have the power to enter at
O:\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS ORDINANCE.DOCX 10
a reasonable time upon any mobile home park property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating
conditions relating to the enforcement of this Ordinance.
It shall be the duty of park management to give access to the park register and to all lots during normal
business hours to the Code Enforcement Officer or his agent for the purpose of inspection.
SECTION 402A.12 – COMPLIANCE
A. NOTICES
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer or his agent determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this Ordinance; he shall give notice of
such alleged violation to the person to whom the permit or license was issued as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
1. Be in writing
2. Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance
3. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires
4. Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require, provided that such notice or order
shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has
been sent by certified return receipt to his last known address, or when he has been served with
such notice by any method authorized by the laws of this state.
B. EMERGENCIES
Whenever the Code Enforcement Office finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate
action to protect the public health, he may without notice or hearing issue an order reciting the
existence of such an emergency and requiring that certain action be taken as he may deem necessary
to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance, such order shall be
effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply immediately, but
shall be afforded a hearing before the Town Council as soon as possible. The provision of this
Ordinance shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter.
SECTION 402A.13 – STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
A. DRAINAGE, STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, AND EROSION CONTROL
1. A storm drainage study and a proposed drainage system plan bot certified by a registered
professional engineer, for surface and subsurface runoff, showing measures proposed to prevent
pollution of surface or ground water, soil erosion, increased runoff, changes in ground water
level and flooding. The storm drainage study shall document post vs. pre-development runoff
conditions for the two (2) and twenty-five (25) year, twenty-four (24) hour storms. Drainage
improvements shall be designed to control the rate of runoffs for the twenty-four (24) hour storm
such that the rate of post development runoff will not exceed that of the pre-development
condition.
2. Soil erosion and the sedimentation control plans prepared according to the specifications of the
Cumberland County Soil and Water Conservation District (CCS&WCD), including a letter of
plan approval by the CCS&WCD.
B. STREET SYSTEM
O:\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS ORDINANCE.DOCX 11
1. Interior park streets shall intersect adjoining public streets at approximately ninety degrees (90°)
and at locations which will eliminate or minimize interference with traffic on those public
streets. Access shall be in compliance with acceptable engineering standards and with a
professional engineer’s seal as required by the Manufactured Housing Board.
2. Parking: All parking shall be off-street. Each mobile home unit shall be provided with two (2)
on-site parking spaces. Each space shall have minimum dimensions of nine feet (9’) width and
eighteen feet (18’) length.
3. Guest Parking: Guest parking shall be provided at a rate of one space for each four (4) mobile
home units. Guest parking shall be located such that no mobile home is farther than two hundred
feet (200’) (walking distance) from guest parking.
4. Minimum pavement widths of park streets shall be twenty feet (20’) for two-way traffic; fourteen
feet (14’) for one-way traffic, and at least seven feet (7’) shall be added for each parking lane if
provided. In addition to the minimum pavement width, all streets in a mobile home park shall
have a cleared area (no vegetation or appurtenances over three feet high) of forty feet (40’)
within the right-of-way to provide for maneuvering of mobile homes.
5. The park street system shall have direct connection to a public street.
6. Street grades may not be more than eight percent (8%). Short runs with a maximum grade of
twelve percent (12%) may be permitted, provided traffic safety is assured.
7. All mobile home parks shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from
abutting public streets to each mobile home lot. Such access shall be provided by private park
streets.
8. Entrances to mobile home parks shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards and allow
free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. No parking shall be permitted on the mobile home
park entrance street for a distance of one hundred feet (100’) from its point of beginning.
9. Park streets shall be built and designed according to acceptable engineering standards and with a
professional engineer’s seal as required by the Manufactured Housing Board. In the event the
developer intends to offer the streets to the Town for acceptance as town ways, park streets shall
be built and designed to those standards as set forth in the Town of Gray Subdivision Ordinance.
10. Park entrance streets must be able to accommodate all vehicle types having occasion to enter the
park, including delivery vehicles and emergency vehicles.
11. All connections to the public street system shall be paved and shall meet the following standards:
a. Separation of park streets: four hundred feet (400’) along the public road frontage.
b. Corner clearance is determined by the functional classification of the street as follows:
(i) Arterials: eighty feet (80’)
(ii) Collectors: forty feet (40’)
(iii) Minor: thirty feet (30’)
c. Specifications for access aprons shall be equal to the specifications for the existing street and
shall be built according to acceptable engineering standards and with a professional
engineer’s seal as required by the Manufactured Housing Board.
O:\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS ORDINANCE.DOCX 12
12. A common walk system shall be provided and maintained between locations where pedestrian
traffic is concentrated and is not separated from automobile traffic. Such common walks shall
have a minimum width of three and one half feet (3 1/2’). If the slope of a walk is greater than
five percent (5%) (1 in. rise in a 20 in. run), a handrail should be provided. The slope of a walk
shall not exceed 8.33 percent (8.33%) (1 in. rise in a 12 in. run). Walks shall have a continuous
common surface, not interrupted by steps or abrupt changes in level greater than ½ in. Where
walks cross driveways or parking lots, they shall blend to a common level by means of curb cuts,
ramps, or other means. Curb cuts shall have a textured nonslip surface (such as broom-finish
concrete). Walks shall be provided with a level area no less than five feet (5’) by five feet (5’)
where they terminate at the doors; in no case shall such walks extend less than one foot (1’)
beyond the side from which the door opens.
C. A performance bond or similar financial guarantee acceptable to the Town Manager to secure
completion of all improvements required by the Board and written evidence that the Municipal
Officers are satisfied with the sufficiency of such bond shall be submitted.
D. No part of any park shall be used for non-residential purposes except such uses that are required for
the direct servicing and well-being of park residents and for the management and maintenance of the
park, except for recreation.
1. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed as prohibiting the sale of a mobile home
located on a mobile home lot and connected to the pertinent utilities.
E. The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park shall be so conducted as to
comply with the Town of Gray laws.
F. Community facilities for the residents of each park should be provided. Facilities should meet the
expected indoor and outdoor leisure time needs and may include common laundry facilities and
office space for management. Facilities, when provided, shall be safely accessible to all residents.
Such structures shall meet all applicable Town and State codes including those for buildings,
utilities, occupancy, and handicap accessibility.
G. Accessory structures or permanent structures within the park shall meet all construction standards
for building, plumbing, electrical, and fire protection as adopted by the Town of Gray and the State
of Maine.
H. Each lot shall be marked for identification, easily readable from the park street.
I. All mobile home parks subject to this Ordinance will connect to the public water system provided by
the Gray Water District.
1. Individual water riser pipes shall be located within the confined area of the mobile home stand at
a point where the water connection will approximate a vertical position and shall include a cutoff
valve before entering the mobile home.
J. An adequate and safe septic system or sewer system shall be provided in all mobile home parks for
conveying and disposing of all sewage. Such system shall be designed, constructed, and maintained
in accordance with state and local laws. Cluster septic systems shall be limited to a maximum of
four dwelling units.
K. LOT LAYOUT AND STANDS
O:\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS ORDINANCE.DOCX 13
1. Each mobile home lot shall contain a minimum area of 20,000 square feet. Units may be
clustered on a 12,500 square foot lot when serviced by a central on-site subsurface waste water
disposal system approved by the Maine Department of Human Services provided that a total of
20,000 square feet per unit is provided. Lot areas are exclusive of park streets.
2. Mobile home stands shall occupy no more than twenty percent (20%) of the respective lot area.
The accumulated floor area of the mobile home and its accessory structures shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the total area of the lot.
3. Each mobile home shall be anchored to a six inch (6”) thick reinforced concrete slab, the
horizontal dimensions of which are the same or larger than the mobile home unit. The concrete
slab shall be placed on not less than a 12” layer of well graded compacted gravel on a stripped
subgrade. Suitable masonry piers shall be placed from the concrete slab to the girders and holddown
wires, chain, or cable shall be anchored into the slab. A suitable attached skirt extending
from the concrete slab to the mobile home shall be provided.
4. The lots within any mobile home park shall not all be of the same size and shape if mobiles
homes of different sizes are to be accommodated and if effective use is to be made of the
available space.
5. Buildings, mobile homes, or any structures shall be set back at least ten feet (10’) from side and
rear lot lines and twenty-five feet (25’) from any park street. There shall be no variances of these
setbacks.
6. Buildings and mobile homes shall be set back at least fifty feet (50’) from any abutting property.
7. Placement of mobile homes within a park which appear to be perpendicular to a public road
outside of the park is prohibited.
8. The site, including mobile home stand, patio, structures, and all site improvements shall be
harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to topography, the shape of the lot and the
shape, size, and position of structures. Full attention shall be paid to use, appearance, and
livability. Special attention shall be given to new mobile home designs and to common
appurtenances that are available.
9. The mobile home unit shall be fitted to the terrain with a minimum disturbance to the land.
Existing trees, rock formations and other natural site features shall be preserved to the extent
practical.
10. The distance between mobile homes or mobile home stands shall not be less than twenty feet
(20’). If structural additions to the mobile home are to be allowed, design distances must take
the additional space required into account.
11. The site shall provide for a desirable residential environment which is an asset to the community.
Innovative and imaginative designs shall be developed.
12. Visual buffers shall be provided within the property boundary perimeter setback area.
a. Screen planting shall consist of a mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees or shrubs which
will be at least six feet (6’) in height and seventy percent (70%) solid within three (3) years
of planting.
b. Screen fences shall be visually attractive structures and constructed of durable weather
resistant materials.
O:\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS ORDINANCE.DOCX 14
c. Earth mounds shall be limited to slopes which can be easily maintained (3 to 1 for grassed
slopes) and be used preferably in combination with screen planting.
13. A variety of lot and home orientations within each site plan shall be encouraged to:
a. Eliminate monotony and repetitive unit siting;
b. Ensure compatibility and specific site shapes and harmony with topography;
c. Encourage individual mobile home site privacy;
d. Create siting variety and improve appearance; and
e. Take advantage of solar siting.
14. Each mobile home lot shall be designed to be occupied by one mobile home and uses thereto.
L. Each park shall provide either a recreation area or a fee-in-lieu of provision of such an area.
1. Recreation areas shall be not less than 2,500 square feet of area, or 100 square feet of area per
space, whichever is greater. Suitable separations or other safeguards shall be provided if the
recreation area abuts upon a railroad, a public street, a steep slope, or other similar hazard. Land
reserved for recreation areas shall be developed, suitable, and usable for such use.
2. A fee in lieu of provision of land shall be made in conformance with the Town of Gray
Subdivision Ordinance.
SECTION 402A.14 – SEPTIC SYSTEMS
All septic systems shall comply at a minimum with the State of Maine Plumbing Code.
SECTION 402A.15 – ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
A. Every mobile home park and every mobile home shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting
of wiring, fixtures, equipment, and appurtenances which shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with the Town of Gray Electrical Code and current edition of the National Electric Code
governing such systems and approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. All electrical service to the park shall be installed to comply with standards acceptable to the service
provided (Central Maine Power, etc.)
SECTION 402A.16 – FIRE PROTECTION
Mobile home parks shall be kept free of litter, rubbish, and other flammable materials.
Portable fire extinguishers rated for classes A, B, and C fires shall be kept in Community Facilities Bldg.
and maintained in good operating condition. Their rating shall not be less than 1A10BC (Underwriters
Laboratory Rating). Mobile homes shall conform to the requirements of the N.F.P.A. 101 Life Safety
Code as amended where applicable.
SECTION 402A.17 – ENFORCEMENT
On behalf of the Town, the Town Attorney shall, when directed by the Town Council, institute
appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this ordinance or the
standards referred to herein with respect to any violation thereof which occurs.
O:\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS\CHAPTER 402A MOBILE HOME PARKS ORDINANCE.DOCX 15
SECTION 402A.18 – APPEALS
If the applicant should disagree with the action of the Planning Board, he may further appeal by filing a
civil action in Superior Court.
SECTION 402A.19 – VARIANCES
A. Except as provided in subsection 19A-1, the Zoning Board of Appeals may authorize a variance
from the bulk and space requirements of these regulations when, in its opinion, undue hardship will
result from strict compliance. A variance shall not be authorized from Section five (5) of these
regulations.
A-1 Disability Variance
The Board may grant a variance to a property owner for the purpose of making that property
accessible to a person with a disability who is living on the property. The Board shall restrict any
variance granted under this subsection solely to the installation of equipment or the construction of
structures necessary for access to or egress from the property by the person with the disability. The
Board may impose conditions on the variance, including limiting the variance to the duration of the
disability or to the time that the person with the disability lives on the property. For the purposes of
this subsection, disability has the same meaning as a physical or mental handicap under Title 5,
MRSA Section 4553.
B. The term “undue hardship” shall mean:
1. The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted; and;
2. The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the general
conditions in the neighborhood; and;
3. The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and;
4. The hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
C. All requests for variance from the ordinance shall be submitted in writing. The decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeal shall be rendered prior to application for Mobile Home Park approval.
Written decision shall be forwarded from the ZBA to the Town Planner.
SECTION 402A.20 – REPEALING CLAUSE
All ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby expressly repealed to the
extent of said conflict with mobile home park development requirements.
SECTION 402A.21 – SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
Should any portion or part of this Ordinance be held by a court of competent jurisdiction for any reason
invalid or unenforceable, the same shall not be construed to affect any other portion hereof, but all other
portions hereof shall remain in full force and effect.
CHAPTER 404 GROUND WATER ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted January 22, 2002
SECTION 404.1 – TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and be cited as the Ground Water Ordinance of the Town of Gray,
Maine.
SECTION 404.2 – PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of residents of Gray by
identifying a certain Institutional Control Zone (“ICZ”) and prohibiting the removal and use of ground
water from land located within the ICZ so as to prevent exposure to contaminated ground water until
such time as the ground water in the land attains State of Maine drinking water standards.
SECTION 404.3 – SCOPE AN AUTHORITY
A. Within the boundaries of the ICZ, comprised as set forth in this Ordinance, no ground water shall be
extracted from the ground except in conformity with the provision of this Ordinance. This
Ordinance shall apply to such areas notwithstanding the provisions of any other Town ordinance
previously adopted.
B. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Article VIII-A of the Maine State Constitution and Title 30-A
M.R.S.A. §§ 3001, 3002, and 4352.
SECTION 404.4 – DEFINITIONS
Groundwater: All the water found beneath the surface of the ground. In this Ordinance the term also
refers to the slowly moving subsurface water present in aquifers and recharge areas.
SECTION 404.5 – REGULATIONS
A. Establishments and Delineation of ICZ:
For the purpose of this Ordinance, there is hereby established within the Town of Gray a certain ICZ
area. The delineation of the ICZ shall be revised by the Town Council from time to time if the
analysis of tests and other data generated by a certain Long Term Monitoring Plan applicable to the
McKin site results in a conclusion that the ground water beneath an area of the ICZ meets or exceeds
State of Maine drinking quality standards. In that event, this Ordinance shall be amended to remove
from the ICZ that area.
B. The ICZ is established with the following boundaries:
Starting at the intersection of the Yarmouth Road and Mayall Road, proceeding west on Yarmouth
Road to the intersection of Yarmouth Road with Depot Road, then northeast on the Depot Road to
the southwest corner of Lot 30, Tax map 33, then by straight line to the north corner of Lot 30, Tax
Map 33, then by straight line from the south corner of Lot 44, Tax Map 33 to northwest corner of
Lot 43, Tax Map 33, then by the northwesterly lot line of Lot 43, Tax Map 33 to Mayall Road, then
by straight line east across Mayall Road to southwesterly corner of Lot 1, Tax Map 39, then along
the northwesterly lot line of Lot 1, Tax Map 39 to southeasterly corner of Lot 1 B, Tax Map 39, then
along the southwest lot line of Lot 1, Tax Map 39 to the southwest corner of Lot 1, Tax Map 39, then
easterly along the northwest lot line of Lot 1, Tax Map 39, to the southwest corner of Lot 1-C, Tax
Map 39 to Merrill Road, then north on Merrill Road to Collyer Brook, then across Collyer Brook,
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 404 GROUND WATER\CH404 GROUND WATER ORDINANCE.DOCX 2
then proceeding in a straight line from the southwest corner of Lot 3, Tax Map 39 in a northeasterly
direction 500 feet; then proceeding easterly abut 2900 feet to a point on the northeasterly lot line of
Lot 3A, Tax Map 39, located about 1300 feet southeasterly of the northwesterly corner of Lot 3A,
Tax Map 39, then running southeast along the lot line of Lot 3A to the north corner of Lot 20, Tax
Map 39, then running southeast along the easterly lot line of Lot 20, Tax Map 39 across the Royal
River to the easterly side of Lot 20, Tax Map 39, then by straight line across the railroad tracks to the
north corner of Lot 4B, Tax Map 44, then along the easterly lot line of Lot 4B, Tax Map 44 to the
southwest corner of Lot 3, Tax Map 44, then to the southerly corner of Lot 3, Tax Map 44 at Depot
Road, then running east along Depot Road to the north corner of Lot 5, Tax Map 44, then southerly
along the easterly lot line of Lot 5, Tax Map 44 to the southerly corner of Lot 5, Tax Map 44, then
along the southerly lot line of Lot 11, Tax Map 44 to the southern point of Lot 11, Tax Map 44, then
northwesterly on a straight line to the southwestern most corner of Lot 11, Tax Map 44, then
northwesterly across the Royal River and the railroad tracks, on a straight line to the southeast corner
of Lot 14-A, Tax Map 38, then along the northeasterly lot line of Lot 14-A, Tax Map 38 to the most
northerly corner of Lot 14-A, Tax Map 38, then along the most north and northwest lot line of Lot
11, Tax Map 38 to the Yarmouth Road and thence southwesterly across the Yarmouth Road to the
point of beginning.
C. When the line of the zone runs long any road, the line shall follow the center line of the road
whenever possible.
D. The referenced property tax maps are on file at the Town Office and are those bearing the following
identification (as amended through the date of adoption of this Ordinance):
“Property Maps, Town of Gray, Cumberland County, Maine, prepared by GEO-SYSTEMS, 915
U.S. Route 1, P.O. Box 934, Yarmouth, Maine 04096”
E. The ICZ is also depicted on the McKin Site Standard Survey Plan, entitled “Location of Properties
for Restrictive Covenant” prepared by Sevee & Maher Engineers dated August 2000, a copy of
which is on file at the Town office.
SECTION 404.6 – USE REGULATIONS
Within the ICZ, these regulations shall apply:
A. The following uses are prohibited in the ICZ: the removal and/or use of ground water for any
purposes, including residential wells; provided, however, that ground water in the ICZ may be
removed and tested to determine if it meets the State of Maine drinking water standards.
SECTION 404.7 – VIOLATIONS
A. Either the Code Enforcement Officer or the Municipal Officers shall institute or cause to be
instituted, in the name of the Town, any and all actions, legal and equitable, that shall be appropriate
or necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. A photograph or video of the
removal and/or use of groundwater, properly authenticated, shall constitute prima facie evidence of a
violation.
B. Any person, firm or corporation, being the owner or occupant of, or having control or the use of land
found to violate any provision of this ordinance, shall be guilty of a civil violation and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, but no more than $250.00.
Each day such violation is permitted to exist after notification thereof by the Code Enforcement
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 404 GROUND WATER\CH404 GROUND WATER ORDINANCE.DOCX 3
Officer shall constitute a separate offense. Such persons shall also be liable for any court costs and
reasonable attorney fees. The fine for any person, firm or corporation found to violate this
Ordinance a second time or more shall be punished by a fine of not less than $250.00, but no more
than $500.00, for each day such violation is permitted to exist after notification thereof from the
code Enforcement Officer.
CHAPTER 405
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY, MAINE
Enacted April 20, 1993
Amended December, 1992
STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND INTENT
Certain areas of the Town of Gray, Maine are subject to periodic flooding, causing serious damages to
properties within these areas. Relief is available in the form of Federally subsidized flood insurance as
authorized by the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
Therefore, the Town of Gray, Maine has chosen to become a participating community in the National
Flood Insurance Program, and agrees to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as delineated in the attached Floodplain Management Ordinance.
It is the intent of the Town of Gray, Maine to require the recognition and evaluation of flood hazards in
all official actions relating to land use in the floodplain areas having special flood hazards.
This body has the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures to reduce future flood losses
pursuant to MRSA Title 30A, Sections 3001-3007, 4352 and 4401-4407.
ARTICLE I – ESTABLISHMENT
The Town of Gray, Maine elects to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act
of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended). The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid
Act, provides that areas of the Town having a special flood hazard be identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and that floodplain management measures be applied in such
flood hazard areas. This Ordinance establishes a Flood Hazard Development Permit system and review
procedure for development activities in the designated flood hazard areas of the Town of Gray, Maine.
The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A, A1-30, AE, AO, and AH, identified by FEMA in a report
entitled “Flood Insurance Study – Town of Gray, Maine, Cumberland County, “ dated July 6, 1981 with
accompanying “flood Insurance Rate Map” dated January 6, 1982 is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE II – PERMIT REQUIRED
Before any construction or other development (as defined in Article XIII), including the placement of
manufactured homes, begins within any areas of special flood hazard established in Article I, a Flood
Hazard Development Permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer. This permit shall be
in addition to any other building permits which may be required pursuant to the codes and ordinances of
the Town of Gray, Maine.
ARTICLE III – APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
The application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement
Officer and shall include:
A. The name and address of the applicant;
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site;
C. A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed structures, sewage disposal facilities, water
supply facilities, areas to be cut and filled, and lot dimensions;
O:\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.DOCX 2
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure;
E. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
F. Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure;
G. The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or to a locally
established datum in Zone A only, of the:
1. base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved structures, which is
determined:
a. in Zones A1-30, AE, AO, and AH from data contained in the “Flood Insurance Study –
Town of Gray, Maine,” as described in Article I; or,
b. in Zone A, to be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of the floodplain boundary
and a line perpendicular to the shoreline which passes along the ground through the site of
the proposed building;
2. highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the proposed building;
3. lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such structures contain a basement; and,
4. level, in the case of non-residential structures only, to which the structure will be floodproofed;
H. A description of a base flood elevation reference point established on site of all new or substantially
improved structures;
I. A written certification by a registered land surveyor that the elevations shown o n the application are
accurate;
J. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that floodproofing methods for any
non-residential structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of Articles III.G.4; VI.G; and other
applicable standards in Article VI.
K. A description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development; and,
L. A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each applicable development standard in
Article VI will be met.
ARTICLE IV – APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT’S FEE
A non-refundable application fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the Town Clerk and a copy of a receipt for
the same shall accompany the application.
An additional fee may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer and/or Board of Appeals needs the
assistance of a professional engineer or other expert. The expert’s fee shall be paid in full by the
applicant within 10 days after the town submits a bill to the applicant. Failure to pay the bill shall
constitute a violation of the ordinance and be grounds for the issuance of a stop work order. An expert
shall not be hired by the municipality at the expense of an applicant until the applicant has either
consented to such hiring in writing or been given an opportunity to be heard on the subject. An
applicant who is dissatisfied with a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer may appeal that decision
to the Board of Appeals.
O:\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.DOCX 3
ARTICLE V – REVIEW OF FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATIONS
The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
A. Review all applications for the Flood Hazard Development Permit to assure that proposed building
sites are reasonably safe from flooding and to determine that all pertinent requirements of Article VI
(Development Standards) have, or will be met;
B. Utilize, in the review of all Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, the base flood data
contained in the “Flood Insurance Study – Town of Gray, Maine,” as described in Article I. In
special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data are not provided, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data from
federal, state, or other sources, including information obtained pursuant to Article III.G.1.b.; Article
VI.I; and Article VIII.D, in order to administer Article VI of this Ordinance;
C. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas shown on the maps
described in Article I of this Ordinance;
D. In the review of Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state, and local government agencies from which
prior approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334;
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Maine Office
of Community Development prior to any alteration or relocation of a water course;
F. Issue a two part Flood Hazard Development Permit for elevated structures. Part I shall authorize the
applicant to build a structure to and including the first horizontal floor only above the base flood
level. At that time the applicant shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer with an application for
Part II of the Flood Hazard Development Permit and shall include an Elevation Certificate
completed by a registered Maine surveyor for compliance with the elevation requirements of Article
VI, paragraphs F, G, H, and K. Following review of the application, which review shall take place
within 72 hours of receipt of the application, the Code Enforcement Officer, shall issue Part II of the
Flood Hazard Development Permit. Part II shall authorize the applicant to complete the construction
project; and,
G. Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all Flood Hazard Development Permits issued and data
relevant thereto, including reports of the Board of Appeals on variances granted under the provisions
of Article IX of this Ordinance, and copies of Elevation Certificates and Certificates of Compliance
required under the provisions of Article VII of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following applicable standards:
A. New construction or substantial improvement of any structure shall:
1. be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy;
2. use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
O:\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.DOCX 4
3. use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage; and,
4. use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and other service
facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during flooding conditions.
B. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
C. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed and located to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the system into flood
waters.
D. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during floods.
E. All development shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that no reduction occurs in
the flood carrying capacity of any watercourse.
F. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure located within:
1. Zones A1-30, AE, and AH shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least
one foot above the base flood elevation.
2. Zones AO and AH shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwater away from the proposed structures.
3. Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent
grade:
a. at least one foot higher than the depth specified in feet on the community’s Flood Insurance
Rate Map; or,
b. at least three feet if no depth number is specified.
4. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.G.1.b.; Article V.B; or
Article VIII.D.
G. New construction or substantial improvement of any non-residential structure located within:
1. Zones A1-30, AE, and AH shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least
one foot above the base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities
shall:
a. be floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood level so that below that elevation the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to passage of water;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions
of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the application for a Flood Hazard
Development Permit, as required by Article III.J and shall include a record of the elevation
above mean sea level of the lowest floor including basement.
O:\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.DOCX 5
2. Zones AO and AH shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwater away from them.
3. Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent
grade:
a. at least one foot higher than the depth specified in feet on the community’s Flood Insurance
Rate Map; or,
b. at least three feet if no depth number is specified; or,
c. together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be floodproofed to meet the elevation
requirements of this section and floodproofing standards of Article VI, paragraph G.1.
4. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.G.1.b; Article V.B; or
Article VIII.D.
H. New or substantially improved manufactured homes located within:
1. Zones A1-30, AE, or AH shall:
a. be elevated on a permanent foundation so that the lowest floor is a least one foot above the
base flood elevation; and,
b. be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to:
(i) over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four corners of the manufactured home,
plus two additional ties per side at intermediate points (homes less than 50 feet long
require one additional tie per side); or by,
(ii) frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five additional ties along each side at
intermediate points (homes less than 50 feet long require four additional ties per side).
(iii) All components of the anchoring system described in Article VI.H.1 shall be capable of
carrying a force of 4800 pounds.
2. Zones AO and AH shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwater away from them.
3. Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent
grade:
a. at least one foot higher than the depth specified in feet on the community’s Flood Insurance
Rate Map; or,
b. at least three feet if no depth number is specified; and,
c. meet the requirements of Article Vi.H.1. (a) (b).
4. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.G.1.b; Article V.B; or
Article VIII.D.
O:\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.DOCX 6
I. Floodways
1. In Zones A1-30 and AE encroachments, including fill, new construction substantial
improvement, and other development shall not be permitted in riverine areas, for which a
regulatory floodway is designated on the community’s “Flood Boundary and Floodway Map,”
unless a technical evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that such encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
2. In Zones A1-30 and AE riverine areas, for which no regulatory floodway is designated,
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other
development shall not be permitted unless a technical evaluation certified by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing development and anticipated development
will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point
within the community; and,
3. In Zone A riverine areas, in which the regulatory floodway is determined to be the channel of the
river or other water course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width of the
floodplain as measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain,
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other
development shall not be permitted unless a technical evaluation certified by a registered
professional engineer is provided meeting the requirements of Article VI, paragraph I.2.
J. New construction or substantial improvement of any structure in Zones A1-30, AE, AO, Ah, and A
that meets the development standards of Article VI, including the elevation requirements of Article
VI, paragraphs F, G, or H and is elevated on posts, columns, piers, piles, “stilts,” or crawlspaces less
than three feet in height may be enclosed below the elevation requirements provided all the
following criteria are met or exceeded:
1. Walls, with the exception of crawlspaces less than three feet in height, shall not be part of the
structural support of the building; and,
2. Enclosed areas are not “basements” as defined in Article XIII; and,
3. Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either:
a. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or,
b. meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(i) a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of the enclosed area;
(ii) the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above the lowest grade; and,
(iii) openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the entry and exit of flood waters automatically without any
external influence or control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical
and other non-automatic mechanical means, and,
4. The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and,
O:\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.DOCX 7
5. The enclosed area may be used for building maintenance, access, parking vehicles, or storing of
articles and equipment used for maintenance of the building.
ARTICLE VII – CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no structure which is constructed or
substantially improved shall be occupied until a Certificate of Compliance is issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer subject to the following provisions:
A. The applicant shall submit an Elevation Certificate completed by:
1. a registered Maine surveyor for compliance with Article VI, paragraphs F, G, H, or K; and,
2. a registered professional engineer or architect, in the case of floodproofed non-residential
structures, for compliance with Article VI.G; and,
B. The application for a Certificate of Compliance shall be submitted by the applicant in writing along
with a completed Elevation Certificate to the Code Enforcement Officer.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall review the application within 10 working days of receipt of the
application and shall issue a Certificate of Compliance, provided the building conforms with the
provisions of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE VIII – REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS
The planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed developments that require
review under other federal law, state law or local ordinances or regulations and all projects on 5 or more
acres, or in the case of manufactured home parks divided into two or more lots, assure that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. Al proposals include base flood elevation and, in a riverine floodplain, floodway data.
E. Any proposed development plan shall include a statement that the developer will require that
structures on lots in the development be constructed in accordance with Article VI of this ordinance
and that such requirement will be included in any deed, lease, or document transferring or expressing
an intent to transfer any interest in real estate or structure, including but not limited to a time-share
interest. The construction requirement shall also be stated on any map, plat, or plan to be signed by
the Planning Board or local reviewing authority as part of the approval process.
ARTICLE IX – APPEALS AND VARIANCES
The Board of Appeals of the Town of Gray, Maine, may, upon written application of an aggrieved party,
hear and decide appeals from determinations of the Code Enforcement Officer in the administration of
the provisions of this Ordinance. The Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the requirements of
this Ordinance consistent with state law and the following criteria:
A. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge would result.
B. Variances shall be granted only upon:
O:\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.DOCX 8
1. a showing of good and sufficient cause; and,
2. a determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood occur, the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, public expense, or
create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances; and,
3. a showing that the existence of the variance will not conflict with other state, federal or local
laws or ordinances; and,
4. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in “undue hardship,” which in this
sub-section means:
a. that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted; and,
b. that the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the
general conditions in the neighborhood; and,
c. that the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character or the locality; and,
d. that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
D. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
1. other criteria of Article IX and Article VI-I are met; and,
2. the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during
the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
E. Variances may be issued by a community for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of
structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places,
without regard to the procedures set forth in Article IX, paragraphs A through D.
F. Any applicant who meets the criteria of Article IX, paragraphs A through E shall be notified by the
Board of Appeals in writing over the signature of the Chairman of the Board of Appeals that:
1. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in
greatly increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 per $100 of
insurance coverage;
2. such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property; and,
3. the applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of all the risks inherent in the use
of land subject to flooding, assumes those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the
municipality against any claims filed against it that are related to the applicant’s decision to use
land located in a floodplain and that the applicant individually releases the municipality from any
claims the applicant may have against the municipality that are related to the use of land located
in a floodplain.
G. The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer a report of all variance actions,
including justification for the granting of the variance and an authorization for the Code
O:\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.DOCX 9
Enforcement Officer to issue a Flood Hazard Development Permit, which includes any conditions to
be attached to said permit.
ARTICLE X – ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance
pursuant to 30A MRSA § 4452.
B. The penalties contained in 30A MRSA § 4452 shall apply to any violation of this ordinance.
C. In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer, upon determination that a violation
exists, shall submit a declaration to the Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration
requesting a denial of flood insurance. The valid declaration shall consist of;
1. the name of the property owner and address or legal description of the property sufficient to
confirm its identity or location;
2. a clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a cited State or local law,
or ordinance;
3. a statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to do so and a citation to
that authority;
4. evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation and the prospective
denial of insurance; and,
5. a clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section 1316 of the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
ARTICLE XI – VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
If any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall
not invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE XII – CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
This Ordinance shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other
applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw, permit, or provision of law. Where this Ordinance
imposes a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings, or structures, the provisions of this
Ordinance shall control.
ARTICLE XIII – DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used I this Ordinance shall have the same meaning
as they have at common law and to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application. Words used in
the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular. The word “may” is permissive; “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.
Adjacent Grade – means the natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Area of a Shallow Flooding – means a designated AO and AH zone on a community’s Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable,
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
O:\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.DOCX 10
Area of Special Flood Hazard – means the land in the floodplain having a one percent or greater chance
of flooding in any given year, as specifically identified in the Flood Insurance Study cited in Article I of
this Ordinance.
Base Flood – means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year, commonly called the 100-year flood.
Basement – means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway Wall – means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended
through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing
damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Building – see Structure.
Certificate of Compliance – A document signed by the Code Enforcement Officer stating that a structure
is in compliance with all of the provisions of this Ordinance.
Code Enforcement Officer – any person or board responsible for performing the inspection, licensing,
and enforcement duties required by a particular statute or ordinance.
Development – mans any change caused by individuals or entities to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings or other structures; the construction of
additions or substantial improvements to buildings or other structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials; and the storage, deposition,
or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
Elevated Building – means a non-basement building:
1) built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, or AH, to have the top of the
elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns, post, piers or
“stilts;” and
2) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of
up to one foot above the magnitude of the base flood.
3) In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, or AH, Elevated Building also includes a building
elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls less than three feet in height with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters.
Elevation Certificate – An official form (FEMA Form 81-31, 05/90, as amended) that:
1) is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program; and,
2) is required for purchasing flood insurance.
Flood or Flooding – means:
1) A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from:
a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
b) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
O:\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.DOCX 11
2) The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of
erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical
levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in
flooding as defined in paragraph (a) (1) of this definition.
Flood Elevation Study – means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if
appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) – means an official map of a community, on which the Administrator
of the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study –see Flood Elevation Study.
Floodplain or Flood-prone Area – means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source (see flooding).
Floodplain Management – means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations – means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building
codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain Ordinance, grading
ordinance, and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes
such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of
flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing – means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents.
Floodway – see Regulatory Floodway.
Floodway Encroachment Lines – mean the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state, and
local floodplain maps.
Freeboard – means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of
floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors, such as wave
action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed, that could
contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions.
Functionally Dependent Use – means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port
facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and
ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Historic Structure – means any structure that is:
1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting
the requirements for individual listing on the National register;
O:\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.DOCX 12
2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
a) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
b) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Locally Established Datum – means, for purposes of this ordinance, an elevation established for a
specific site to which all other elevations at the site are referenced. This elevation is generally not
referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or any other established datum and is used
in areas where Mean Seal Level data is too far from a specific site to be practically used.
Lowest Floor – means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements
described in Article VI of this ordinance.
Manufactured Home – means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term manufactured home also includes
park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive
days.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision – means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale..
Mean Sea Level – means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a
community’s Flood Insurance Rate map are referenced.
New Construction – means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
100-year flood – see Base Flood.
Regulatory Floodway –
1) means the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved
in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot, and
2) in riverine areas is considered to be the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land
areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain, as measured from the normal high water
mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
Riverine – means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
O:\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT\CHAPTER 405 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.DOCX 13
Special Flood Hazard Area – see Area of Special Flood Hazard.
Start of Construction – means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement
of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include exaction for basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For
a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
Structure – means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building. A gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground is also a structure.
Substantial Damage – means, damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement – means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
2) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure.
Variance – means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management
regulation.
Violation – means the failure of a structure or development to comply with a community’s floodplain
management regulations.
ARTICLE XIV – ABROGATION
This Ordinance repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously enacted to comply with the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.S. 90-488, as amended).
60.3 (c & d)
CHAPTER 407
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES SITING ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Enacted August 7, 2001 - Effective September 6, 2001
Amended May 18, 2010 – Effective June 17, 2010
SECTION 1 TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the “Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Siting
Ordinance” of Gray, Maine (hereafter referred to as the “Ordinance”).
SECTION 2 AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the enabling provisions of Article VIII, Part 2, Section I of the
Maine Constitution; the provisions of Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 3001 (Home Rule), and the
provisions of the Planning and Land Use Regulation Act, Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 4312 et seq.
SECTION 3 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide a process and a set of standards for the construction of
wireless telecommunications facilities in order to:
A. Implement a municipal policy concerning the provision of wireless telecommunications services,
and the siting of their facilities within the Town of Gray.
B. Establish clear guidelines, standards, and time frames for the exercise of municipal authority to
regulate wireless telecommunications facilities.
C. Allow competition in telecommunications service.
D. Encourage the provision of advanced telecommunications services to the largest number of
businesses, institutions, and residents of the Town of Gray.
E. Authorize and facilitate reasonable access to the public rights of way of the Town of Gray for
telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis.
F. Ensure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities services within the Town of Gray
comply with the Ordinances of the Town of Gray.
G. Ensure that the Town of Gray can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety,
and welfare.
H. Encourage the co-location of wireless telecommunications facilities thus helping to minimize
adverse visual impacts on the community.
I. Enable the Town of Gray to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving Federal and
State regulatory policies, industry competition, and technological development.
J. Further the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Gray, while promoting
orderly development of the town with minimal impacts on existing uses.
K. Protect the scenic and visual character of the community. Minimize the adverse impacts of such
facilities including: scenic and visual impacts, environmental impacts, impacts to historically
significant areas, health and safety impacts, and property value impacts.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY SITING\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES SITING
ORDINANCE.DOCX 2
SECTION 4 APPLICABILITY
This local land use Ordinance applies to all construction and expansion of wireless telecommunications
facilities with the exception that the following are exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance:
A. Emergency Wireless Telecommunications Facility – A temporary wireless communication facility
for emergency communications by public and private officials.
B. Amateur (ham) radio station antenna – An antenna of an amateur (ham) radio station licensed by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) provided that it is not more than thirty-five (35) feet in
height.
C. Parabolic antenna – A parabolic antenna less than seven (7) feet in diameter, and not more than
thirty-five (35) feet in height, that is an accessory use of a property.
D. Maintenance or repair – Maintenance, repair, or reconstruction of a wireless telecommunications
facility and related equipment, provided that there is no change in the height or any other dimension
of the facility.
E. Temporary wireless telecommunications facility – A temporary wireless telecommunications
facility, in operation for a maximum period of one hundred eighty (180) days.
F. Antenna as Accessory Use – An antenna that is an accessory use to a residential dwelling unit
provided that it does not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.
G. Public Service Use or Facility – A use operated or used by a public body or public utility as a public
service that has a maximum height of no more than one hundred (100) feet.
SECTION 5 APPROVAL AUTHORITY
5.1 APPROVAL REQUIRED
No person shall construct or expand a wireless telecommunication facility without approval of the
Planning Board or the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) as follows:
A. New Construction
1. Construction of a new wireless telecommunications facility requires approval by the Planning
Board.
B. Expansion of an Existing Facility and Co-location
1. Expansion of an existing wireless telecommunications facility that increases the height of the
facility by more than twenty (20) feet requires approval by the Planning Board.
2. Expansion of an existing wireless telecommunications facility, accessory use of an existing
wireless telecommunications facility, or co-location on an existing wireless telecommunications
facility that does not increase the height of the facility by more than twenty (20) feet requires
approval by the CEO.
5.2 APPROVAL AUTHORITY
In accordance with Section 5.1 above, the Planning Board or the CEO shall review applications for
wireless telecommunications facilities and provide written findings on whether or not the proposed
facility complies with this Ordinance.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY SITING\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES SITING
ORDINANCE.DOCX 3
SECTION 6 APPLICATION AND REVIEW
6.1 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE
All persons seeking approval of the Planning Board or the CEO under this Ordinance shall meet with the
CEO before filing an application. At this meeting, the CEO shall explain to the applicant the Ordinance
provisions as well as application forms and submissions that will be required under this Ordinance.
6.2 APPLICATION
All persons seeking approval of the Planning Board or the CEO under this Ordinance shall submit an
application as provided below. The Town Planner or the CEO, as the case may be, shall be responsible
for ensuring that notice of the application is published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
community.
A. General Rules for Applications
1. Documentation of the applicant’s right, title, or interest in the property on which the facility is to
be sited, including name and address of the property owner and name and address of the
applicant.
2. A copy of the FCC license for the facility, or a signed statement from the owner or operator of
the facility attesting that the proposed facility complies with all current FCC regulations for radio
emissions.
3. Identification of districts, sites, building, structures, or objects, significant in American history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture that are listed, or are eligible for listing, in the
National Register of Historic Places (see 16 U.S.C. 470w (5); 36 CFR 60 and 800) from which
the facility is visible.
4. Location map and elevation drawings of the proposed facility and any other proposed structures
showing colors and identifying structural materials.
5. For a proposed new facility or for a proposed expansion of an existing facility, a signed
statement that the owner of the wireless telecommunications facility and his or her successors
and assigns agree to:
a. Respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request for information from a potential colocation
applicant in exchange for a reasonable fee not in excess of the actual cost of
preparing a response.
b. Negotiate in good faith for shared use of the wireless facility by third parties.
c. Allow shared use of the wireless telecommunications facility if an applicant agrees in writing
to pay reasonable charges for co-location.
d. Require no more than a reasonable charge for shared use, based upon community rates and
generally accepted accounting principles, this charge may include but is not limited to a pro
rata share of the cost of site selection, planning, project administration, land costs, site
design, construction and maintenance, financing, return on equity, depreciation, and all of the
costs of adapting the tower or equipment to accommodate a shared use without causing
electromagnetic interference. The amortization of the above cost by the facility owner shall
be accomplished at a reasonable rate, over the useful life span of the facility.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY SITING\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES SITING
ORDINANCE.DOCX 4
B. Application for Planning Board Approval
An application for approval by the Planning Board must be submitted to the Town Planner. In
addition to the general rules of Section 6.2 A, the application must include the following
information:
1. A USGS 7.5 minute topographic map showing the location of all structures and wireless
telecommunications facilities more than one hundred fifty (150) feet in height above the ground
level except antennas located on roof tops, within a five (5) mile radius of the proposed facility,
unless this information has been previously made available to the Town of Gray.
2. A site plan prepared and certified by a qualified Professional Engineer registered in State of
Maine indicating the location, type, and height of the proposed facility, antenna capacity, on-site
and abutting off-site land uses, means of access, setbacks from property lines, and all applicable
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) technical and structural codes.
3. A boundary survey of the site performed by a Land Surveyor licensed by the State of Maine.
4. A scenic assessment, consisting of the following:
a. Elevation drawings of the proposed facility and any other proposed, structures showing
height above ground level.
b. A landscaping plan indicating the proposed placement of the facility on the site; location of
existing structures, trees, and other significant site features; the type and location of plants
proposed to screen the facility; the method of fencing, the color of the structure, and the
proposed lighting method.
c. Photo simulations of the proposed facility taken from perspectives determined by the
Planning Board, or their designee, during the pre-application conference. Each photo must
be labeled with the line of sight, elevation, and with the date taken imprinted on the
photograph. The photos must show the color of the facility and method of screening.
d. A narrative discussing:
(i) The extent to which the proposed facility would be visible from or within a designated
scenic resource.
(ii) The tree line elevation of vegetation within 100 feet of the facility.
(iii) The distance to the proposed facility from the noted viewpoints of a designated scenic
resource.
5. A written description of how the proposed facility fits into the applicant’s telecommunications
network. This submission requirement does not require disclosure of confidential business
information.
6. Evidence demonstrating that no existing building, site, or structure can accommodate the
applicant’s proposed facility, the evidence for which may consist of any one or more of the
following:
a. Evidence that no existing facilities are located within the targeted market coverage area that
are suitable to meet the applicant’s engineering requirements.
b. Evidence that existing facilities do not have sufficient height or cannot be increased in height
at a reasonable cost to meet the applicant’s engineering requirements.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY SITING\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES SITING
ORDINANCE.DOCX 5
c. Evidence that existing facilities do not have sufficient structural strength to support
applicant’s proposed antenna and related equipment. Specifically:
(i) Planned necessary equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing facility,
considering the existing and planned use of those facilities, and the existing facilities
cannot be reinforced to accommodate the new equipment.
(ii) Existing or approved facilities do not have space on which planned equipment can be
placed so it can function effectively.
d. The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share or adapt an
existing facility are unreasonable. Costs exceeding the pro rata share of a new facility
development are presumed to be unreasonable.
e. Evidence that the applicant has made diligent good faith efforts to negotiate co-location on an
existing facility, building, or structure and has been denied access.
f. The applicant’s proposed antenna or equipment would cause electromagnetic interference
with antennas on the existing towers or structures.
g. Antennas or equipment on the existing facility would cause electromagnetic interference with
the applicant’s proposed antenna.
7. A sample of a form of surety approved by the Planning Board to pay for the costs of removing
the facility if it is abandoned. Actual surety is to be obtained after approval of the application by
the Planning Board.
C. Application for CEO Approval
Applications for permit approval by the CEO must be in accordance with the general rules of Section
6.2 A
6.3 SUBMISSION WAIVER
At the time of application, an applicant may submit a written request for a waiver of some submission
requirements. A waiver of any submission requirement may be granted only if the Planning Board,
Town Planner, or CEO finds in writing that the information is not required to determine compliance
with the standards of this Ordinance due to special circumstances of the application.
6.4 FEES
A. Application Review Fees
An applicant shall pay all reasonable and customary fees for the costs incurred by the Town of Gray
that are necessary to review an application for approval by the Planning Board or CEO. The review
fees shall be paid in full prior to the start of construction. Any portion of the review fees not used
shall be returned to the applicant within fourteen (14) days of the decision by the Planning Board or
CEO.
B. Planning Board Application Fee
An application for Planning Board approval shall include payment of an application fee of onehundred-
fifty dollars ($150.00). The application shall not be considered complete until this fee is
paid. If an application is withdrawn within fifteen (15) days of the date of filing, the applicant is
entitled to a refund of the application portion of the fee less all expenses incurred by the Town of
Gray to review the application.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY SITING\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES SITING
ORDINANCE.DOCX 6
C. CEO Application Fee
An application for CEO approval shall include payment of an application fee of one-hundred-fifty
dollars ($150.00). The application shall not be considered complete until this fee is paid. If an
application is withdrawn within fifteen (15) days of the date of filing, the applicant is entitled to a
refund of the application portion of the fee less all expenses incurred by the Town of Gray to review
the application.
6.5 NOTICE OF COMPLETE APPLICATION
A. Upon receipt of an application, the Town Planner or CEO, as the case may be, shall provide the
applicant with a dated receipt. Within five (5) working days of receipt of an application the Town
Planner or CEO, as appropriate, shall review the application and determine if the application meets
the submission requirements. The Planning Board, Town Planner, or CEO, as appropriate, shall
review any requests for a waiver from the submission requirements and shall act on these requests
prior to determining the completeness of the application.
B. If the application is complete, the Town Planner or CEO, as appropriate, shall notify the applicant in
writing of this determination and require the applicant to provide a sufficient number of copies of the
application to the Planning Board, Town Planner, Code Enforcement Officer, Town Engineer, and
Fire Department.
C. If the application is incomplete, the Town Planner or CEO, as the case may be, shall notify the
applicant in writing, specifying the additional materials or information required to complete the
application.
D. If the application is deemed to be complete, and requires Planning Board review the Town Planner
or CEO, as appropriate, shall notify all abutters to the site as shown on the Assessor’s records, by
first-class mail, that an application has been accepted. This notice shall contain a brief description of
the proposed activity and the name of the applicant, give the location of a copy of the application
available for inspection, and provide the date, time, and place of the Planning Board meeting at
which the application will be considered. Failure on the part of any abutter to receive such notice
shall not be grounds for delay of any consideration of the application nor denial of the project.
6.6 PUBLIC HEARING
A public hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days of the notice of the completed application for an
application that requires Planning Board approval under Section 5.1 A or 5.1 B.
6.7 APPROVAL
A. Planning Board Approval
Within ninety (90) days of receiving a completed application for approval under Section 5.1 A or 5.1
B, the Planning Board shall approve, approve with condition, or deny the application in writing,
together with the findings on which that decision is based. The Town Planner shall notify all
abutters within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed site of the decision to approve a permit under
this section. The time period may be extended upon agreement between the applicant and the
Planning Board. If the Planning board has a waiting list of applications that would prevent the
Planning Board from making a decision within the required ninety (90) day time period, then a
decision on the application shall be issued within sixty (60) days of the public hearing or within sixty
(60) days of the completed Planning Board review. This time period may be extended upon
agreement between the applicant and the Planning Board.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY SITING\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES SITING
ORDINANCE.DOCX 7
B. CEO Approval
Within thirty (30) days of receiving a completed application for approval under Section 5.1 C, the
CEO shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application in writing, together with the
findings on which that decision is based.
The CEO shall approve the application if the CEO finds that the application complies with the
provisions in Section 7.1 of this Ordinance. The CEO shall notify all abutters within five-hundred
(500) feet of the proposed site of the decision to issue a permit under this section. The time period
may be extended upon agreement between the applicant and the CEO.
SECTION 7 STANDARDS OF REVIEW
7.1 PLANNING BOARD APPROVAL STANDARDS
An application for approval by the Planning Board under Section 5.1 A or 5.1 B must meet the
following standards:
A. Location
1. New wireless telecommunications facilities are not permitted in the Well Head Protection Zone 2
(WH2).
2. New wireless telecommunications facilities are not permitted in any areas that are subject to
Shoreland Zoning restrictions.
3. New wireless telecommunications facilities may be permitted as architectural co-locations
attached to any structures such as church steeples, water towers, power poles, tall buildings, and
similar structures anywhere in the Town of Gray, with the following restrictions:
a. Architectural co-locations are not permitted in the restricted zones of Sections 1 and 2 above.
b. New wireless telecommunications facilities that are architectural co-locations are not
permitted to extend more than twenty (20) feet above the structures to which they are
attached.
4. New wireless telecommunications facilities may be permitted on any State of Maine or
Municipal Property except that new wireless telecommunications facilities are permitted in the
Village Center Zone (VC) only in areas where the ground elevation is three-hundred-fifty (350)
feet or more above MSL.
5. New wireless telecommunications facilities may be permitted in the following
Telecommunications Overlay Zones: (Note: The series of Gray Quadrangle U. S. Geological
Survey Topographic Maps dated 1980 and revised on file in the Town Office shall be used as
reference maps for ground elevation above mean sea level.)
a. Telecommunications Overlay Zone 1 shall include all areas in the vicinity of Adams Hill
(Mountain View Road) where the ground elevation is five-hundred (500) feet or more above
MSL.
b. Telecommunications Overlay Zone 2 shall include all areas in the vicinity of Hunt’s Hill
(Eagle’s Nest Road) where the ground elevation is four-hundred (400) feet or more above
MSL.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY SITING\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES SITING
ORDINANCE.DOCX 8
c. Telecommunications Overlay Zone 3 shall include all areas in the vicinity of Long Hill
(Long Hill Road) where the ground elevation is four-hundred (400) feet or more above MSL.
d. Telecommunications Overlay Zone 4 shall include all areas in the vicinity of Dutton Hill
(Dutton Hill Road) where the ground elevation is four-hundred (400) feet or more above
MSL.
e. Telecommunications Overlay Zone 5 shall include all areas in the vicinity of Colley Hill (on
the East side of Gray Village) where the ground elevation is three-hundred-fifty (350) feet or
more above MSL.
f. Telecommunications Overlay Zone 6 shall include all areas in the vicinity of Libby Hill
(Libby Hill Road) where the ground elevation is three-hundred-seventy (370) feet or more
above MSL.
g. Telecommunications Overlay Zone 7 shall include all areas in the vicinity of Knudsen Road
between Cambell Shore Road and the Windham Town Line where the ground elevation is
four-hundred (400) feet or more above MSL.
h. Telecommunications Overlay Zone 8 shall include all areas in the vicinity of the small hill on
Libby Brook where the ground elevation is two-hundred-fifty (250) feet or more above MSL.
i. Telecommunications Overlay Zone 9 shall include all areas in the vicinity of the hill at
Weathervane Road where the ground elevation is three-hundred (300) feet or more above
MSL.
j. Telecommunications Overlay Zone 10 shall include all areas in the vicinity of the hill at
Merrill Road and Bull Run Road where the ground elevation is three-hundred (300) feet or
more above MSL.
B. Siting on Municipal Property
An application to locate a new wireless telecommunications facility, or expand an existing facility
on municipal property, must show the following:
1. The proposed location complies with applicable Town of Gray policies and ordinances.
2. The proposed facility will not interfere with the intended purpose of the property.
3. The applicant has adequate liability insurance and a lease agreement with the Town of Gray that
will include reasonable compensation as determined by the Town Council after a public hearing
for the use of the property and other provisions to safeguard the public rights and interests in the
property.
C. Siting on State Property
An application to locate a new wireless telecommunications facility, or expand an existing facility
on municipal property, must show the following:
1. The proposed location complies with applicable Town of Gray policies and ordinances.
2. The proposed facility or facility expansion serves essential government services and does not
serve commercial purposes.
D. Design for Co-location
1. A new wireless telecommunications facility and related equipment must be designed and
constructed to accommodate expansions for future co-location of at least three additional
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY SITING\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES SITING
ORDINANCE.DOCX 9
wireless telecommunications facilities or providers. The Planning Board, however, may waive or
modify this standard where special circumstances effectively preclude future co-location.
2. An exception to Section 1 above shall be allowed in the case of architectural co-location where a
new facility may stand alone without any provisions for future co-locators.
E. Height
1. The height any new wireless telecommunications facility must be less than an amount that would
require illumination in order to be in accordance with FAA or other applicable State and Federal
requirements.
2. On any new site, the height of a new wireless telecommunications facility may be no more than
two hundred (200) feet at the highest point including antennas or accessories. The highest point
shall exclude farm building components, flagpoles, chimneys, ventilators, skylights, domes,
water towers, bell towers, church spires, and processing towers, tanks, bulkheads, or other
building accessory features usually erected at a height greater than the main roofs of buildings.
3. For any allowed location where there are one or more existing wireless telecommunications
facilities, a new wireless telecommunications facility that is located at a horizontal distance of no
more than four-hundred (400) feet from a facility that was in existence at the time of Adoption of
this Ordinance may have a height such that the highest point including antennas or accessories
may be as much as, but no more than, the height of that existing facility. The new is facility not
permitted to be illuminated except for security lighting in accordance with Section H below.
4. Facility height shall be the vertical distance measured from the finished grade of the facility site
to the highest point of the structure, including base pad, all antennas, and other appurtenances. If
the support structure is on a sloped grade, the average between the highest and lowest grades
shall be used in calculating the height.
F. Setbacks
A new or expanded wireless telecommunications facility must comply with the setback requirements
for the Zoning District in which it is located, or be set back one hundred twenty-five percent (125%)
of its height from all property lines, whichever is greater. The setback may be satisfied by including
areas outside the property boundaries if secured by easements. The following exemptions apply:
1. The setback requirement may be reduced by the Planning Board upon a showing by the applicant
that the facility is designed to collapse in a manner that will not harm other property.
2. A horizontal antenna is exempt from the setback requirement if it extends no more than five (5)
feet horizontally from the edge of the structure to which it is attached, and it does not encroach
upon abutting property.
G. Landscaping
A new wireless telecommunications facility and related equipment must be screened with plants
from being viewed by abutting properties, to the maximum extent practicable. Existing plants and
natural land forms on the site shall also be preserved to the maximum extent practicable.
H. Fencing
A new wireless telecommunications facility must be suitably fenced to discourage trespass on the
facility and to discourage climbing on any structure by trespassers.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY SITING\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES SITING
ORDINANCE.DOCX 10
I. Lighting
Any new wireless telecommunications facility must not be illuminated except for security lighting
that is directed down in a manner to retain light within the boundaries of the site, to the maximum
extent practicable.
J. Color and Materials
A new wireless telecommunications facility must be constructed with materials and colors that
match or blend with the surrounding natural or built environment to the maximum extent practicable.
Unless otherwise required, muted colors, earth tones, and subdued hues shall be used.
K. Structural Standards
For a building permit to be issued, a new wireless telecommunications facility must comply with the
current Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries Association (EIA/TIA)
Standard 222 Revision F entitled “Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna
Supporting Structures” and the Town of Gray Building Code.
L. Visual Impact
The proposed wireless telecommunications facility must not have any unreasonable adverse impact
upon designated scenic resources within theTown of Gray as identified either in the Comprehensive
Plan, or by a State or Federal agency. In determining the potential unreasonable adverse impact of
the proposed facility upon designated scenic resources; the Planning Board shall consider the
following factors:
1. The extent to which the proposed wireless telecommunications facility is visible above the tree
line as seen from one or more viewpoints of the impacted designated scenic resource.
2. The type, number, height, and proximity of existing structures and features and background
features within the same line of sight as the proposed facility.
3. The extent to which the proposed wireless telecommunications facility would be visible from
viewpoints.
4. The amount of vegetative screening.
5. The distances of the proposed facility from viewpoints and the location of the facility.
6. The presence of reasonable alternatives that would allow the facility to function consistently with
its purpose.
M. Fuels
The risk of environmental contamination that might result from fuel leakage or fuel spills is to be
minimized by the use of propane or other suitable alternative fuel for facility heating or for operation
of a back-up power generator. Gasoline or diesel fuel is to be used for operation of a back-up power
generator only if specially approved by the Planning Board.
N. Noise
Any noise resulting from the operation of a back-up power generator at any time during a general
power failure or the testing of a back-up generator shall not exceed seventy (70) dBa at the
boundaries of a telecommunications site, excluding any easements.
O. Historic and Archaeological Properties.
The proposed facility, to the greatest degree practicable, shall have no unreasonable adverse impact
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY SITING\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES SITING
ORDINANCE.DOCX 11
upon a historic district, site, or structure which is currently listed on or eligible for listing on the
National Register of Historic Places from which the facility is visible.
7.2 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER APPROVAL STANDARDS
An application for approval by the CEO under Section 5.1 C must meet the following standards:
A. The applicant has sufficient right, title, or interest to locate the proposed facility on the existing
structure.
B. The proposed facility is an expansion, accessory use, or co-location to a structure existing at the time
the application is submitted. An architectural co-location must be in accordance with Section 7.1 A
3 above.
C. The proposed facility does not increase the height of the existing structure by more than twenty (20)
feet.
D. The proposed facility will be constructed with materials and colors that match or blend with the
surrounding natural or built environment to the maximum extent practicable.
E. The proposed facility, to the greatest degree practicable, shall have no unreasonable adverse impact
upon districts, sites, buildings, structures or objects significant in American history, architecture,
archaeology, engineering, or culture, that are listed or eligible for listing, in the National Register of
Historic Places (see 16 U.S.C. 470w (5); 36 CFR 60 and 800).
SECTION 8 AMENDMENT TO AN APPROVED APPLICATION
Any changes to an approved application must be approved by the Planning Board or CEO, as
appropriate, in accordance with Section 5.
SECTION 9 TOWER INSPECTION
A. All telecommunications towers must be inspected for structural integrity by a qualified Registered
Professional Engineer at time intervals of no more than ten (10) years.
B. A copy of the inspection report shall be provided to the Town Engineer within thirty (30) days of its
receipt by the owner or operator of the tower. Failure to provide required inspection reports in
accordance with the required time schedule shall be deemed primae facie evidence of abandonment.
C. Upon recommendation by the Town Engineer, the CEO may require the tower to be repaired or to be
demolished based upon the results of the inspection.
D. Any repairs that are required as a result of the inspection shall be completed within ninety (90) days
from the receipt of notice by the owner of the tower. Repairs may be required to be completed more
quickly if the Town Engineer determines that a safety or impending environmental emergency
exists.
E. Within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice, the owner must complete the removal of a tower that
has been ordered demolished. After the demolition of a tower has been completed, the site may be
converted to another use or an application to build a new tower may be submitted to the Planning
Board. When applicable, the site must be returned to its pre-construction natural condition as much
as may be feasible to the satisfaction of the CEO. The CEO may require the removal of all
associated above ground structures, equipment, foundations, guy anchors, utilities, and access roads
or driveways constructed to specifically service the demolished tower.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY SITING\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES SITING
ORDINANCE.DOCX 12
F. If demolition of a tower has not been completed within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice, then the
Municipal Officers may proceed at the owner’s expense to demolish the tower and return the site to
its pre-construction natural condition or convert the site to another appropriate use. The Municipal
Officers may act more quickly if the Town Engineer has determined that a safety or environmental
emergency exists. Upon completion of demolition or conversion of the facility to the satisfaction of
the CEO and the Planning Board, any balance remaining in the surety provided to the Town of Gray
by the owner may be returned to the owner.
G. After the completion of each inspection and completion of any required repairs, the amount of the
surety provided to the Town of Gray by the owner or operator of a tower shall be reviewed. The
amount of the surety may be increased if deemed necessary to be adequate to pay for the estimated
future costs of demolishing the tower.
H. All the costs of inspections, reports, repairs, review of surety, or demolition required under this
Section of this Ordinance shall be borne entirely by the owner or operator of the tower.
SECTION 10 ABANDONMENT
A wireless telecommunication facility that has not been used or operated at any time during a continuous
period of the preceding twelve (12) months shall be considered to be abandoned. The CEO shall
provide written notice to the owner of an abandoned facility that the facility is deemed to be abandoned
and that the abandoned facility is required to be removed or to be converted to another use.
A. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a notice of abandonment, the owner of the facility shall exercise
one of the following three options:
1. The owner may demonstrate to the CEO that the facility has not been abandoned, is in use, or has
been in use during the continuous period of the preceding twelve (12) months, is being properly
maintained, and is not a safety hazard.
or
2. The owner may submit a plan to the CEO for conversion of the facility to another use that will be
in accordance with all applicable zoning requirements including approval by the Planning Board
or CEO as appropriate.
or
3. The owner may submit a plan for completion of removal of the abandoned facility to be
accomplished within ninety (90) days. When applicable, the site must be returned to its preconstruction
natural condition as much as may be feasible to the satisfaction of the CEO. The
CEO may require the removal of all associated above ground structures, equipment, foundations,
guy anchors, utilities, and access roads or driveways constructed to specifically service the
abandoned facility.
B. If there is more than one wireless telecommunication facility at a particular site, then the
requirements of Section A above are to be applied only to an abandoned facility.
C. If the owner of the abandoned facility has not exercised one of the three options of Section A above
within ninety (90) days of receipt of the notice of abandonment, then the Municipal Officers may
proceed at the owner’s expense to remove the abandoned facility and return the site to its preconstruction
natural condition or convert the site to another appropriate use. Upon completion of
removal or conversion of the facility to the satisfaction of the CEO and the Planning Board, any
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY SITING\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES SITING
ORDINANCE.DOCX 13
balance remaining in the surety provided to the Town of Gray by the owner may be returned to the
owner.
SECTION 11 APPEALS
Any persons aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Board or CEO under this Ordinance may appeal
the decision directly to the Maine Superior Court within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the written
decision in accordance with the rules for such appeals.
SECTION 12 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
The CEO, as appointed by the Town Manager, shall enforce this Ordinance. If the CEO finds that any
provision of this Ordinance has been violated, the CEO shall notify in writing the person responsible for
such violation, indicating the nature of the violation, and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The
CEO may take any other legal action to ensure compliance with this Ordinance. The Municipal
Officers, or their agents, are authorized to enter into administrative consent agreements for the purpose
of eliminating violations of this Ordinance and recovering penalties without court action. Such
agreements shall not allow a violation of this Ordinance to continue unless:
A. There is clear and convincing evidence that the violation occurred as a direct result of erroneous
advice given by an authorized Municipal Official upon which the applicant reasonably relied to its
detriment and there is no evidence that the owner acted in bad faith.
B. The removal of the violation will result in a threat to public health and safety or cause substantial
environmental damage.
SECTION 13 PENALTIES
Any person who owns or controls any building or property that violates this Ordinance shall be
penalized in accordance with Title 30-A M.R.S.A.§ 4452. Each day such violation continues after
notification by the CEO shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 14 CONFLICT AND SEVERABILITY
14.1 CONFLICTS WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision of this
Ordinance or of any other Ordinance, Regulation, or Statute, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
14.2 SEVERABILITY
The invalidity of any part of this Ordinance shall not invalidate any other part of this Ordinance.
SECTION 15 DEFINITIONS
The terms used in this Ordinance shall have the following meanings:
A. “Antenna” means any system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs, parabolic antenna, or similar
devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency or other electromagnetic signals.
B. “Architectural Co-location” means the installation of a wireless telecommunications facility on
structures such as church steeples, water towers, power poles, tall buildings, and similar structures
other than new or existing telecommunications towers.
C. “Co-location” means the use of a wireless telecommunications facility by more than one wireless
telecommunications provider.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY SITING\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES SITING
ORDINANCE.DOCX 14
D. “Comprehensive Plan” means the Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Gray
E. “Designated Scenic Resource” means that specific location, view, or corridor, as identified as a
scenic resource in the Comprehensive Plan or by a State or Federal agency, that consists of any of
the following:
1. A three dimensional area extending out from a particular viewpoint on a public way or within a
public recreational area, focusing on a single object, such as a mountain, resulting in a narrow
corridor, or a group of objects such as a downtown skyline or mountain range resulting in a
panoramic view corridor.
2. Lateral terrain features such as valley sides or woodland as observed to either side of the
observer, constraining the view into a narrow or particular field, as seen from a viewpoint on a
public way or within a public recreational area.
F. “Expansion” means the addition of antennas, towers, or other devices to an existing
telecommunications facility .
G. “FAA” means the Federal Aviation Administration
H. “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission, or its lawful successor.
I. “Height” means the vertical measurement from a point on the ground at the mean finish grade
adjoining the foundation as calculated by averaging the highest and lowest finished grade around a
structure, to the highest point of the structure.
J. “Historical or Archaeological Resources” means resources that are any of the following:
1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or eligible for listing on the
National Register.
2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district.
3. Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places approved by the Secretary of the
Interior.
4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified by the Secretary of the Interior through the Maine
Historic Preservation Commission.
5. Areas identified by a governmental agency such as the Maine Historic Preservation Commission
as having significant value as an historic or archaeological resource and any areas identified in
the Comprehensive Plan which have been listed or are eligible to be listed on the National
Register of Historic Places.
K. “Historic District” means a geographically definable area possessing a significant concentration,
linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united by past events or aesthetically
by plan or physical development and identified in the Comprehensive Plan which is listed or is
eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Such historic districts may also
comprise individual elements separated geographically, but linked by association or history.
L. “Historic Landmark” means any improvement, building, or structure of particular historical or
architectural significance to the Town of Gray relating to its heritage, cultural, social, economic, or
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY SITING\CHAPTER 407 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES SITING
ORDINANCE.DOCX 15
political history, or which exemplifies historical personages or important events in local, State, or
National history identified in the Comprehensive Plan, which have been listed or are eligible to be
listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
M. “Line of Sight” means a direct view from a designated scenic resource.
N. “MSL” means mean sea level.
O. “Parabolic Antenna” (also known as a satellite dish antenna) means an antenna which is bowlshaped,
designed for the reception and or transmission of radio frequency communication signals in
a specific directional pattern.
P. “Principal Use” means a use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory to another use
on the same premises.
Q. “Public Recreational Facility” means a regionally or locally significant facility, as defined and
identified either by State statute or in the Comprehensive Plan, designed to serve the recreational
needs of people.
R. “Targeted Market Coverage Area” means the area which is targeted to be served by a proposed
telecommunications facility.
S. “Unreasonable Adverse Impact” means that a proposed project would produce an end result which is
excessively out-of-character with designated scenic resources affected, including existing buildings,
structures, and features within a designated scenic resource, and would significantly diminish the
scenic value of the designated scenic resource.
T. “Viewpoint” means a location which is identified either in the Comprehensive Plan or by a Federal
or State agency, and which serves as the basis for the location and determination of a particular
designated scenic resource.
U. “Wireless Telecommunications Facility” means any structure, antenna, tower, or device which
provides radio or television transmission, commercial mobile wireless services, unlicensed wireless
services, cellular phone services, common carrier wireless exchange phone services, specialized
mobile radio communications (SMR), personal communications service (PSC), or pager service.
SECTION 16 EFFECTIVE DATE
September 6, 2001
CHAPTER 501
VEHICULAR USE ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted July 13, 1982
SECTION 501.1 – TITLE
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Vehicular Use Ordinance of the Town of Gray.
Maine.
SECTION 501.2 – PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate the use of certain vehicles on certain town ways within the
Town of Gray. The restrictions imposed prevent safety hazards and damage which damage has been or
will be caused by the passage of vehicles which are too heavy for the designated town ways. Preventing
safety hazards and damage to the roads reduces the cost of maintenance, reduces the danger of injury to
the traveling public, and generally improves the use of roads by the public.
SECTION 501.3 – AUTHORITY
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to Title 30, MSRA §1917 and 2151 and Title 29 MRSA §902, 1702,
1703 and 1611.
SECTION 501.4 – DEFINITIONS
A. Restricted Vehicle - a vehicle with dual wheel axles and over sixteen (16) feet in length including
any attached trailer or semitrailer. Vehicles used to make residential deliveries or rented on an
occasional basis shall not be considered restricted vehicles.
B. Town Way - an area or strip of land designated and held by a municipality for the passage and use of
the general public by motor vehicle and all town or county ways not discontinued or abandoned
before the effective date of this ordinance.
C. Other Words - the definitions contained in Title 29, Section 1 or the Maine Revised Statutes
Annotated shall govern the construction of other words contained in this ordinance.
SECTION 501.5 – RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Any reference to a Title and Section of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated shall include any
amendments, whenever enacted, to the referenced Title and Section unless the amendments support a
result which is inconsistent with the purposes of this ordinance, in which case the amendments shall be
disregarded.
SECTION 501.8 – PENALTIES
A. Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not
more than one hundred (100) dollars. Each violation shall be considered a separate offense and
violation of this ordinance. All fines imposed pursuant to this ordinance shall accrue to the Town of
Gray.
B. In addition to any fines imposed pursuant to Section S01.8.A, any person violating this ordinance
shall be responsible for all damage which said town way may sustain as a result thereof and the
amount may be recovered in a civil action brought by the municipality. Any amount so recovered
shall be used for repair of the ways so damaged. This section shall not be construed to limit the
amount that may be recovered by the Town in a civil action. Any amount recovered in excess of the
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 501 VEHICULAR USE ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 501 VEHICULAR USE ORDINANCE.DOCX 2
amount needed to repair the damaged way shall accrue to the Town. If the Town prevails in a civil
action brought pursuant to this section, it shall be entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees in
addition to any damages awarded.
SCHEDULE A
Name of Street Restriction
Florence Road No Thru Trucks
CHAPTER 502
PARKING ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted June 7, 1973
Amended May 3, 1979
Amended February 7, 1984
Amended November 20, 1984
Amended March 18, 1988
Amended June 19, 1994
Amended August 6, 1996
Emergency Amendment September 16, 2008 – Amended November 10, 2008
Amended September 2, 2014
Amended September 6, 2016
SECTION 502.1 – TITLE
This ordinance shall be known and be cited as the Parking Ordinance of the Town of Gray, Maine.
SECTION 502.2 – RESTRICTIONS
A. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent with or duplicating the
provision of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
B. There shall be no parking allowed on either side of the North Raymond Road from the Camp
Gregory driveway to Pole #28.
C. There shall be no parking on either side of Mayberry Road within the road limits for a distance of
500 feet from the intersection of the North Raymond Road.
D. Parking along the northwesterly side of U.S. Route 202, or Main Street from the fire station
northeasterly to State Route 26 shall be restricted to parallel parking only.
E. All parking along U.S. Route 100 shall be parallel parking only, except in the Municipal Parking lot.
F. Parking is prohibited within 25 feet of the terminus of the corner radius along the curb line at street
intersections except at the junction of Route 26 and North Raymond Road at Dry Mills. There shall
be no parking on the south bound side of Shaker Road from Central Maine Power Pole #5S in a
southerly direction to the North Raymond Road intersection. There shall be no parking from the
North Raymond Road intersection for 200 feet on the west bound side of the North Raymond Road.
G. There shall be no parking from the Village traffic lights on Route 26 northerly on both sides of the
street as far as the lot line of SAD#15 (approximately five hundred ten (510) feet), Map U02, Lot 47.
Any vehicles parked in a no parking zone shall be towed at the owner’s expense.
H. There shall no parking on the northerly side of Gray Park (Grange Street) for two hundred ninety
(290) feet.
I. There shall be two (2) hour parking on the east side of Route 26, Map U02, Lot 47, SAD#15,
approximately four hundred fifty (450) feet to Map U02, Lot 44 (Enercon).
J. There shall be no parking in front of Map U02, Lot 44 (Enercon) for approximately seventy five (75)
feet.
K. There shall be no parking from Pine Tree Telephone to the north side of Map U02, Lot 13, driveway.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 502 PARKING ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 502 PARKING ORDINANCE.DOCX 2
L. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following places:
1. Within 10 feet of a public or private driveway.
2. Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
3. Within 20 feet of any crosswalk.
4. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street or double
parked, so called.
5. On a sidewalk.
M. There shall be no parking on the northeasterly side of Brown Street from the intersection of Route
115 to CMP pole#5 and no parking on the southwesterly side of Brown Street for a distance of twohundred
(200) feet from Route 100.
N. There shall be no parking on the southerly side of Greenleaf Street from the intersection of Brown
Street to Route 26, except as posted.
O. There shall be no parking on the northeasterly side of Route 26 from CMP pole #1 to the Weymouth
Road.
P. No vehicle shall be parked at any time on a public way to interfere with snow plowing or snow
removal. No vehicle shall be parked on any street in the Town of Gray between the hours of 12
o’clock midnight and 6:00 a.m. from November 15, to April 15.
Q. There shall be no parking on either side of Route 100 from the Cole Farms Restaurant and
continuing in a northerly direction along Route 100 approximately 2,640 feet to the Central Maine
Power Pole #68/156.
R. There shall be no parking on both sides of Libby Hill Road up to the bus garage entrance.
S. There shall be no parking on either side of Foster Hill Road, in a northerly direction for 1/10 of a
mile, starting from Central Maine Power Pole No. 57-167 (at the intersection of Route 100 and
Foster Hill Road) to Central Maine Power Pole No. 63-161 (at the intersection of Foster Hill Road
and Legrow Road)
T. There shall be no parking on either side of Legrow Road, in a westerly direction to 2/10’s of a mile,
starting from Central Maine Power Pole No. 55 (at the intersection of Foster Hill Road and Legrow
Road) to Central Maine Power Pole No. 4.
U. There shall be no parking on the West Gray Road (Route 202) westbound from #304 West Gray
Road, Map 17, Lot#6 to Central Maine Power Pole #141, and eastbound on West Gray Road ( Route
202 ) from the Windham and Gray town line to Central Maine Power Pole #115. There will be no
parking on the Cambell Shore Road northbound from the intersection of West Gray Road ( Route
202 ) and Cambell Shore Road to #14 Cambell Shore Road, Map17, Lot 16 and southbound from
Central Maine Power Pole #7 to the intersection of West Gray Road ( Route 202 ) and Cambell
Shore Road.
SECTION 502.3 – REMOVAL OF VEHICLES IN VIOLATION
A. Any vehicle parked upon an accepted public street in the Town of Gray in violation of any parking
ordinance or in a manner that is a menace to the safe and proper regulations of traffic, or snow
removal by the Town of Gray or anyone authorized to remove snow for the Town of Gray, may be
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 502 PARKING ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 502 PARKING ORDINANCE.DOCX 3
removed, by or under the direction of, or at the request of, any police officer of the Town of Gray,
Cumberland County Sheriff’s Department or State Police, to a garage or storage place within the
limits of the Town of Gray and impounded therein. Such law enforcement officer may use such
force as may be necessary to enter such vehicle and cause the same to be placed in a condition to be
moved, and may employ any reputable person engaged in the business of towing or storing vehicles,
for such purpose. Such person shall be entitled to receive reasonable charges for such towing and/or
storage from the owner before returning such vehicle to its owner.
B. No law enforcement official nor any other person towing or storing a vehicle pursuant to the
foregoing shall be liable in any way to the owner of said vehicle.
C. Notwithstanding any language herein contained, the removal and storage of a vehicle pursuant to
this ordinance, and the payment of the charges specified herein, shall in no way relieve or prevent
prosecution of the owner for the violation of any provision of the ordinances of the Town of Gray.
SECTION 502.4 – PENALTY
Every person convicted of a violation of this ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten
(10) dollars no more than fifty (50) dollars for each such violation, to be recovered by complaint to the
use of the Inhabitants of the Town of Gray. The restrictions contained in Subsection 502.2(P) of this
Ordinance may also be enforced by the Cumberland County Sheriff’s Department and/or the Maine
State Police provided the restricted areas are properly signed.
CHAPTER 503
PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY (PACE) ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Enacted October 19, 2010
PREAMBLE
WHEREAS, the 124th Maine Legislature has enacted Public Law 2009, Chapter 591, “An Act to
Increase the Affordability of Clean Energy for Homeowners and Businesses,” also known as “the
Property Assessed Clean Energy Act” or “the PACE Act”; and
WHEREAS, that Act authorizes a municipality that has adopted a Property Assessed Clean Energy
(“PACE”) Ordinance to establish a PACE program so that owners of qualifying property can access
financing for energy saving improvements to their properties located in the City/Town, financed by
funds awarded to the Efficiency Maine Trust under the Federal Energy Efficiency and Conservation
Block Grant (EECBG) Program and by other funds available for this purpose, and to enter into a
contract with the Trust to administer functions of its PACE program; and
WHEREAS, the Municipality wishes to establish a PACE program; and
NOW THEREFORE, the Municipality hereby enacts the following Ordinance:
ARTICLE I – PURPOSE AND ENABLING LEGISLATION
§ XX-1 Purpose
By and through this Chapter, the City of/Town of Gray declares as its public purpose the establishment
of a municipal program to enable its citizens to participate in a Property Assessed Clean Energy
(“PACE”) program so that owners of qualifying property can access financing for energy saving
improvements to their properties located in the City/Town. The City/Town declares its purpose and the
provisions of this Chapter/Ordinance to be in conformity with federal and State laws.
§ XX-2 Enabling Legislation
The City/Town enacts this Chapter/Ordinance pursuant to Public Law 2009, Chapter 591 of the 124th
Maine State Legislature -- “An Act To Increase the Affordability of Clean Energy for Homeowners and
Businesses,” also known as “the Property Assessed Clean Energy Act” or “the PACE Act” (codified at
35-A M.R.S.A. § 10151, et seq.).
ARTICLE II – TITLE AND DEFINITIONS
§ XX-3 Title
This Chapter/Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as “the City/Town of Gray Property Assessed
Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance” (the “Ordinance”).”
§ XX-4 Definitions
Except as specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Chapter/Ordinance shall have their
customary meanings; as used in this Chapter/Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings indicated:
1. “Energy saving improvement” means an improvement to qualifying property that is new and
permanently affixed to qualifying property and that:
A. Will result in increased energy efficiency and substantially reduced energy use and:
O:\CHAPTER 503 PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY (PACE)\CHAPTER 503 PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY (PACE) ORDINANCE.DOCX 2
(i) Meets or exceeds applicable United States Environmental Protection Agency and United
States Department of Energy (DOE) Energy Star program or similar energy efficiency
standards established or approved by the Trust; or
(ii) Involves air sealing, insulating, and other energy efficiency improvements of residential,
commercial or industrial property in a manner approved by the Trust; or
B. Involves a renewable energy installation or an electric thermal storage system that meets or
exceeds standards established or approved by the trust.
2. “Municipality” shall mean the City/Town of Gray.
3. “PACE agreement” means an agreement between the owner of qualifying property and the Trust that
authorizes the creation of a PACE mortgage on qualifying property and that is approved in writing
by all owners of the qualifying property at the time of the agreement, other than mortgage holders.
4. “PACE assessment” means an assessment made against qualifying property to repay a PACE loan.
5. “Pace district” means the area within which the Municipality establishes a PACE program
hereunder, which is all that area within the Municipality’s boundaries.
6. “PACE loan” means a loan, secured by a PACE mortgage, made to the owner(s) of a qualifying
property pursuant to a PACE program to fund energy saving improvements.
7. “PACE mortgage” means a mortgage securing a loan made pursuant to a PACE program to fund
energy saving improvements on qualifying property.
8. “PACE program” means a program established under State statute by the Trust or a municipality
under which property owners can finance energy savings improvements on qualifying property.
9. “Qualifying property” means real property located in the PACE district of the Municipality.
10. “Renewable energy installation” means a fixture, product, system, device or interacting group of
devices installed behind the meter at a qualifying property, or on contiguous property under common
ownership, that produces energy or heat from renewable sources, including, but not limited to,
photovoltaic systems, solar thermal systems, biomass systems, landfill gas to energy systems,
geothermal systems, wind systems, wood pellet systems and any other systems eligible for funding
under federal Qualified Energy Conservation Bonds or federal Clean Renewable Energy Bonds.
11. “Trust” means the Efficiency Maine Trust established in 35-A M.R.S.A. § 10103 and/or its agent(s),
if any.
ARTICLE III – PACE PROGRAM
1. Establishment; funding. The Municipality hereby establishes a PACE program allowing owners of
qualifying property located in the PACE district who so choose to access financing for energy saving
improvements to their property through PACE loans administered by the Trust or its agent. PACE
loan funds are available from the Trust in municipalities that 1) adopt a PACE Ordinance, 2) adopt
and implement a local public outreach and education plan, 3) enter into a PACE administration
contract with the Trust to establish the terms and conditions of the Trust’s administration of the
municipality’s PACE program, and 4) agree to assist and cooperate with the Trust in its
administration of the municipality’s PACE program.
2. Amendment to PACE program. In addition, the Municipality may from time to time amend this
Ordinance to use any other funding sources made available to it or appropriated by it for the express
O:\CHAPTER 503 PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY (PACE)\CHAPTER 503 PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY (PACE) ORDINANCE.DOCX 3
purpose of its PACE program, and the Municipality shall be responsible for administration of loans
made from those other funding sources.
ARTICLE IV – CONFORMITY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE TRUST
Standards adopted; Rules promulgated; model documents. If the Trust adopts standards, promulgates
rules, or establishes model documents subsequent to the Municipality’s adoption of this Ordinance and
those standards, rules or model documents substantially conflict with this Ordinance, the Municipality
shall take necessary steps to conform this Ordinance and its PACE program to those standards, rules, or
model documents.
ARTICLE VI – PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION; MUNICIPAL LIABILITY
1. Program Administration
A. PACE Administration Contract. Pursuant to 35-A M.R.S.A. §10154(2)(A)(2) and (B), the
Municipality will enter into a PACE administration contract with the Trust to administer the
functions of the PACE program for the Municipality. The PACE administration contract with
the Trust will establish the administration of the PACE program including, without limitation,
that:
(i) the Trust will enter into PACE agreements with owners of qualifying property in the
Municipality’s PACE district;
(ii) the Trust, or its agent, will create and record a Notice of the PACE agreement in the
appropriate County Registry of Deeds to create a PACE mortgage;
(iii) the Trust, or its agent, will disburse the PACE loan to the property owner;
(iv) the Trust, or its agent, will send PACE assessment statements with payment deadlines to the
property owner;
(v) the Trust, or its agent, will be responsible for collection of the PACE assessments;
(vi) the Trust, or its agent, will record any lien, if needed, due to nonpayment of the assessment;
(vii) the Municipality, or the Trust or its agent on behalf of the Municipality, promptly shall
record the discharges of PACE mortgages upon full payment of the PACE loan.
B. Adoption of Education and Outreach Program. In conjunction with adopting this Ordinance, the
Municipality shall adopt and implement an education and outreach program so that citizens of
the Municipality are made aware of home energy saving opportunities, including the opportunity
to finance energy saving improvements with a PACE loan.
C. Assistance and Cooperation. The Municipality will assist and cooperate with the Trust in its
administration of the Municipality’s PACE program.
D. Assessments Not a Tax. PACE assessments do not constitute a tax but may be assessed and
collected by the Trust in any manner determined by the Trust and consistent with applicable law.
2. Liability of Municipal Officials; Liability of Municipality
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, municipal officers and municipal
officials, including, without limitation, tax assessors and tax collectors, are not personally liable
to the Trust or to any other person for claims, of whatever kind or nature, under or related to a
O:\CHAPTER 503 PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY (PACE)\CHAPTER 503 PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY (PACE) ORDINANCE.DOCX 4
PACE program, including, without limitation, claims for or related to uncollected PACE
assessments.
B. Other than the fulfillment of its obligations specified in a PACE administration contract with the
Trust entered into under Article VI, §1(A) above, a municipality has no liability to a property
owner for or related to energy savings improvements financed under a PACE program.
CHAPTER 504
SOLID WASTE, FLOW CONTROL & RECYCLING ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted March 3, 1992
Amended January 19, 1993
Amended August 7, 2012 – Effective September 6, 2012
SECTION I – SCOPE
This Ordinance applies to all generators of Solid Waste in the Town of Gray, including but not limited
to residential, commercial, industrial and governmental generators of Solid Waste in the Town of Gray.
SECTION I I – DEFINITIONS
As used in this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
Abandoned Vehicle: Any gasoline, diesel or electric powered equipment, or part thereof, originally
designed for carrying persons or goods for commercial, business, private or recreational purposes, which
is:
A. No longer used for the purpose originally intended;
B. Has not been converted to another commercial, business, private, or recreational vehicular use;
C. Is not exempted or regulated under existing state or federal law; or
D. Has been left out in the elements to deteriorate.
E. It includes, but is not limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses, campers, trailers, boats, snowmobiles,
jet skis and ATVs.
Acceptable Waste: Household Waste, Municipal Waste, Commercial Waste, Construction/Demolition
Debris, White Goods, Brown Goods, Wood Waste, Yard Waste, Tree and Brush Waste, and Landscape
Refuse, provided it is separated into categories as determined by the Transfer Station’s Operations
Manual and is delivered in quantities reasonably expected to be generated or collected by the delivering
entity. It does not include Hazardous Waste, Special Waste, Biomedical Waste, Agricultural Waste,
Land Clearing Debris or Industrial Waste.
Agricultural Waste: As defined in Maine Department of Environmental Protection (“DEP”)
regulations, 06-096 C.M.R. Ch. 400, Sec. 1(D) as may be amended from time to time, Solid Waste that
results from “agricultural activities,” as defined in 38 M.R.S.A. § 361-A(1-B), which are returned to the
soil as fertilizers. It includes waste pesticides when generated by a farmer, provided that he/she triple
rinses each emptied pesticide container in accordance with DEP regulations and disposes of the pesticide
residues in a manner consistent with the disposal instructions on the pesticide label. It does not include
any materials regulated as a residual under Chapter 419 of the Department’s Regulations. This is also
referred to as “waste resulting from agricultural activities” in 38 M.R.S.A. § 1303-C(45), as may be
amended from time to time.
Ashes: Residue from burning wood, coal, coke, or other combustible material.
Biomedical Waste: Special Waste as defined in regulations promulgated by the DEP in 06-096 C.M.R.
Ch. 900, as may be amended from time to time.
Brown Goods: Small household appliances including, but not limited to, radios, televisions, sound
systems, and other small electric or electronic appliances or devices.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 504 SOLID WASTE\CHAPTER 504 SOLID WASTE FLOW CONTROL AND RECYCLING ORDINANCE.DOC 2
Commercial Waste Hauler: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or other legal
entity that collects, transports and disposes of Solid Waste for a fee as herein prescribed.
Commercial Waste: Solid Waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing,
non-processing activities; but this does not include Household Waste, Industrial Waste
or Special Waste.
Composting: The biological decomposition and stabilization of organic matter under controlled aerobic
conditions of high temperature.
Construction/Demolition Debris: The debris resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and
demolition of structures, excluding asbestos, paints, and chemicals, regardless of their being a byproduct
of such activity.
Contractor: Any individual, company, or corporation hired to provide a service for a fee, including but
not limited to: roofing, siding, window replacement, general carpentry and repair, landscaping or tree
and brush removal.
Disposal: The discharge, deposit, dumping or placing of any Solid Waste into or on any land or body of
water, or the incineration of any Solid Waste.
Disposal Facility: Any land or structure, or combination of land area and structures, including dumps,
recycling centers, and transfer stations used for storing, salvaging, reducing, incinerating or disposing of
Solid Wastes, including any transfer station or similar facility which may be constructed by the Town in
connection with the use of any disposal facilities.
Ecomaine: A non-capital stock, non-profit corporation created pursuant to Title 30-A, Chapter 115 and
Title 13-B, and Title 38, Section 1304-B(5) of the Maine Revised Statutes, or any successor thereto or
assignee thereof, which accepts Solid Waste at its Disposal Facility pursuant to a Waste Handling
Agreement entered into between the Town and Ecomaine.
Garbage: All table refuse, animal and vegetable matter, offal from meat, fish, and fowls, vegetables and
fruits and parts thereof, and other articles and materials ordinarily used for food and which have become
unfit for such use or composting, for which reasons they are discarded.
Hazardous Waste: Waste in any physical state, designated as hazardous by the Maine Board of
Environmental Protection under 38 M.R.S.A. § 1319-O. It does not include Waste resulting from
normal household or agricultural activities. The fact a hazardous waste or part or a constituent may have
value or other use or may be sold or exchanged does not exclude it from this definition.
Household Waste: Refuse that is generated by common domestic activities. It does not include
Construction/Demolition Debris, masonry debris, Wood Waste, Landscape Refuse, household furniture,
White Goods or Brown Goods.
Industrial Waste: Solid Waste generated by manufacturing or processing activities. It does not include
Household Waste, Commercial Waste or Special Waste.
Inert Fill: A clean solid material, including rocks, bricks, and cured concrete, which is not mixed with
other Solid Waste or liquid Waste, and which is not derived from an ore mining activity.
Land Clearing Debris: Solid Waste resulting from the clearing of land and consisting solely of brush,
stumps, soil material and rocks.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 504 SOLID WASTE\CHAPTER 504 SOLID WASTE FLOW CONTROL AND RECYCLING ORDINANCE.DOC 3
Landscape Refuse: Grass, leaves, plant cuttings, garden waste, shrubs, branches, trees and wood,
whether finished or unfinished. It does not include Construction/Demolition Debris, Land Clearing
Debris, plastic bags or other plastic containers used to collect, store or transport Landscape Refuse.
Municipal Waste: Solid Waste generated by municipal activities, with insufficient liquid to be free
flowing. It shall not include Unacceptable Waste or material required by this Ordinance to be either
recycled or disposed of separately.
Owner: The actual owner of the land and/or buildings, whether an individual, partnership or
corporation, or the agent of the owner, or other person having custody of the land or building or to
whom the rent is paid.
Person: Any individual, partnership, association, firm, company, corporation, department, agency,
group (including a city, town, county, state, federal or other government unit), or any other entity
responsible in any way for an activity subject to this Ordinance.
Recyclable Waste: Solid Waste, which when properly segregated, can be recovered, reused, or
recycled. It shall include newspapers, corrugated box material, plastic, glass and metal containers,
scrap metal, waste oil, mixed paper, automotive batteries, White Goods, and other materials deemed
recyclable by the Town.
Resident: Any person who lives in the Town, either on a permanent or seasonal basis.
Rubbish: All miscellaneous waste material, not otherwise included herein, resulting from the ordinary
conduct of business or housekeeping.
Scrap Metal: Bicycles, metal shelving, tire rims, wood stoves, snow blowers, lawnmowers, and other
metal Solid Waste. It shall not include junk cars, trucks, motor vehicles, or White Goods.
Secured: With respect to carrying Rubbish in open-bodied vehicles or vehicles with trailers, the use of a
canvas, tarpaulin, strapping, or other covering of sufficient strength and size to adequately cover and/or
contain the load being transported, being affixed to the vehicle in such a fashion as to prevent spillage.
Solid Waste: Useless, unwanted or discarded solid material with insufficient liquid content to be free
flowing, including by way of example and not by limitation: Rubbish, Garbage, refuse-derived fuel,
Scrap Metal, junk, refuse, Inert Fill and Landscape Refuse. It shall not include sludge from air or water
pollution control facilities, septic tank sludge or Agricultural Waste. The fact that Solid Waste, or any
part of or constituent of the waste, may have value or other use, or may be recycled, sold or exchanged,
does not exclude it from the definition of Solid Waste.
Solid Waste Director: The duly appointed Town official responsible for overseeing the operations at
the Transfer Station and enforcing this Ordinance.
Special Waste: As defined in 38 M.R.S.A. § 1303-C(34), as may be amended from time to time, any
non-Hazardous Waste generated by sources other than domestic and typical commercial establishments
that exists in such an unusual quantity or in such a chemical or physical state, or any combination
thereof, which may disrupt or impair effective waste management or threaten the public health, human
safety or the environment and requires special handling, transportation and disposal procedures. It
includes, but is not limited to:
A. Oil (except for used motor oil), coal, wood and multi-fuel boiler and incinerator ash;
B. Industrial Waste and processed Industrial Waste;
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 504 SOLID WASTE\CHAPTER 504 SOLID WASTE FLOW CONTROL AND RECYCLING ORDINANCE.DOC 4
C. Wastewater treatment plant sludge, paper mill sludge and other sludge waste;
D. Debris and residuals from non-hazardous chemical spills and cleanup of those spills;
E. Contaminated soils and dredge spoils;
F. Asbestos and asbestos-containing waste;
G. Sand blast grit and non-liquid paint waste;
H. Medical and other potentially infectious or pathogenic waste;
I. High and low PH waste;
J. Spent filter media residue;
K. Shredder residue; and
L. Other waste designated by the Town, through this Ordinance.
Town: The Town of Gray, Country of Cumberland, State of Maine.
Transfer Station: Facility in the Town constructed and managed for storage and placement of
Acceptable Waste in large containers or vehicles for movement to another Disposal Facility.
Tree and Brush Waste: Trees or limbs that are 18 inches or less in diameter with a maximum length of
8 feet or less. Also included in this definition is brush from tree pruning or from woody plant growth. It
shall not include tree stumps.
Unacceptable Waste: That portion of Solid Waste which is not Acceptable Waste and includes, but is
not limited to, sewage and its derivatives, special nuclear or by-product materials within the meaning of
the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and Hazardous Waste and Special Waste, or any other
waste determined to be unacceptable by the Town or its authorized agents.
Waste: Items, materials or substances delivered to a Disposal Facility by the Town, its employees,
agents or contractors.
White goods: Any appliance surrounded by metal, such as a refrigerator, stove, washing machine,
dryer, or water heater.
Wood Waste: Lumber and wood furniture free of large metal attachments, roofing shingles, gypsum
board or any other material reducing the acceptability as boiler fuel.
Any terms, phrases and words not defined herein shall have the generally accepted meaning or definition
promulgated in WEBSTER’S NEW WORLD COLLEGE DICTIONARY, Third Edition, Copyright
1997, a copy of which is on file in the Town Clerk’s office, or as defined in applicable State or federal
statutes and regulations.
SECTION I I I – MANDATORY RECYCLING
It is the intent of the Town of Gray to recycle waste as the primary step in responsible waste
management, before resorting to other disposal methods. Recycling is mandatory in the Town of Gray.
All residents and businesses shall recycle waste to the greatest degree practical in order to reduce the
disposal cost and environmental impact of Solid Waste. It shall be the responsibility of each household
and commercial establishment to separate and prepare Recyclable Waste from all other types of waste,
and to see that they are transported to the Transfer Station. Materials to be separated for recycling
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 504 SOLID WASTE\CHAPTER 504 SOLID WASTE FLOW CONTROL AND RECYCLING ORDINANCE.DOC 5
include but are not limited to: non-soiled paper products, plastic, metals, glass/porcelain, and
Construction/Demolition Debris.
SECTION IV – ADMINISTRATION
A. The Town Council may establish by orders the rules and regulations governing the availability and
use of the Transfer Station. The operation of the Transfer Station shall conform to all pertinent
regulations and directives of all local, county, state or federal agencies that may have jurisdiction. It
shall be the duty of the Solid Waste Director to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. The Solid Waste Director shall report to the Town Manager and be given such authority as deemed
necessary by the Town Manager and/or Town Council for the purpose of upholding state and federal
solid waste management laws, rules and regulations, the provisions of this Ordinance, and any rules
made in accordance with this Ordinance.
C. The Solid Waste Director and/or the attendant(s) at the Transfer Station shall have the responsibility
and authority to enforce established rules regarding disposal fees and other rules.
D. The Town shall inform all persons of the location of the Transfer Station by adequate public notice
in writing or in print. Furthermore, the Town shall inform all persons authorized to use the Transfer
Station of the proper location for disposing of the various components of their Solid Waste
including, but not limited to, Recyclable Waste, reusable materials, Household Waste, White Goods,
Brown Goods, Landscape Refuse, Construction/Demolition Debris, tires, ashes, and all other Solid
Waste.
E. Any Solid Waste generated or deposited within the boundary of the Town shall become the property
of the Town or Ecomaine pursuant to the terms of a “Waste Handling Agreement” entered into
between Ecomaine and the Town, and amendments thereto. No Person shall salvage, remove or
carry off any such deposited Solid Waste without prior approval of the Solid Waste Director or
his/her designee.
F. From and after the effective date of this Ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any Person to accumulate
or permanently dispose of, within the corporate limits of the Town, Abandoned Vehicles, Garbage,
refuse, Rubbish, combustible or incombustible refuse, White Goods, Brown Goods, Recyclable
Waste, reusable material or other Solid Waste, excepting Inert Fill, compost and other material, for
which specific permission has been granted by the Town. Failure to remove any existing
accumulation of Garbage, refuse, Recyclable Waste, Rubbish, Abandoned Vehicles or other Solid
Waste within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be deemed in violation
of this section of the Ordinance.
G. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit any person from composting vegetable and plant materials
generated on his/her property for non-commercial use.
H. The owner of any lot, or any Person with the permission of the lot owner and the Code Enforcement
Officer, may deposit or dump Inert Fill or similar material for fill purposes only, subject to state
and/or local land use regulations.
I. Certain materials may be excluded by Town Council regulation from Acceptable Waste, which may
be deposited at the Transfer Station. These excluded materials may include White Goods, Brown
Goods, tires, ashes, spent motor oil, Commercial Waste, Industrial Waste, Land Clearing Debris,
Landscape Refuse, Construction/Demolition Debris, abandoned vehicles, bulky waste, or Special
Waste which may require special processing prior to disposal.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 504 SOLID WASTE\CHAPTER 504 SOLID WASTE FLOW CONTROL AND RECYCLING ORDINANCE.DOC 6
J. Except for licensed disposal of Hazardous Waste, Special Waste or Biomedical Waste, it shall be
unlawful for any Person to burn or incinerate any Solid Waste within the Town other than Landscape
Refuse, other than in an approved incinerator. Cross-Reference: 06-096 C.M.R. Ch. 102 (Maine
Department of Environmental Protection regulations related to open burning); 12 M.R.S.A. §§ 9301,
9324 (statutory provisions enforceable by the Department of Conservation, Bureau of Forestry).
SECTION V: AUTHORIZED USE OF THE TRANSFER STATION
A. The availability and use of the Transfer Station shall be limited to Residents and/or property owners
of the Town, or their contractors, for the sole purpose of disposing of Solid Waste generated within
the Town.
B. All vehicles utilizing the Transfer Station must display a valid Transfer Station permit. Permits are
issued annually, valid for the calendar year. Permits are available at the Municipal Office, the
Transfer Station, and may, at the direction of the Town Manager, be made available elsewhere.
Proof of residency is required in order to acquire a permit. Verification of residency shall be made
by showing a valid vehicle registration, rental agreement, property tax bill, or driver’s license.
C. Arrangements may be made at the discretion of the Solid Waste Director, prior to arrival at the
Transfer Station, to allow for the use of rented or borrowed vehicles.
D. Non-resident contractors must provide a letter or contract from the Resident for whom the work is
being done to include the name, address, telephone number and a description of the work being
conducted in the Town of Gray prior to their being allowed to dispose of Acceptable Waste. This in
no way removes the responsibility of any disposal fees due from the contractor.
E. Waste generated in the course of commercial activity must be segregated into recyclable, reusable
and non-recyclable categories prior to delivery to the Transfer Station.
F. Federal agencies, state agencies, and non-profit organizations may bring Recyclable Waste to the
Transfer Station.
SECTION VI – TRANSFER STATION USER CHARGES
Upon reviewing recommendations made by the Town Manager and Solid Waste Director, the Town
Council may establish, by order, schedules of waste disposal charges, operating hours, delivery times
and other operating regulations for the use of the Transfer Station, or any portion thereof located within
the Town, which schedules may include different waste disposal charges, operating hours, delivery
times and other operating regulations for property owners and Residents of the Town, businesses located
within the Town and Commercial Haulers collecting Solid Waste within the Town and may include
different schedules for disposal or disposal of different kinds of Solid Waste. All schedules shall be kept
on file in the Town Clerk’s office.
SECTION VI I – RESTRICTIONS
A. Hazardous Waste shall not be deposited at the Transfer Station. The Town shall not be responsible
for any costs or liabilities incurred with the disposal of Hazardous Waste.
B. Special Waste shall not be deposited at the Transfer Station. The Town shall not be responsible for
any costs or liabilities incurred with the disposal of Special Waste.
C. Biomedical Waste shall not be deposited at the Transfer Station. The Town shall not be responsible
for any costs or liabilities incurred with the disposal of Biomedical Waste.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 504 SOLID WASTE\CHAPTER 504 SOLID WASTE FLOW CONTROL AND RECYCLING ORDINANCE.DOC 7
D. Agricultural Waste shall not be deposited at the Transfer Station. The Town shall not be
responsible for any costs or liabilities incurred with the disposal of Agricultural Waste.
E. Land Clearing Debris shall not be deposited at the Transfer Station. The Town shall not be
responsible for any costs or liabilities incurred with the collection, storage, transport, or disposal of
Land Clearing Debris.
F. Industrial Waste shall not be deposited at the Transfer Station. The Town shall not be responsible
for any costs or liabilities incurred with the collection, storage, transport or disposal of Industrial
Waste.
G. It shall be unlawful for any Person to place, leave or deposit at the entrance of, or along the
perimeter fence of the Transfer Station, any Garbage, refuse, Recyclable Waste, Rubbish, White
Goods or other Solid Waste during, or outside of, the hours of the day and the days of the week that
the Town Council has determined those facilities open for the disposal of Solid Waste Materials.
H. It shall be unlawful for any Person to place, leave or deposit along any public right of way, on any
public property, or any property on which it is deemed illegal by local ordinance any Garbage,
refuse, Recyclable Waste, Rubbish, White Goods or other Solid Waste unless permission is granted
from the governing authority.
I. No more than ten (10) cubic yards of any Solid Waste or combination of materials may be deposited
by a Person at the Transfer Station per day without prior approval of the Solid Waste Director.
SECTION VI I I – DESIGNATION
In accordance with the provisions of 38 M.R.S.A. § 1304-B, the Town hereby designates the Ecomaine
Disposal Facility in Portland, Maine and the Transfer Station as Disposal Facilities for the purposes
cited in this Ordinance. The disposal by any Person, including any Person licensed as a Commercial
Waste Hauler in accordance with this Ordinance, of any Household Waste, Municipal Waste, or
processable portions of Commercial Waste or Industrial Waste, generated within the Town, at any place
other than the Ecomaine Disposal Facility or the Transfer Station is prohibited. The Town shall not be
responsible for any costs incurred with the disposal of non-segregated Household Waste or Commercial
Waste hauled by or for the generator.
SECTION IX – REGULATION OF COMMERCIAL WASTE HAULERS
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, transport, collect, remove or dispose of Garbage,
Recyclable Waste, Rubbish, White Goods, Brown Goods, or other Acceptable Waste generated
within the Town for a fee without first securing a Commercial Waste Hauler’s license from the
Town.
B. The fee for a Commercial Waste Hauler’s license shall be established by Town Council Order and
set forth in the Town’s fine and fee schedule. Any person desiring to secure such a license shall
present a written application, accompanied by the fee, to the Town Clerk. Such license shall be
issued after due and proper investigation and recommendation of the Solid Waste Director and after
approval by the Town Council.
C. Commercial Waste Haulers shall deposit all Household Waste, Commercial Waste and acceptable
Industrial Waste generated within the boundaries of the Town at the Ecomaine Disposal Facility or
any other licensed Disposal Facility as may be designated by the Town Council. The Town shall not
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 504 SOLID WASTE\CHAPTER 504 SOLID WASTE FLOW CONTROL AND RECYCLING ORDINANCE.DOC 8
be responsible for the collection, transportation or disposal of any Household Waste, Commercial
Waste, Industrial Waste, or Unacceptable Waste.
D. Trucks or other vehicles used for the transportation of Garbage or other Solid Waste mixed with
refuse shall be of the compactor type; water tight, with an enclosed cargo space. Collection of dry
refuse, Rubbish, Recyclable Waste and other Solid Waste is permitted in open trucks, which shall be
covered and Secured. No trucks or other vehicles shall be permitted to scatter any of the contents on
the streets, highways, or roads of the Town. Trucks used to haul Garbage, refuse, Recyclable Waste,
Rubbish or other Solid Waste over the streets of the Town must be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition and shall meet all the requirements of the Town or appropriate State agency where
applicable. The trucks may be inspected at any time during normal collection hours by the Solid
Waste Director or his/her designee. Any deficiencies must be corrected by the Commercial Waste
Hauler prior to additional waste being collected. Trucks must be cleaned before handling
Recyclable Waste.
E. With prior notice and hearing, licenses and renewals of licenses may be denied and any license
issued pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance may be revoked by the Town Council, upon
failure of the licensee to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance, or with any of the
regulations of the DEP, relating to the collection and disposal of Garbage, refuse, Recyclable Waste,
Rubbish, White Goods, or any other Solid Waste. License fees are nonrefundable. An aggrieved
party may appeal a license denial or revocation to Superior Court, pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine
Rules of Civil Procedure, within 30 days of such denial or revocation.
F. Any agreement for the collection, transportation and/or disposal of Solid Waste generated in the
Town shall be by private contract between the Person and the Commercial Waste Hauler licensed for
the purpose of collecting removing, hauling and/or disposing of such Solid Waste.
G. Any agreements for the removal and collection of Recyclable Waste must provide that the materials
will be received by the Town or its designee in marketable condition.
SECTION X – DISPOSAL OF CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION DEBRIS AND LANDSCAPE REFUSE
A. Only residents of the Town and owners of property located within the Town may dispose of
Construction/Demolition Debris and Landscape Refuse at the Transfer Station.
B. Disposal of Construction/Demolition Debris and Landscape Refuse shall occur in accordance with
regulations determined from time to time by vote of the Town Council and only in the presence of a
Town employee or agent.
C. Contaminated Construction/Demolition Debris, Land Clearing Debris and/or Landscape Refuse
cannot be deposited at the Transfer Station. The Town shall not be responsible for any costs
incurred with the disposal of contaminated Construction/Demolition Debris, Land Clearing Debris
and Landscape Refuse.
SECTION XI – PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION
Any Person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall:
A. Be punished by a fine per violation plus costs; fines established by Town Council Order shall be
recovered on complaint to the use of the Town. Each day upon which any continuing violation of
any provision of this Ordinance shall occur shall constitute a separate violation; each incident of
disposal of Solid Waste in violation of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate violation. In
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 504 SOLID WASTE\CHAPTER 504 SOLID WASTE FLOW CONTROL AND RECYCLING ORDINANCE.DOC 9
addition, the Town may seek equitable relief, including, but not limited to, injunctive relief and
indemnification of the Town’s liquidated damages to Ecomaine, and attorney’s fees and costs, to
ensure compliance with the terms of this Ordinance.
B. Pay the actual costs to remove and dispose of Solid Waste deposited in violation of this Ordinance.
C. Pay for any damages to the Town’s facilities or equipment caused by said violation.
D. Be prohibited from using the Transfer Station for a period of six (6) months, after notice and hearing
by the Town Manager and upon recommendation of the Solid Waste Director or his/her designee.
An appeal of this prohibition may be made to the Town Council within fourteen (14) days from the
notice upon request. Furthermore, an aggrieved party may appeal to Superior Court, pursuant to
Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
E. The fine for violation of this Ordinance is as set forth in the Town’s fine and fee schedule.
SECTION XI I – SEVERABILITY
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be unconstitutional,
illegal, or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the
intent of the Town that this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or
invalid sentence, clause, section, or part had not been included herein.
CHAPTER 202
FIRE ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted March 6, 1950
SECTION 202.1 – TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Fire Ordinance of the Town of Gray, Maine.
SECTION 202.2 – PROHIBITION OF FIRES
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to burn, kindle, ignite or set fire to any household
accumulation, paper, cardboard or other light combustible material, on his own land or elsewhere,
except when such burning shall be done in a screened receptacle having a screened covering, or a
steel barrel or drum with a metal cover, and under proper safeguards, said screened receptacle, barrel
or drum to be located not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any building or structure and providing
at least five (5) feet of mineral soil completely surround said receptacle, barrel or drum, or except
when the ground is covered with snow, without first obtaining a permit from the Fire Chief.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to burn, kindle, or set fire to or ignite any combustible
material of any sort within the limits of any public way, within the Town of Gray without the written
permission of the Fire Chief of said Town.
C. The Chief of the Gray Fire Department shall by publication in a Portland newspaper prohibit or ban
all outdoor burning of trash, leaves, grass or other combustible materials for such period of time as
he deems necessary, when in his opinion a condition of serious fire hazard exists due to drought or
other reasons. During the period of such prohibition or ban it shall be unlawful for any person or
persons to set fire to, burn, kindle, or ignite any trash, lumber, leaves, straw, grass or other
combustible materials anywhere out-of-doors, except that during such period of prohibition or ban
the Chief may grant specific written permission for burning at such time and in such manner as he
deems necessary to assure safe control of fire.
SECTION 202.3 – EQUIPMENT
A. No person shall use any Fire Department apparatus or equipment for any private purpose, nor shall
any person willfully and without proper authority take away or conceal any article used in any way
by the said Department.
B. No person shall enter any place where Fire Department apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus
or equipment belonging to said Department unless accompanied by, or having special permission of
an authorized officer of the said Fire Department or by permission of the Town Manager.
C. The Town of Gray is hereby authorized to enter into agreements or contracts with nearby
communities or governing bodies of other organizations to provide the members of such
communities or organization with fire protection or to establish a mutual aid system.
D. No apparatus shall be used by the Department or any person or persons for any purpose except
public fire prevention and control, or permitted to leave the Town of Gray except in response to a
call for aid at a fire in a neighboring community, without the consent of the Chief of the Fire
Department or the Town Manager. The officer in charge of the Department shall have power to
assign equipment for response to other cases only when the absence of such equipment will not
jeopardize protection in the Town of Gray.
SECTION 202.4 – GENERAL
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 202 FIRE ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 202 FIRE ORDINANCE.DOC 2
A. No person shall drive any vehicle over fire hose except on specific order from the Fire Chief or other
authorized officer of the Fire Department in charge, where such hose is used.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to park any vehicle in any manner which will obstruct
the entrance to any fire station in said Town of Gray, or obstruct the entrance to any such fire station
in any other manner, or to park any such vehicle within ten (10) feet of any fire hydrant or cistern.
C. No unauthorized person in any vehicle shall follow within three-hundred (300) feet of any apparatus
belonging to the Fire Department, proceeding to answer an alarm, nor park any vehicle within threehundred
(300) feet of a fire.
D. All motor equipment of the Fire Department, and all personal cars or vehicles of department
members shall have right-of-way over all other traffic when responding to a fire alarm.
E. No person shall maliciously turn in or cause to be turned in a false fire alarm.
SECTION 202.5 – PENALTIES
Any person or persons found guilty of a violation of this ordinance under Sections I, 202-2, 202-3, or
203-4 shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty (50) dollars nor more than five hundred (500)
dollars for each such violation, to be recovered by complaint to the use of the inhabitants of the Town of
Gray.
CHAPTER 206
NO TOBACCO, ALCOHOL, OR MEDICAL MARIJUANA USE ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted November 1, 2011
Effective December 1, 2011
Amendments Effective October 17, 2019
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 206 NO TOBACCO ALCOHOL OR MEDICAL MARIJUANA USE\CHAPTER 206 NO TOBACCO ALCOHOL OR MEDICAL MARIJUANA
ORDINANCE.DOCX 1
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Town of Gray “No Tobacco, Alcohol, or Medical Marijuana Use”
Ordinance.
PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety welfare and quality of life of
the children, inhabitants, guests and employees that use any or all Town of Gray property, whether building(s),
and/or land.
DEFINITIONS
Municipality: Town of Gray, Maine.
Municipal Officers: Gray Town Council.
Building: Any structure, shelter or dwelling, installed permanently or temporarily upon land owned or controlled
by the municipality.
Property: Any real estate, whether land or building, owned or controlled by the Municipality.
Rule: No person(s) shall use or partake of any form of tobacco, alcohol or marijuana on/in Town of Gray
property, 365 days a year, 24 hours a day. There will be no designated areas to use or partake of any form of the
same on/in Town of Gray property. No litter containing and/or associated with tobacco, alcohol or marijuana may
be discarded on/in Town of Gray property.
“Smoking” means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe or joint, or
any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation, including hookahs and marijuana,
whether natural or synthetic in any manner or in any form. “Smoking” also includes the use of an electronic
smoking device which creates an aerosol or vapor, in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking
device.
"Tobacco" is defined as all tobacco-derived or tobacco containing products and any product intended to mimic
tobacco including but not limited to any electronic delivery system(s). This does not include products specifically
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the purpose of cessation or nicotine replacement
therapy.
NOTICE & ENFORCEMENT
A. The municipal officers authorize the Recreation and Conservation Committee to appropriately and visibly
post signs indicating to the general public that all areas so posted are “Tobacco, Alcohol & Marijuana Free”.
B. The Recreation and Conservation Committee shall direct the Parks and Recreation Department to notify
community organizations as reasonable and/or necessary when such areas are posted.
C. Any and all organizations/individuals that contract for the use of Town of Gray property shall be subject to
the terms and conditions of this Ordinance. All agencies with law enforcement authority, including without
limitation the Town’s Code Enforcement Officer, shall enforce this Ordinance.
D. The Recreation and Conservation Committee shall authorize all Town of Gray employees and their appointed
designees to monitor compliance and enforcement of this Ordinance.
E. For any person, firm or organization that violates this Ordinance, Town of Gray staff and their appointed
designees shall request that the person(s), firms or organizations cease such unlawful activity by a verbal
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 206 NO TOBACCO ALCOHOL OR MEDICAL MARIJUANA USE\CHAPTER 206 NO TOBACCO ALCOHOL OR MEDICAL MARIJUANA
ORDINANCE.DOCX 2
warning. If the person(s), firm or organization refuses to cease such unlawful activity, designees authorized
by the same authority may request that the person, firm or organization leave the designated area. Refusal to
obey such a lawful directive shall constitute a trespass for which any law enforcement agency with
jurisdiction in Gray may enforce the same in accordance with Maine law.
SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Ordinance shall be finally held to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, this
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the Ordinance which can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application. For this purpose, the “No Tobacco, Alcohol or Medical Marijuana Use”
Ordinance is severable.
CHAPTER 209
FIREWORKS ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Proposed May 1, 2018, 2nd Reading May 15th 2018
Approved May 15th 2018, Effective June 14, 2018
Proposed Updates January 8, 2019, 2nd Reading January 22, 2019
Approved January 22, 2019, Effective March 1, 2019
SECTION 209.1 – PURPOSE
This Ordinance regulates the use of professional fireworks and consumer fireworks to ensure the safety
of the residents of Gray and property owners of the Town of Gray and the general public.
SECTION 209.2 – TITLE AND AUTHORITY
This Ordinance shall be known as the "Town of Gray Fireworks Ordinance." It is adopted pursuant to
the enabling provisions of the Maine Constitution, the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 3001,
and the provisions of 8 M.R.S.A. Section 223-A, and the Town Charter for the Town of Gray.
SECTION 209.3 – DEFINITIONS
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
A. Consumer Fireworks: "Consumer Fireworks" has the same meaning as in 27 Code of Federal
Regulations, Section 555.11 or subsequent provision, but includes only products that are tested and
certified by a 3rd-party laboratory as conforming with United States Consumer Product Safety
Commission standards, in accordance with 15 United States Code, Chapter 47. Consumer Fireworks
does not include the following products:
1. Missile-type rockets, as defined by the State Fire Marshall Rule by rule;
2. Helicopters and aerial spinners, as defined by State Fire Marshall by rule; and
3. Sky rockets and bottle rockets. For purposes of this definition, "sky rockets and bottle rockets" means
cylindrical tubes containing not more than 20 grams of chemical composition, as defined by the State
Fire Marshall by rule, with a wooden stick attached for guidance and stability that rise into the air upon
ignition and that may produce a burst of color and/or sound at or near the height of flight.
B. The term "Fireworks" does not include consumer fireworks or toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or
other devices in which paper caps or plastic caps containing 25/100 grains or less of explosive
compound are used if they are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in
place for the explosion, toy pistol, paper caps, or plastic caps that contain less than 20/100 grains of
explosive mixture, or sparklers that do not contain magnesium chlorates or perchlorates.
C. Fireworks Display: An entertainment feature where the public or a private group is admitted or
permitted to view the display of fireworks or consumer fireworks or special effects.
D. Fireworks: The same meaning as that term defined under State Law, 8 M.R.S.A., Section 221-A (4),
as may be amended from time to time.
E. Person: Any individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, governmental entity,
association, or public or private organization of any character.
F. Town: The Town of Gray, Maine.
SECTION 209.4 – USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS RESTRICTED
A person shall not use, display, fire, or cause to be exploded (collectively "Setting Off") consumer
fireworks within the Town of Gray or in or from any watercraft within waters of the Town except upon
the following conditions:
A. No fireworks shall be set off on any day with a Fire Danger Class of 3, 4, or 5. Any person(s) setting
off fireworks shall be responsible for verifying the Fire Danger Class on any day that consumer
fireworks are set off.
B. No person shall use, display, throw, drop or cause to set off any consumer fireworks or fireworks
within any public way or within 50 feet of a public way.
C. Consumer Fireworks may only be set off during the following days/times:
Summer:
1. July 3rd: 12:00 P.M. until 10:00 P.M.
2. July 4th: 12:00 P.M. until 11:00 P.M.
3. From 6:00 P.M. to 10:00 P.M. for the following days:
a. Saturday preceding July 4th
b. Saturday following July 4th
c. Saturday preceding Labor Day weekend
d. Labor Day weekend Saturday
New Year’s:
4. 9:00 AM on December 31st until 12:30 A.M. on January 1st
5. January 1st from 12:00 P.M. until 10:00 P.M.
D. No person shall use, display, throw, drop or cause to set off any consumer fireworks or fireworks
within 75 feet of any building or structure.
SECTION 209.5 – PROFESSIONAL FIREWORKS STANDARDS
Pursuant to 8 M.R.S.A. Section 227-B, this section establishes standards for the use, display, or setting
off fireworks, as defined in 8 M.R.S.A., that require a permit from the Maine Commissioner of Public
Safety or designee.
A. No fireworks shall be set off on any day with a Fire Danger Class of 3, 4, or 5. The person or entity
setting off fireworks shall be responsible for verifying the Fire Danger Class on any day that fireworks
are set off.
B. Any person that is required to obtain a fireworks display permit from the Maine Commissioner of
Public Safety under 8 M.R.S.A, Sections 221-237 and 227-A shall also be required to obtain a permit
from the Gray Department of Public Safety. The applicant shall submit the following information to the
Gray Fire Chief at least 14 days in advance of the scheduled event:
1. Location of the event including a plan showing the area where the display is to occur.
2. Responsible party including contact information both prior to and during the event.
3. Commencement time and ending time.
4. Description and listing, including approximate quantity, of the fireworks to be displayed.
5. Detailed description of safety and security measures to be taken.
C. The professional fireworks display shall not occur unless the Gray Department of Public Safety has
duly issued the Town permit.
D. No permit for professional fireworks display shall be issued between May 10th and June 20th on any
property or location within 2000 feet of a body of water in excess of 10 acres.
E. The party or entity setting off the fireworks display shall be responsible for ensuring that all fireworks
stored on the site before the display are sufficiently secured and protected including having
appropriately trained personnel staying on site.
SECTION 209.6 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
A. Copy to State Fire Marshall: Per Title 8 M.R.S.A. Section 223, the Town Clerk shall file a copy of
this Ordinance, any amendments thereto, with the State Fire Marshall within 30 days of adoption or
amendment.
B. Any State or County Law Enforcement official may enforce the provisions of this Ordinance
specifically including duly-authorized representatives from Cumberland County Sherriff, Maine State
Police, Maine Inland Fish & Wildlife, and Maine Department of Public Safety (Fire Marshall Office).
SECTION 209.7 – SEIZURE AND DISPOSAL
The Town or any person authorized to enforce this Ordinance may seize fireworks that it has probable
cause to believe are to be used in violation of this Ordinance. All fireworks lawfully seized under this
Ordinance shall be forfeited to the State per 8 M.R.S.A. Section 237 (2).
SECTION 209.8 – VOILATION(S) AND PENALTIES
A. Use of fireworks in violation of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $250 plus attorney costs for the first offence, or a fine not less than $250 nor more than $750
plus attorney costs for each subsequent offence within any previous two (2) year period.
B. Injunction: In addition to any other remedies available at law or equity, the Town of Gray, acting
through its Town Manager, may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any planned,
anticipated, or threatened violation of this Ordinance.
SECTION 209.9. – APPEALS
Appeals with respect to this Ordinance including fines shall be taken to the Gray Town Council who
shall be the final authority.
SECTION 209.10 – SAVINGS CLAUSE
In the event that any provision of this Ordinance is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, this finding shall not affect the remainder of this Ordinance.
SECTION 209.11 – EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall be effective on June 14, 2018.
CHAPTER 305
SENIOR PROPERTY TAX ASSISTANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted January 21, 2020, Effective February 20, 2020
SECTION 304.1 — TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Active Duty Military Excise Tax Exemption
Ordinance of the Town of Gray, Maine.
SECTION 305.1 —PURPOSE
The purpose of this article is to establish a program to provide property tax assistance to persons
seventy (70) years of age and over who reside in the Town of Gray. Under this program, the Town of
Gray will provide refund payments to those individuals who maintain a homestead in the Town of Gray
and meet the criteria established by this article.
SECTION 305.2 —DEFINITIONS
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BENEFIT BASE: Property taxes paid by a qualifying applicant during the tax year on the qualifying
applicant's homestead or rent constituting property taxes paid by the resident individual during the tax
year on a homestead not exceeding $3,500.
HOMESTEAD: For purposes of this article, "homestead" shall have the same meaning as defined in 36
M.R.S.A. § 5219-KK(1)(C). Generally, a homestead is a dwelling owned or rented by the person seeking
tax assistance under this article or held in a revocable living trust for the benefit of that person. The
dwelling must be occupied by that person and that person's dependents as a home.
QUALIFYING APPLICANT: A person who is determined by the Town Manager or his designee, after
review of a complete application under § 4 of this chapter, to be eligible for a refund payment under
the terms of this article.
HOUSEHOLD INCOME: Total household income as determined by the total adjusted gross income
reported on the applicant’s most recent income tax return, plus the total adjusted gross income of each
additional adult member of the household if filing separately.
RENT CONSTITUTING PROPERTY TAX: Fifteen percent (15%) of the gross rent actually paid in cash or its
equivalent during the tax year solely for the right of occupancy of a homestead. For the purposes of this
article, "gross rent" means rent paid at arm's length solely for the right of occupancy of a homestead,
exclusive of charges for any utilities, services, furniture, furnishings or personal property appliances
furnished by the landlord as part of the rental agreement, whether or not expressly set out in the rental
agreement.
SECTION 305.3 — CRITERIA FOR PARTICIPATION
In order to participate in the property tax assistance program, an applicant shall demonstrate all of the
following:
A. The applicant shall be 70 years of age or more at the time of application.
B. The applicant shall have a homestead in the Town of Gray at the time of the application and
for the entire year prior to the date of application.
C. The applicant has been a resident of the Town of Gray for at least 10 years immediately
preceding the date of application for participation in the Program.
D. The applicant shall own no more than one property at the time of application.
E. The applicant shall meet the application and eligibility criteria set forth in §§ 4 and 5 of this
chapter.
SECTION 305.4 — APPLICATION AND PAYMENT PROCEDURES
A. Persons seeking to participate in the property tax assistance program shall submit an application to
the Town Manager no later than August 1 of the year for which the refund is requested. Applications
are required for every year the applicant seeks to participate in this program. The application form for
the program shall be made available upon request in the Town Manager's office and shall include, at a
minimum, the applicant's name, homestead address and contact information. Attached to all
applications shall be proof of household income.
B. Applicants shall also submit proof of property taxes paid or rent constituting property taxes paid
during the tax year on the individual's homestead in the Town of Gray.
C. The Town Manager or his/her designee shall review and determine if the application is complete and
accurate and if the applicant is otherwise eligible to participate in the program. The Town Manager or
designee shall notify an applicant if an application is determined to be incomplete. The Town Manager's
decision on eligibility to participate in the program shall be final.
SECTION 305.5 — DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY AND AMOUNT
If the Town Manager or designee determines that the applicant is eligible to participate in the program,
he/she shall determine the total amount of such eligibility in accordance with the following formula.
Eligibility under this article shall be proportional to the applicant's income in relation to the applicant's
benefit base.
For purposes of calculating eligibility under this article, the applicant's income shall include total
household income, and the benefit base shall not exceed $3,500, regardless of actual property taxes
accrued or rent constituting property taxes accrued. Applicants with household income greater than an
amount equal to 50% of the current U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development metropolitan
area median family income shall not be eligible for benefits under this article.
Notwithstanding the following formulas, the maximum benefit allowed under this article shall be $500.
Eligibility shall be the lesser of the following amounts:
A. Fifty percent of the amount by which the benefit base (not to exceed $3,500) exceeds 5% of
the applicant's household income (not to exceed 50% of the current HUD MFI for the Portland
metropolitan area). (Note: 2019 HUD median family income (MFI) for the Portland is $93,000
which would make the maximum income limit for eligibility $46,500.)
B. (Benefit base - 5% of Income) / 2 = Benefit Amount
C. An amount proportional to the available monies as approved by the Town Council in the
Town's annual budget and the applications received for that application year, calculated as a
percentage of the benefit amount for which the applicant is eligible in § 5(A)(1).
SECTION 305.6 — LIMITATIONS ON PAYMENTS
A. The Town Manager shall report to the Town Council for its approval each year the projected
payments and number of eligible applicants requesting assistance from the program fund. This report
shall be no later than at its second meeting following the August 1st application deadline.
B. Payments under this article shall be conditioned upon the existence of sufficient monies in the
program fund the year in which participation is sought. If there are not sufficient monies in the program
fund to pay all qualifying applicants under this article, payments shall be limited to the amounts
available in the fund and may be prorated accordingly. In the event that a lack of funding results in no
payment or less than the full payment to a qualifying applicant, the request will not carry over to the
next year.
SECTION 305.7 — CREATION OF PROGRAM FUND
The program fund from which payments shall be made under the terms of this article shall be created
as follows:
A. As funds are available, the Town Council shall annually appropriate monies from the general
fund or other sources to support this program.
B. Any surplus monies available after all payments have been made shall be carried forward
within the fund to the next fiscal year.
C. Any additional funds that may be received by dedication, gift, donation, or by supplemental
appropriation as may be approved.
SECTION 305.8 — TIMING OF PAYMENTS
A person who qualifies for payment under this program shall be mailed a check for the benefit amount
for which he/she is eligible under § 5 no later than fourteen (14) days from the date of Council approval
of the applications for the year in which participation is sought.
SECTION 305.9 — ONE APPLICANT PER HOUSEHOLD
Only one qualifying applicant per household shall be entitled to payment under this program each year.
Eligibility shall be determined based on total household income. The right to file an application under
this article is personal to the applicant and does not survive the applicant's death, but the right may be
exercised on behalf of an applicant by the applicant's legal guardian or attorney in fact. If an applicant
dies after having filed a timely complete application that results in a determination of qualification, the
amount determined by the Town Manager shall be disbursed to another member of the household as
determined by the Town Manager. If the applicant was the only member of a household, then no
payment shall be made under this article.
CHAPTER 400
STREET ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Street Construction Ordinance Adopted June 3, 2003 / Effective Date July 3, 2003
Amended March 16, 2004 / Effective Date April 15, 2004
Street Ordinance Adopted May 17, 2011 / Effective June 16, 2011
Amended December 6, 2011 / Effective January 5, 2012
Amended October 15, 2013 / Effective November 14, 2013
Amended October 20, 2015 / Effective November 19, 2015
Amended January 8, 2019, 2nd Reading January 22, 2019
Approved January 22, 2019, Effective March 1, 2019
SECTION 1 – GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 1.1 – PURPOSE
The Purposes of this ordinance are to promote public health, safety, and welfare for the residents of the
Town of Gray by regulating activities that affect the Town’s ability to maintain the roadway system,
enhancing the easy and rapid location of and access to properties for the delivery of public safety and
emergency services, and avoiding potentially life threatening situations that may be caused by unsafe
road conditions and confusing or disorganized addressing.
SECTION 1.2 – EFFECTIVE DATE
The effective date of this revision of this Ordinance shall be June 16, 2011.
SECTION 1.3 – APPLICABILITY
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all streets, roads and vehicular easements in the Town of
Gray that are under public ownership, by the Town or the State of Maine, or that are under private
ownership specifically including public easements for winter maintenance. The Ordinance shall also
apply to any street, road, or vehicular easements shown on a subdivision plan approved by the Gray
Planning Board and recorded in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds.
SECTION 1.4 – APPEALS
A. Decisions of the Code Enforcement Officer under this Ordinance shall be appealed to the Zoning
Board of Appeals and from the Zoning Board of Appeals to the Superior Court in accordance with
Rule 80 B of the Maine Civil Rules of Procedure.
B. Decisions of the Public Works Director, Town Engineer, and Street Addressing Committee under
this ordinance shall be appealed to the Town Council.
SECTION 1.5 – SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision
shall not invalidate any other article, section, or provision of this Ordinance.
SECTION 1.6 – CONFLICTS WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
This Ordinance shall not repeal, annul, or in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with
any other rule, regulation, permit, or provision of law. Whenever the requirements of this Ordinance are
in conflict with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, Ordinances, deed
restrictions, or covenants, the most restrictive shall govern.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE UPDATED.DOC 2
SECTION 2 – ACCEPTANCE OF A PUBLIC STREET OR PUBLIC EASEMENT FOR WINTER MAINTENANCE
SECTION 2.1 – PURPOSES & INTENT
A. Sub-collectors, Village Public Streets, and Rural Public Streets generally are designed for full public
ownership and maintenance. Sub-collectors and Rural Public Streets carry high volumes of traffic
and/or provide through connections between existing streets that improve traffic flows through the
community.
B. Rural Public Easement Streets are designed for public winter maintenance under the Town’s private
road public easement policy. Minor Rural Streets are designed for full private ownership and
maintenance under a maintenance agreement or homeowners’ association framework.
C. All new public streets/easements shall not be isolated from existing public streets/easements by
intervening private streets. New public streets/public easements must either intersect existing public
streets/easements or there shall be a continuous path from new public street/easements through other
new public streets to one or more existing public streets.
D. All decisions to accept public ownership or public easements, however, are subject to the
discretionary authority of the Town Council, and all proposed streets shall be covered by a private
maintenance agreement or homeowners’ association framework until they are accepted by the Town.
Upon receiving preliminary subdivision approval, applicants are required to seek indication of
whether the Town Council is willing to accept public ownership of fee interests or public easements.
SECTION 2.2 – PUBLIC EASEMENT FOR WINTER MAINTENANCE
Roads proposed for winter maintenance under a public easement shall meet the following criteria:
A. Requests for public easement road acceptance shall be made in writing to the Town Manager by the
road association president.
B. Each respective road or homeowners association shall be incorporated, unless all property owners
sign an individual public road easement and a hold harmless release.
C. Each respective road association and each individual property owner if required shall grant a
recorded public easement.
D. Each respective road association and each individual property owner if required shall sign a general
release to the Town granting permission to enter upon the road and to perform maintenance.
E. Each respective road association and each individual property owner if required shall agree and sign
to hold the Town harmless for any damages that may be caused in the process of providing
maintenance services.
F. The traveled portion of the road shall be adequately maintained in good repair by the respective road
association as determined by the Town’s Public Work’s Director.
G. There shall be adequate vehicle and plow turnaround(s).
H. All costs associated with each public easement road acceptance shall be borne by the respective road
association and property owners. Said costs may include public easement recording fee, published
notices and others costs deemed by the Town Council.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE UPDATED.DOC 3
I. Upon written application to the Town Council and determination of extraordinary circumstances the
Town Council has sole authority to waive or modify requirement(s) of the road adoption criteria.
J. In accordance with the Town annual budget cycle and to forecast Town winter maintenance
expenditures, a letter of intent must be submitted by January 15th for any new road(s) to be
considered for Public Easement for Winter Maintenance purposes for the subsequent winter. This
letter of intent shall be submitted to the Town Manager by the developer, road owner, road
association president or other agent of the road. The request must include the location and sufficient
information for the Town to determine winter maintenance needs such as road length, width, grades,
curve radii, drainage, and orientation. In the event that a letter of intent is duly submitted but the
proposed new road(s) is/are not accepted for winter maintenance purposes, i.e. not sufficiently
complete, the road owner/applicant shall be responsible for submitting a new letter of intent to the
Town for consideration by January 15th during the winter preceding the proposed winter
maintenance.
K. Accompanying each road association request for acceptance shall be separate, written
recommendations by the Public Works Director and Town Engineer either supporting or not
supporting public easement acceptance and their reasoning for the recommendation. A copy of the
request and recommendations shall be forwarded to the Town Manager or designee for notification
purpose prior to public easement acceptance.
L. In order to provide an efficient and workable relationship between the Town and the road
associations, each respective road association president or designee shall be the liaison between the
Town and road association. Each road association is responsible to inform the Town Manager, in
writing, identifying their respective association president or designee, address and telephone number
by September1st of each respective year.
M. Maintenance services covered under this policy shall consist only of snowplowing and road sanding.
The provision of required materials: road sand and road salt is implied by this policy. All other
maintenance aspects, materials and requirements of public easement roads accepted are the
responsibility of the road association and its members, including road grading. The Town does not
assume or accept liability for any defects in or lack of repair to public easements.
N. If a public easement’s traveled portion is paved, the public easement road association and abutting
property owners agree the Town assumes no responsibility for damages or injury to the paved
surface.
O. For public easement road acceptance and road maintenance, each road association recognizes the
Town of Gray responsibilities shall be limited to the scope of this policy and to hold the Town
harmless regarding any liability for any negligent damage to property: including but not limited to:
driveways, mail boxes, lawns, trees, curbing, shrubs or property markers. Each road association or
individual benefiting agrees to hold the Town of Gray, its officers, agents and employees harmless.
This clause does not mean or intend to hold harmless private contractors for their negligent acts.
P. If the Public Works Director determines that an emergency exists on any public easement way due to
heavy snowfall and/or narrowing of the travel ways due to snow banks, the Public Works Director
and the Town Manager may take such additional snow plowing and/or removal action as he
reasonably deems fit to abate the emergency. The Public Works Director shall keep accurate
financial records of any such emergency work and report the same to the Town Manager at least
monthly.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE UPDATED.DOC 4
SECTION 2.3 – PUBLIC EASEMENT FOR WINTER MAINTENANCE STANDARDS FOR PRE-1998 ROADS
In addition to the requirements of Section 2.2 above, roads proposed for winter maintenance under a
public easement that were constructed before October 1, 1998 shall meet the following standards:
A. There shall be at least four (4) year around dwellings served on the road under consideration.
B. An easement of at least twenty (20 ft) feet in width shall be provided.
C. The traveled portion of the road must be at least ten (10 ft) feet in width with an overall clearance
width of eighteen (18ft) feet.
D. The traveled portion of the road shall have an adequate gravel base with a minimum depth of six (6
in) inches.
E. The traveled portion of the road’s overhead clearance shall be a minimum of thirteen and half (13½
ft) feet.
SECTION 2.4 – PUBLIC EASEMENT FOR WINTER MAINTENANCE STANDARDS FOR POST-1998 ROADS
In addition to the requirements of Section 2.2 above, roads proposed for winter maintenance under a
public easement that were constructed after October 1, 1998 shall meet the following standards:
A. The road must meet all standards of the Subdivision Ordinance for Rural Public Easement Streets or
Rural Public Streets, including paving, except that roads built to the prior public street standard of
three (3) inches of paving prior to enactment of this ordinance on May 17, 2011 may be accepted for
public easements (Amendment effective Jan 5, 2012). Rural Public Streets will not be fully accepted
under Section 2.5 below unless they provide public benefits indicated in Section 2.1 A above, but
they will be eligible for winter maintenance public easements.
B. No public easement may be submitted for acceptance unless at least seventy-five (75%) percent of
the housing units on that street or within that subdivision phase have received their certificates of
occupancy.
C. Roads shown on final subdivisions plans which were duly approved, inspected, and “substantially
started”, as defined in the Gray Zoning Ordinance, by May 17, 2011 may be eligible for winter
maintenance of each phase provided that such roads are constructed to the prior “Public Street
Construction Standards”, excluding paved shoulders, and that the minimum pavement thickness
meets the requirements for a Rural Public Easement Street. (Amendment effective Nov 14, 2013).
SECTION 2.5 – REQUIREMENTS FOR FULL PUBLIC ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS
A. The owner(s) shall give the Town a deed to the property within the boundaries of the street at the
time of its acceptance by the Town and a separate deed to areas reserved for future development of
streets.
B. A plan of said street or way shall be recorded in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds at the
time of its acceptance.
C. A petition for the acceptance of said street or way shall be submitted to the Town Council upon a
form to be prescribed by the Town Attorney. Said petition shall be accompanied by an as-built plan,
profile and cross section of said street or way as follows:
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE UPDATED.DOC 5
1. A plan drawn to a scale of 50 feet to 1 inch, and to be on one or more sheets of paper not
exceeding 24 inches by 36 inches in size or in digital format as prescribed by the Planning
Board.
2. A profile of said street or way drawn to a horizontal scale of 50 feet to 1 inch and a vertical scale
of 5 feet to 1 inch.
3. A typical cross section of said street or way, drawn to a horizontal scale of 5 ft. to 1 inch and a
vertical scale of 5 ft. to 1 inch.
D. Streets to be offered to the town for acceptance must have a written report of inspection prepared by
the Town Engineer that affirms compliance with the standards of the Subdivision Ordinance for its
road classification at the completion of construction. Final Certification by the Town Engineer shall
be done only after the road has gone through one winter and spring season.
E. No street or way shall be accepted by the Town Council until the Planning Board and the Town
Engineer shall have made a careful investigation thereof, and shall have reported to the Town
Council their recommendations in writing. Such results shall include at a minimum one core sample
for the road proposed. Additional core samples may be required upon recommendation of the Town
Engineer.
F. No street or way may be accepted unless at least seventy-five (75%) percent of the housing units on
that street or within that subdivision phase must have received their certificates of occupancy before
any acceptance by the Town Council.
PART 3 STREETS ASSOCIATED WITH SUBDIVISIONS [Repealed 12-7-2010 & moved to
Subdivision Ordinance]
SECTION 3 – STREET NAMING AND NUMBERING
SECTION 3.1 – ADMINISTRATION
All streets and roads shall be named by a Street Addressing Committee consisting of a representative of
Public Safety, Code Enforcement, Public Works, Assessing, and Planning. Road names and numbers
shall be assigned to all properties, on both existing roads and new roads that are built after the effective
date of this ordinance. The Street Addressing Committee shall be responsible for maintaining the
following official records of this ordinance:
A. Town of Gray street map for official use showing all road names and numbers. The map shall be
updated annually as of each April 1st.
B. An alphabetical list of all property owners as identified by current assessment records, by last name,
showing the assigned numbers. The list shall be updated as street names are authorized.
C. An alphabetical list of all roads with property owners listed in order of their assigned numbers. The
list shall be updated annually as of each April 1st.
Any situation pertaining to addressing not covered in this ordinance shall be settled by the Town
Council.
SECTION 3.2 – NAMING SYSTEM
All roads/accessways in Gray that serve two or more addresses or principal structures shall be named
regardless of whether the ownership is public or private. A road name assigned by the Town of Gray
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE UPDATED.DOC 6
shall not constitute or imply acceptance of the road as a public way. The following criteria shall govern
the naming system:
A. Similar names – no two roads shall be given the same or similar-sounding (e.g. Beech and Peach,
Pine Road and Pine Lane) names.
B. Each road shall have the name throughout its entire length.
SECTION 3.3 – NUMBERING SYSTEM
Numbers shall be assigned every one hundred (100 ft) feet along both sides of the road, with even
numbers appearing on the right side of the road and odd numbers appearing on the left side of the road,
determined by the number origin. The following criteria shall govern the numbering system:
A. All number origins shall begin from the designated center of the Town of Gray or that end of the
road closest to the designated center. For dead end roads, numbering shall originate at the
intersection of the adjacent road and terminate at the dead end.
B. The number assigned to each structure shall be that of the number interval falling closet to the front
door or driveway of said structure.
C. Every structure with more than one principal use or occupancy shall have a separate number for each
use or occupancy (i.e. multi-dwelling units and apartments) will have one road number with an
apartment letter, such as 235 Maple Street, Apt B. lettered from left to right from the street and
beginning with the lowest separately occupied unit.
D. Corner lots will be numbered on the street which the front door faces.
E. Cul-de-sacs with buildable lots within the center of the cul-de-sac will be numbered continuously
around the cul-de-sac on both sides in the direction of the traffic flow. Cul-de-sacs with no buildable
lots in the center will be numbered as a straight street with odd numbers and even numbers meeting
on the far side of the cul-de-sac.
F. Number on the structure. Where the structure is within fifty (50) feet of the street, the assigned
number shall be located on the front of the structure near the front door or entry.
G. Number at street: Where the structure is over fifty (50) feet from the street, the displayed number
shall be displayed on a post or mailbox at the street line next to the walk or drive accessing the
structure, or where appropriate as determined by public safety officials. The displayed number shall
be between four (4) and (6) six feet above the ground and visible from both directions.
H. Size and color of number. Displayed numbers shall be between four (4) and six (6) inches in height
and shall be horizontally oriented and of a contrasting color to any background. Either the number or
the background shall be of a reflective nature for visibility at night.
SECTION 3.4 – NEW DEVELOPMENTS AND SUBDIVISIONS
All new developments and subdivisions shall be named and numbered in accordance with the provisions
of this ordinance and as follows:
A. New Developments. Whenever any residence or other structure is constructed or developed, it shall
be the duty of the new owner to procure an assigned number from the Street Addressing Committee.
This shall be done at the time of the issuance of the building permit.
B. New Subdivisions.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE UPDATED.DOC 7
1. Any prospective subdivider shall show a proposed road name on the final plan submissions to
the Planning Board. Approval by the Planning Board shall constitute the assignment of road
names for the subdivision.
2. On the final plan showing proposed roads, the applicant shall mark on the plan, lines or dots, in
the center of the streets every one hundred (100 ft) feet so as to aid in assignment of numbers to
structures subsequently constructed.
3. Developers of subdivisions shall be required to erect signs naming streets within each approved
subdivision at the onset of the construction phase. Street signs shall be approved by the Public
Works Director and installed by the developer prior to the issuance of building permits for any of
the subdivision lots.
SECTION 3.5 – ADDRESS REVISIONS
In the event a resident or residents wish to change an existing physical address, the following procedure
will be adhered to:
A. The resident(s) will request the change via a letter to the Addressing Committee, in care of the Fire
Chief.
B. At least two-thirds of the residents affected by the change must be in support of the change, and
must have signed the letter. The Addressing Committee will review the requested change, and may
request the residents to meet with them.
C. In the event a resident who is affected by the proposed change does not support the change, they
may address their concerns to the Addressing Committee at any time. In the case of an approval for
change by the Addressing Committee, the Committee will have the authority to make the change.
D. Should a resident wish to appeal the Committee's decision, said appeal will be made to the Town
Council.
PART 4 PRIVATE STREETS Repealed May 17, 2010 & moved to Subdivision Ordinance]
SECTION 4 – EXCAVATIONS
SECTION 4.1 – PERMIT REQUIRED
No person including a utility shall dig up, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any manner break up any
street or make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street for any purpose
or place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or other material obstructing or tending to interfere
with the free use of the street, unless such person including a utility shall first have obtained a street
opening permit from the Public Works Director as provided in Section 4.4.
SECTION 4.2 – COMMENCEMENT OF WORK
Excavation work must be started no later than thirty (30) days from the date of issue of the street
opening permit. After the expiration of this thirty-day period, such permit shall become null and void.
SECTION 4.3 – RESTRICTED MONTHS
No person shall be granted a street opening permit from December first of each year to March thirty-first
of the following year unless an emergency or special condition exists and written permission is obtained
from the Public Works Director. A written explanation shall be submitted to the Public Works Director
explaining the special situation or emergency prior to the issuing of the permit.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE UPDATED.DOC 8
SECTION 4.4 – APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
A. No street opening permit shall be issued unless a written application is submitted to the Public
Works Director for review.
B. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant and an emergency phone number
that will be answered twenty-four (24) hours per day, the type of work to be done, signatures of
approval from utilities, name of the place and street number and purpose of the excavation, the date
of commencement and date of completion of excavation.
C. The application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the planned excavation submitted on an eightand-
one-half-inch by eleven-inch sketch showing trench locations, widths, depths, location of all
barricades, warning signs, detour signs and detour routes and such other information as may be
reasonably required by the Public Works Director.
D. If the applicant is other than a public utility and intends to excavate in the vicinity of a facility
owned or operated by a public utility or oil pipeline owned by a person, the applicant shall provide
the information required by the town under this section to the utility or person owning such facility
in addition to providing such information to the town.
E. The application for permit shall be accompanied by payment of a permit fee established by the Town
Council which is on file in the town clerk's office.
F. A preconstruction meeting may be held, if felt to be warranted by the Public Works Director.
G. The application shall be accompanied by proof of notice to the utilities as provided in 23 M.R.S.A. §
3360.
SECTION 4.5 – REASON FOR DENIAL OF A PERMIT
The Public Works Director may deny any street opening permit if the Director determines that such
excavation would endanger the life or property of the citizens of the town or if such excavation would
endanger the general public or interfere with snow removal. The denial may be appealed within thirty
(30) days to the Town Council. All denials by the Public Works Director shall be made in writing to the
applicant.
SECTION 4.6 – NOTICE OF COMMENCEMENT OF WORK
The excavator shall give notice to the Public Works Director not more than seventy-two (72) hours nor
less than twenty-four (24) hours before excavation work begins.
SECTION 5 – DRIVEWAYS
SECTION 5.1 – DEFINITIONS & APPLICABILITY
A. For the purposes of this Ordinance, all references to the term "Private Driveway" shall be
deemed to apply to a new or expanded driveway utilized to access a single-family residence,
and/or a duplex/two-family and/or multi-family dwelling, and/or a commercial or institutional
entrance that is not subject to Site Plan Review.
B. This Section 5 shall also apply to the addition of a new dwelling unit or additional principal
structure(s) that utilizes an existing Private Driveway for access.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE UPDATED.DOC 9
C. The entirety of this Section 5 shall apply to any and/or all new or expanded Private Driveways
within the Town of Gray accessing a street, road or vehicular easement irrespective of the owner
of the street, road, or vehicular easement including all of the following types:
1. Owned by the Town of Gray, and/or
2. Owned/operated by the State of Maine within an MeDOT Urban Compact area, and/or
3. Owned/operated by the State of Maine not within an MeDOT Urban ompact area, and/or
4. Privately owned, irrespective of whether or not subject to a public easement for winter
maintenance.
D. The provisions contained in this Section 5 shall only apply to the intersection of the Private
Driveway entrance with the street that it provides access to for a distance of thirty (30') feet from
the travel way except for commercial driveways as provided in Table 5.1.
E. A separate Private Driveway permit shall not be required for private driveways shown in a
specific location on an approved subdivision plan and built in conformance with the design
specifications approved by the Planning Board. Changes to design are allowed subject to the
submittal of a driveway permit application with engineered drawings and approved by the Town
Planner and Town Engineer.
SECTION 5.2 – PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURES
The procedure for application for proposed construction of new or expanded Private Driveways shall be
as follows:
A. All new or expanded Private Driveway(s) accessing State or State Aid highways requiring a
MeDOT entrance permit must obtain all necessary MeDOT entrance permit(s) before applying
for a Private Driveway permit from the Town. Applicants are advised to ensure compliance with
Town standards before applying for an MeDOT entrance permit.
B. Prior to the construction or expansion of any private driveway, an application shall be submitted
to the Code Enforcement Officer on forms prepared by the Town. The application shall include
the following information:
1. Names of applicants.
2. Owners of land for the location of a proposed Private Driveway and evidence of right,
title, or interest.
3. A statement of any legal encumbrances on the land for the location of a proposed Private
Driveway.
4. The anticipated starting date of construction.
C. Drawings of the proposed or expanded private driveway entrance shall be submitted to the Code
Enforcement Officer with the application. The drawings shall include the following information:
1. Date, scale, and magnetic or true North.
2. Intersection of the proposed Private Driveway with an existing public or private street
and their location and relationship with respect to any existing natural waterways in the
vicinity of the proposed driveway.
3. Turning radii at the intersection of the proposed private driveway with the existing street.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE UPDATED.DOC 10
4. Approximate centerline gradients of the proposed Private Driveway within thirty (30')
feet of the travel way of the existing street.
5. Locations of existing overhead and underground utilities including, but not limited to,
water, sewer, electricity, telephone, lighting, and cable television.
D. The fee schedule for review of plans for a new or expanded Private Driveway or an alteration to
an existing private driveway shall be established by the Town Council and may be amended.
E. Building permits that are associated with any new construction or expansion of Private
Driveways shall not be issued until the Code Enforcement Officer has determined that the
applicant's Private Driveway construction application is complete in accordance with the
following provisions:
1. All applications for Private Driveway permits for access to any street, road, or vehicular
easement within the Town of Gray hall be subject to review and approval by the Public
Works Director. The Public Works Director shall also review Private Driveways to be
located on street turnarounds to ensure that snow plowing operations are not hindered.
2. In the event that the ode Officer and/or Public Works Director determine that the input of
a professional engineer is needed to verify compliance with this ordinance, a review by
the Town Engineer may be requested by the Town Officials, and the costs of that review
shall be paid by the applicant under the Town's peer review escrow system.
SECTION 5.3 – APPLICATION PROCEDURE STANDARDS FOR ALL NEW OR EXPANDED PRIVATE
DRIVEWAYS:
The procedure for application for proposed new private driveways shall be as follows:
A. The minimum diameter of culverts under a Private Driveway at the intersection of he street or ditchline
shall be fifteen (15") inches. Based on site conditions, the Public Works Director shall have the
authority to not require a culvert or require the owner/applicant to install a larger culvert.
B. When a corner lot is bounded by streets of two different classifications, private driveways to the
corner lot shall gain access from the street of lower classification unless, in the opinion of the Town
Engineer, there is good reason to do otherwise (e.g., on the higher classification road the Private
Driveway can be located more distant from the intersection or sight distances are improved).
C. Unless specifically approved by the Gray Planning Board as an integral component of a duly
approved application such as Site Plan Review, Conditional Use and or a Subdivision, only one (1)
curb cut for non-residential purposes shall be permitted on any parcel.
D. Private Driveways shall be located so that the edge of the shoulder closest to a property line is at
least ten (10) feet from that property line unless one of the following conditions are met:
1. For a Private Driveway shared between abutting properties meeting the following
standards:
a. The Private Driveway shall have a minimum travel way width of fourteen (14')
feet for the first twenty-five (25') feet before dividing into separate driveways;
and
b. Deeded rights to the Private Driveway shall be issued for both lots serviced by the
common driveway and a maintenance agreement specifying rights and
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE UPDATED.DOC 11
responsibilities for its maintenance signed by the parties shall be filed with the
driveway permit application.
2. For a common curb cut shared between abutting properties meeting one of the following
standards:
a. Approved by the Planning Board as an integral component of a duly approved
application such as Site Plan Review, Conditional Use, and/or Subdivision
review; or
b. Reviewed and approved by the Code Enforcement Officer and Public Works
Director with appropriate input and design parameters from the Town Engineer.
Engineering fees shall be at the owners/applicant's expense.
E. Sidewalk Crossing Standards: The following standards shall apply where proposed or expanded
Private Driveways will cross existing sidewalks:
1. When sidewalk or curb exists at the proposed entrance the applicant shall remove and
replace such materials at the applicant's expense.
2. Where curb exists, curb tip-downs shall be provided at each side of a new entrance.
3. Where sidewalk is removed to accommodate a new entrance a new walk surface of equal
type construction is to be provided. The sidewalk area at all entrances is to meet handicap
accessibility requirements and conform to the American with Disabilities Act guidelines.
In general sidewalks shall meet the following:
a. The maximum sidewalk longitudinal transition slope is not to exceed I vertical to
12 horizontal (I: 12).
b. The maximum sidewalk cross-slope is not to exceed 2%.
c. No abrupt changes in grade are permitted and the maximum curb reveal crossing
a walkway is ½ inch or less.
SECTION 5.4 – PRIVATE DRIVEWAY LAYOUT AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
A. All new or expanded private driveways constructed after the date of adoption of this ordinance shall
meet the driveway construction standards of Table 5.1.
Table 5.1 Private Driveway Required Construction Standards
Maximum grade w/in 30 feet of street travel way surface residential 6 percent
Maximum grade w/in 60 feet of street travel way surface commercial 3 percent
Minimum angle of intersection with street 75 degrees
Maximum angle of intersection with street 105 degrees
B. All entrances shall be so located such that vehicles approaching or using the entrance will be able to
obtain adequate sight distance in both directions along the street or to maneuver safely and without
interference with traffic in accordance with the following provisions:
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE UPDATED.DOC 12
1. Measurements to determine sight distance shall be made in the proposed entrance at a point ten
(10’) feet from the edge of shoulder line with the height of eye three and one-half (3.5’) feet
above the pavement. The sight distance shall be computed from this point measuring along the
roadway to a point where an approaching height of object four and one quarter (4.25’) feet is first
seen.
2. Driveway placement shall be such that an existing vehicle has an unobstructed sight distance in
both directions meeting the requirements of Table 5.2 unless a waiver is granted by the Town
Engineer upon documentation provided by the applicant that safety conditions will be met with
shorter sight distances (this review will be covered by the Town requirements for peer review
escrows). Commercial driveway entrances and exits not requiring site plan review and serving
traffic of over fifteen percent (15%) truck traffic shall meet the Mobility Sight Distance
requirements of Table 5.2 (third column).
Table 5.2 Private Driveway Entrance Sight Distance Standards
Posted Speed (MPH) Sight Distance (Feet) Mobility Sight Distance1
20 155 225
25 200 300
30 250 380
35 305 480
40 360 580
45 425 710
50 495 840
C. All private driveways shall have suitable drainage facilities to provide for adequate removal of storm
water to prevent flooding and erosion:
1. When the Public Works Director determines that a culvert is necessary, culverts shall be of
adequate size and depth to convey ditch water flows and shall be shielded with stone rip rap at
inlet and outlet to prevent washouts when the ditch flow capacity is exceeded in major storms.
2. Irrespective of the travel surface material, the intersection of the Private Driveway with the
roadway shall be designed. constructed, and maintained to prevent surface drainage from flowing
onto or across the roadway. The entrance surface shall slope away from the road at a rate of not
less than one quarter inch (.25”/ft.) per foot, nor more than one inch (1”/ft.) per foot for a
distance of not less than the prevailing width of the existing shoulder, but in no case less than
four (4’) feet from the edge of the travel way surface.
D. Private driveways shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from the tangent point of the travel
way edge radius of any intersection of streets.
E. When a corner lot is bounded by streets of two different classifications, private driveways to the
corner lot shall gain access from the street of lower classification unless, in the opinion of the Town
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE UPDATED.DOC 13
Engineer, there is good reason to do otherwise (e.g., on the higher classification road the driveway
can be located more distant from the intersection or sight distances are improved).
F. There shall be a minimum turning radius of ten (10 ft) feet at the intersection of a private driveway
with the street. If necessary, the width of the travel way of the Private Driveway shall be increased in
the vicinity of the intersection to provide for this turning radius. Commercial driveway entrances and
exits not requiring site plan review and serving traffic of over fifteen percent (15%) truck traffic
shall be designed with adequate width to avoid a turning vehicle from tracking into the opposing
travel lane.
G. Private driveways shall be located so that the edge of the shoulder closest to a property line is at least
ten (10) feet from that property line unless the following conditions are met for a driveway shared
between abutting properties:
1. The driveway shall have a minimum travel way width of fourteen (14’) feet for the first twenty
five (25’) feet before dividing into separate driveways.
2. Deeded rights to the driveway shall be issued for both lots serviced by the common driveway and
a maintenance agreement specifying rights and responsibilities for its maintenance signed by the
parties shall be filed with the driveway permit application.
H. Unless specifically approved by the Gray Planning Board as an integral component of a duly
approved application such as Site Plan Review, Conditional Use and or a Subdivision, only one (1)
curb cut for non-residential purposes shall be permitted on any parcel.
PART 6 PARKING [Repealed 1-19-2010 & moved to Zoning Ordinance]
SECTION 6 – MISCELLANEOUS ACTIVITIES WITHIN THE ROAD RIGHT OF WAY
SECTION 6.1 – ACTIVITIES WITHIN THE ROAD RIGHT OF WAY
Notwithstanding that the public way is intended for public travel and convenience; other uses are
permissible when not in conflict with public interest. The following criteria shall apply to uses:
SECTION 6.2 – MAILBOXES
Mailboxes may be located in the public way when located so as not to obstruct visibility for safe vehicle
operation and not to interfere with the maintenance of the public way. Mailboxes shall be placed as
follows:
A. The box will be a minimum of forty-two (42 in) inches above the edge of pavement;
B. The reflectors will be located on the side facing oncoming traffic; and
C. The standard or upright will be at least four (4 ft) feet from the edge of pavement.
SECTION 6.3 – PLANTINGS & FENCES
Lawns and other ground cover as well as fences may be located within the right-of-way so long as the
landscape will not adversely affect visibility for safe vehicle operation nor impede storm drainage and
snow and ice removal activities. No fences or ground cover (shrubs or trees) may be placed within four
(4 ft) feet of the edge of pavement without written permission of the Public Works Director. The Public
Works Director shall review the location and design to determine if curbing or drainage modifications
are necessary.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 400 STREET ORDINANCE UPDATED.DOC 14
SECTION 6.4 – DRIVEWAY & FOUNDATION DRAINAGE
No water other than the natural flow from a site may be discharged into the right-of way of a street
without written permission from the Public Works Director. The director shall review the proposed
location and design and consider the following before granting any permit:
A. Adequacy of downstream drainage system;
B. Impact upon the public way;
C. Snow and ice removal and control.
CHAPTER 402
ZONING ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted November 10, 2008 / Effective December 10, 2008
Amended January 19, 2010 / Effective February 18, 2010
Amended June 21, 2011 / Effective July 21, 2011
Amended September 6, 2011 / Effective October 6, 2011 (Medical Marijuana)
Amended November 15, 2011 / Effective December 15, 2011 (Contract Zoning)
Amended December 6, 2011 / Effective January 5, 2012 (Agritourism Center)
Amended June 5, 2012 / Effective July 5, 2012 (Gravel Pits / Art. 11)
Amended February 5, 2013 / Effective March 7, 2013 (Gravel Pits / Art. 11)
Amended October 20, 2015 / Effective November 19, 2015
Amended March 15, 2016 / Effective April 14, 2016
Amended September 6, 2016 / Effective October 5, 2016
Amended January 3, 2017 / Effective February 2, 2017
Amended March 21, 2017 / Effective April 20, 2017
Amended May 16, 2017 / Effective June 15, 2017
Amended September 19, 2017 / Effective October 19, 2017
Amended October 17, 2017 / Effective November 16, 2017
Amended January 2, 2018 / Effective February 1, 2018
Amended January 22, 2019, Effective March 1, 2019
Amended June 18, 2019 / Effective date is July 18, 2019
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 2
ARTICLE 1 – AUTHORITY AND PURPOSES ....................................................................................... 6
402.1.1 Authority .................................................................................................................................... 6
402.1.2 Short Title .................................................................................................................................. 6
402.1.3 Purposes ..................................................................................................................................... 6
402.1.4 Jurisdiction ................................................................................................................................. 6
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS .................................................................................................................... 7
402.2.1 Construction of Language .......................................................................................................... 7
402.2.2 Definitions.................................................................................................................................. 7
ARTICLE 3 – OFFICIAL ZONING MAP ............................................................................................... 27
402.3.1 Official Zoning Map ................................................................................................................ 27
402.3.2 Certification of Zoning Map .................................................................................................... 27
402.3.3 Changes of the Official Zoning Map ....................................................................................... 27
402.3.4 Rules Governing District Boundaries ...................................................................................... 27
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS ...................................................................................................... 29
402.4.1 Zoning Districts Established .................................................................................................... 29
402.4.2 Zoning Districts Purposes ........................................................................................................ 29
402.4.3 Applicability of Zoning Provisions to Districts ....................................................................... 31
ARTICLE 5 – ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS ........................................................................... 32
402.5.1 Basic Requirements for Compliance with Codes and Ordinances .......................................... 32
402.5.2 Legal Rights and Responsibilities to Uses of Land and Property ............................................ 32
402.5.3 District Regulations ................................................................................................................. 32
402.5.4 Districts Dimensional Requirements ....................................................................................... 36
ARTICLE 6 – GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS ................... 38
402.6.1 Land Use Requirements ........................................................................................................... 38
402.6.2 Lots .......................................................................................................................................... 38
402.6.3 Net Residential Area ................................................................................................................ 39
402.6.4 Net Residential Density ........................................................................................................... 39
402.6.5 Non-Conformance with the Requirements of this Zoning Ordinance ..................................... 39
402.6.6 Special Permit Required for Temporary Events ...................................................................... 41
402.6.7 Regulation of Signs .................................................................................................................. 42
402.6.8 Regulation of Mobile Home Parks .......................................................................................... 42
402.6.9 Parking Requirements .............................................................................................................. 42
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 3
ARTICLE 7 –STANDARDS APPLICABLE IN MOST ZONING DISTRICTS ................................... 44
402.7.1 Temporary Structures ............................................................................................................... 44
402.7.2 Home Occupations ................................................................................................................... 44
402.7.3 Flea Markets & Open Air Markets .......................................................................................... 45
402.7.4 Keeping of Large Animals ....................................................................................................... 46
402.7.5 Back Lot Access Easements .................................................................................................... 46
402.7.6 Residential Open Space Subdivisions and Multi-family housing development ...................... 47
402.7.7 Planned Unit Development for Commercial Subdivisions ...................................................... 48
402.7.8 Mobile Homes, Motor Homes and Travel Trailers .................................................................. 48
402.7.9 Accessory Apartments ............................................................................................................. 50
402.7.10 Private Landing Strips for Personal Aircraft & Helicopters .................................................. 52
402.7.11 Campgrounds ......................................................................................................................... 53
402.7.12 Fire and Explosive Hazards ................................................................................................... 55
402.7.13 Lighting .................................................................................................................................. 55
402.7.14 Storage of Materials ............................................................................................................... 55
402.7.15 Farm Stands ........................................................................................................................... 56
402.7.16 Bed and Breakfast Establishments ......................................................................................... 57
402.7.17 In-Home Offices .................................................................................................................... 57
402.7.18 Boat Storage ........................................................................................................................... 57
402.7.19 Building Trades Occupation-1 ............................................................................................... 57
402.7.20 RETAIL MARIJUANA ........................................................................................................ 58
ARTICLE 8 –STANDARDS ONLY APPLICABLE IN SPECIFIC DISTRICTS .................................. 59
402.8.1 Adult Businesses ...................................................................................................................... 59
402.8.2 Business Transitional District Standards ................................................................................. 59
402.8.3 Village Center District Standards ............................................................................................ 61
402.8.4 Wellhead District Standards .................................................................................................... 62
402.8.5 Agritourism .............................................................................................................................. 69
402.8.6 Watershed Protection Measures in the Lake District (LD) ...................................................... 70
402.8.7 Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facilities and Dispensaries .................................................... 73
402.8.8 Business Development District 2 Standards ............................................................................ 73
402.8.9 Light Manufacturing Overlay District Standards (LMOD) ..................................................... 77
ARTICLE 9 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT ................................................................ 81
402.9.1 Duties and Authority of the Code Enforcement Officer .......................................................... 81
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 4
402.9.2 Duties and Authority of the Board of Zoning Appeals ............................................................ 82
402.9.3 Duties and Authority of the Planning Board for Approval of Conditional Permitted Uses and
Site Plan Review Permits ...................................................................................................................... 86
402.9.4 Severability of Individual Ordinance Sections and Provisions ................................................ 89
402.9.5 Conflicts with Other Ordinances ............................................................................................. 89
402.9.6 Planning Board Rules of Procedure ......................................................................................... 89
402.9.7 Effects of New Ordinance Enactment ...................................................................................... 89
402.9.8 Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map ........................................................ 90
402.9.9 Conditional or Contract Zoning ............................................................................................... 90
ARTICLE 10 – SITE PLAN REVIEW .................................................................................................... 91
402.10.1 Purposes of Site Plan Review ................................................................................................ 91
402.10.2 Applicability of Site Plan Review.......................................................................................... 91
402.10.3 Exempt Activities................................................................................................................... 91
402.10.4 Review and Approval Authority ............................................................................................ 92
402.10.5 Staff Review Committee ........................................................................................................ 92
402.10.6 Classification of Projects ....................................................................................................... 92
402.10.7 Site Plan Review Procedure for Minor Developments .......................................................... 93
402.10.8 Site Plan Review Procedure for Major Developments .......................................................... 95
402.10.9 Application and Technical Review Fees for Site Plan Review ............................................. 99
402.10.10 Required Submissions for Site Plan Review ..................................................................... 100
402.10.11 Site Development Standards for Site Plan Review ............................................................ 105
402.10.12 Good Neighbor Standards for Site Plan Review................................................................ 118
402.10.13 Site Design Standards for Site Plan Review ...................................................................... 119
402.10.14 Standards for Multi-Family Housing ................................................................................. 122
402.10.15 Planning Board Waivers of Site Plan Review Performance Standards ............................. 123
402.10.16 Negotiated Exactions ......................................................................................................... 123
402.10.17 Post Site Plan Approval Activities ..................................................................................... 128
ARTICLE 11 – GRAVEL PITS AND QUARRIES .............................................................................. 130
402.11.1 Purpose ................................................................................................................................. 130
402.11.2 Applicability ........................................................................................................................ 130
402.11.3 Permitted Zoning Districts ................................................................................................... 131
402.11.4 Permit Requirements ............................................................................................................ 131
402.11.5 Classification........................................................................................................................ 131
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 5
402.11.6 Requirements for Classifications ......................................................................................... 132
402.11.7 Excavation Regulations ....................................................................................................... 142
402.11.8 Administrative Requirements .............................................................................................. 144
402.11.9 Waivers of Provisions .......................................................................................................... 145
402.11.10 Enforcement ....................................................................................................................... 146
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 6
ARTICLE 1 – AUTHORITY AND PURPOSES
402.1.1 Authority
This ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 30-A, Chapter 187 of the
Maine Revised Statutes Annotated, as amended.
402.1.2 Short Title
This ordinance and the accompanying Official Zoning Maps shall be known as and may be cited as the
"Zoning Ordinance, Town of Gray, Maine."
402.1.3 Purposes
The purpose of this ordinance is to:
A. Protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the town of Gray;
B. To encourage appropriate use of land throughout the municipality;
C. To promote traffic safety;
D. To provide safety from fire and other elements;
E. To provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of real estate;
F. To prevent housing development in unsuitable areas;
G. To provide an allotment of land area in new developments sufficient for all the requirements of
community life;
H. To conserve natural resources, open space, and visual character;
I. To prevent and control water pollution;
J. To protect buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion;
K. To protect archaeological and historic resources;
L. To protect freshwater wetlands; and,
M. To provide for adequate public services, as an integral part of a Comprehensive Plan for municipal
development.
402.1.4 Jurisdiction
The provisions of this ordinance shall govern all land and all structures within the boundaries of the
Town of Gray.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 7
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
402.2.1 Construction of Language
In the interpretation and enforcement of this ordinance, all words other than those specifically defined in
the ordinance shall have the meaning implied by their context in the ordinance or their ordinarily
accepted meaning. In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this
ordinance and any map, illustration, or table, the text shall control.
The word "person" includes firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation,
as well as an individual or any other legal entity.
The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural
numbers includes the singular.
The word "shall" and "will" are mandatory, the word "may" is permissive.
The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel".
The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the
words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied."
The words "town" or "municipality" means the Town of Gray, Maine.
The words "governing authority” means the Gray Town Council.
402.2.2 Definitions
In this ordinance the following terms shall have the following meanings:
Abutter: The owner(s) of a property sharing a common boundary with or within 250 feet of a given
parcel of property, whether or not these properties are separated by a public or private way. For the
purposes of this Ordinance, the owner(s) of properties shall be considered to be parties listed by the Tax
Assessor as the ones whom taxes are assessed.
Accessory Apartment: A subordinate residential use that requires approval from the Code Enforcement
Officer that conforms to the performance standards in this Ordinance including being owner-occupied, a
maximum of 660 sq. ft., and is incorporated within a single-family dwelling. An accessory apartment
shall not be considered a separate dwelling unit when calculating lot area per dwelling unit for this
Ordinance, but must comply with all other applicable requirements of law including the State Minimum
Lot Size statute and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal rules.
Accessory Use or Structure: A use or structure which is customarily and in fact both incidental and
subordinate to the principal use or structure. The term "incidental" in reference to the principal use or
structure shall mean subordinate and minor in significance to the principal use or structure. Accessory
uses, when aggregated, shall not subordinate the principal use of the lot. Accessory use shall include the
use of any portion of a lot pursuant to an easement for Commercial Recreation, Outdoor, but shall not
include the use of any portion of a lot for purposes related to medical marijuana cultivation facilities,
medical marijuana registered dispensaries, adult use marijuana establishments, marijuana food
establishments, marijuana extraction, or the manufacturing of marijuana concentrate or marijuana
products as defined herein, unless expressly authorized herein.
Adult Business: Any business in any use category, a substantial or significant portion of which consists
of selling, renting, leasing, exhibiting, displaying or otherwise dealing in materials or services of any
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 8
kind which appeal to prurient interests and which depict or describe specified sexual activities. As
applied to a business which sells, rents or leases such materials or devices, “substantial or significant
portion” means that 25% or more of the floor area of the unit of occupancy in which the business is
located is used to display, shelve or store such materials or devices. As applied to a business which
exhibits or displays, films, videos or similar visual reproductions for viewing by patrons on the
premises, “substantial or significant portion” means that, in any single day, 50% or more of the total
display or exhibition time is devoted to such materials.
Adult Use: The acquisition, possession, cultivation, consumption, transfer or transportation of
marijuana or paraphernalia relating to the consumption of marijuana by persons 21 years of age or older.
Adult Use Marijuana Cultivation Facility: A facility licensed under Maine law to purchase marijuana
plants and seeds from other cultivation facilities; to cultivate, prepare and package adult use marijuana;
to sell adult use marijuana to products manufacturing facilities, to adult use marijuana stores and to other
adult use marijuana cultivation facilities; and to sell marijuana plants and seeds to other adult use
marijuana cultivation facilities and immature marijuana plants and seedlings to adult use marijuana
stores.
Adult Use Marijuana: Marijuana that is cultivated, manufactured, distributed or sold by an adult use
marijuana establishment.
Adult Use Marijuana Establishment: An adult use marijuana cultivation facility, an adult use marijuana
products manufacturing facility, an adult use marijuana testing facility or an adult use marijuana store
licensed under Maine law.
Adult Use Marijuana Product: A marijuana product that is manufactured, distributed or sold by an adult
use marijuana establishment.
Adult Use Marijuana Products Manufacturing Facility: A facility licensed under Maine law to
purchase adult use marijuana from a cultivation facility or another adult use marijuana products
manufacturing facility; to manufacture, label and package adult use marijuana and adult use marijuana
products; and to sell adult use marijuana and adult use marijuana products to adult use marijuana stores
and to other adult use marijuana products manufacturing facilities.
Adult Use Marijuana Store: A facility licensed under Maine law to purchase adult use marijuana,
immature marijuana plants and seedlings from an adult use marijuana cultivation facility, to purchase
adult use marijuana and adult use marijuana products from an adult use marijuana products
manufacturing facility and to sell adult use marijuana, adult use marijuana products, immature marijuana
plants and seedlings to consumers.
Adult Use Marijuana Testing Facility: A facility licensed under Maine law to develop, research and test
adult use marijuana, adult use marijuana products and other substances.
Aggrieved Person or Party: An owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly affected by the
granting or denial of a permit or variance under this Ordinance; a person whose land abuts land for
which a permit or variance has been granted; or any other person or group of persons who have suffered
particularized injury as a result of the granting or denial of such permit or variance.
Agriculture, General: Includes the cultivation of the soil for food products or other useful or valuable
growth of the field, garden, nursery or greenhouse, but does not include dairying, raising of livestock,
breeding or keeping of animals, fowl or birds as a business or gainful occupation, or cultivation of
marijuana for medical use or adult use.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 9
Agritourism Center: A campus containing Agritourism Facilities along with facilities for educational,
cultural, and outdoor recreation programs that may serve larger community purposes. One office
building not exceeding fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet may be included to manage and support the
mission and operation of the Agritourism Center. An Agritourism Center shall not include any principal
or accessory uses related to medical marijuana cultivation facilities, medical marijuana registered
dispensaries, adult use marijuana establishments, marijuana food establishments, marijuana extraction,
or the manufacturing of marijuana concentrate or marijuana products as defined herein, unless expressly
authorized herein.
Agritourism Facility: A building, or group of buildings operated in conjunction with each other, in
which there is provided overnight lodging facilities, which may include private or other assembly
facilities and/or restaurant facilities, to paying or non-paying guests, provided that: The operations of
such facilities complement or support the agricultural, silvicultural, animal husbandry, or forest
management use of land, or the educational and/or outdoor recreational programs on land so used, which
uses or programs are otherwise permitted in the Rural Residential and Agricultural (RRA) District. The
buildings or group of buildings may include private or common facilities, such as bathrooms, living
areas, dining areas, gathering areas and kitchen facilities. The private or other assembly facilities and
restaurant facilities may be open to the public generally in addition to guests of the lodging facilities. A
facility meeting the foregoing definition of “Agritourism Facility” shall not be considered a “Bed and
Breakfast Establishment” or a “Hotel/Motel.” An Agritourism Facility shall not include any principal or
accessory uses related to medical marijuana cultivation facilities, medical marijuana registered
dispensaries, adult use marijuana establishments, marijuana food establishments, marijuana extraction,
or the manufacturing of marijuana concentrate or marijuana products as defined herein, unless expressly
authorized herein.
Alteration: Any change, addition, or modification in construction, other than cosmetic or decorative, or
any change in the structural members of buildings such as baring walls, columns, beams, or girders.
Animal Husbandry: Dairying or raising of livestock, breeding or keeping of animals, horses, llamas,
deer, alpacas and other fur bearing animals, emus, fowls or birds as a business or gainful occupation,
which are considered commercial and come under other State laws.
Applicant for Excavation: Anyone who applies for a permit to create or operate an excavation to
obtain gravel, rock, sand, fill, borrow, or clay.
Aquifer: Geologic unit composed of rock or sand and gravel, which unit contains sufficient saturated
permeable materials to conduct groundwater and to also yield economically significant quantities of
groundwater to wells and springs. For purposes of this Ordinance, economically significant quantities of
ground water shall be taken to be any unit capable of yielding ten (10) gallons or more per minute of
water to a single well or spring.
Arterial Street: A major thoroughfare which serves as a major traffic way for travel to other
communities and through the Town. The following roadways shall be considered arterial streets:
West Gray Road (Route 202) Shaker Road (Route 26)
Lewiston Road (Route 100) Wildlife Park Way (Route 26A)
Portland Road (Route 100/26)
Auction Houses: A place where the public sale of property to the highest bidder is held by one licensed
and authorized for that purpose.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 10
Auctions: The sale of household goods by competitive bid conducted on the premises. Civic or
nonprofit organizations are exempt from the above but must obtain a permit from the Town Council.
Authorized Agent: Anyone having written authorization to act in behalf of a property owner, signed by
the property owner.
Auto Body Shop: A place where collision services, such as body, frame, or fender straightening and
repair, overall painting and undercoating of vehicles are performed.
Auto Intensive: Retail, office or restaurant uses which have a drive-through facility.
Auto Repair Garage: A place where, with or without the attendant sale of engine fuels, the following
services may be carried out: general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor
vehicles.
Auto Service Station: A place where gasoline or any other automobile engine fuel (stored in tanks),
kerosene, motor oil, lubricants or grease (for operation of motor vehicles) is retailed directly to the
public on the premises. This includes the sale of minor accessories and the servicing and minor repair of
automobiles, but does not include storage of unlicensed vehicles nor does it include body, frame, or
fender straightening and repair.
Bed & Breakfast: A single family dwelling in which lodging and meals are offered to the general
public for compensation, offering no more than three bedrooms for lodging purposes.
Blasting: The use of explosives to break up or otherwise aid in the extraction or removal of rock or
other consolidated natural formation.
Blazed Tree: A tree from which a section of bark has been removed to display a visible spot that can be
easily recognized
Buffer: A strip of land with the purpose to separate and protect one type of land use from another or
screen a land use from public view.
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used for shelter or protection of
persons, animals or personal property.
Building Height: Vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade
at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof for flat and mansard roofs, and to the average
height between eaves and ridge for other types of roofs.
Building Trade Occupation-1: An accessory residential use of a dwelling unit carried on by one (1)
self-employed or other craftsperson in a construction-related trade who resides in the dwelling unit or
Accessory Apartment. This use is subject to performance standards.
Campground: A parcel or parcels of land providing temporary accommodation for recreational
vehicles, tenting areas, and other forms of temporary shelter.
Caregiver: A person or an assistant of that person that provides care for a qualifying patient to receive
Medical Marijuana pursuant to Maine law.
Caregiver Retail Store: A retail store in which a Caregiver sells harvested marijuana to qualifying
patients for the patients’ medical use.
Cemetery: A property used for the interment of the dead.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 11
Church: A building or structure or group of buildings or structures and grounds primarily intended or
used for the conduct of religious services of any religious group faith, denomination or sect and for
accessory uses associated therewith.
Class A Excavations: Class A excavations are those of five (5) acres or more in area that are required to
have a permit from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection in accordance with 38 MRSA §§
490-D Performance Standards For Excavations For Borrow, Clay, Topsoil, Or Silt, 490-Z Performance
Standards for Quarries, Excavations that have a Site Location of Development permit issued under 38
MRSA Section 481, or excavations that have filed a notice of intent to comply pursuant to 38 MRSA §
Section 484-A of the Site Location of Development Law and have adhered with the compliance
schedule as required by that Section.
Class B Excavations: Class B excavations are those of less than five (5) acres in area that are not
required to have a permit from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, but are required to
have a permit from the Town of Gray.
Client: A person dependent on another for protection or patronage.
Club: Any association of persons organized for social, religious, benevolent, or academic purposes;
whose facilities are open to members and guests including fraternities, sororities, and social
organizations.
Code Enforcement Officer: A person appointed by the Town Manager to administer and enforce this
Ordinance. Reference to the Code Enforcement Officer may be construed to include Building Inspector,
Plumbing Inspector, Electrical Inspector and the like where applicable.
Commercial Recreation, Indoor: Any indoor recreational use such as bowling alleys, roller or ice
skating rinks, swimming pools or tennis courts operated primarily for profit.
Commercial Recreation, Outdoor: Any outdoor recreational use such as golf courses, tennis courts,
riding stables, swimming pools or ice skating rinks operated primarily for profit.
Community Living Arrangement: A housing facility for eight (8) or fewer persons with disabilities
that is approved, authorized, certified or licensed by the State. A community living arrangement may
include a group home, foster home, or intermediate care facility
Conditional Permitted Use: A use permitted only after review and approval by the Planning Board. A
Conditional Use is a use that would not be appropriate without public review and restrictions, but which
is permitted provided that all performance standards and other requirements of this ordinance are met.
Conditional Use Permit: A permit authorized by the Planning Board for a Conditional Permitted Use.
A Conditional Use Permit may be issued only after the applicant has followed the procedures of this
ordinance.
Conforming Use: A use of buildings, structures or land which complies with all applicable provisions
of this Ordinance.
Constructed: Includes built, erected, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on
the premises which are required for construction. Excavation, fill, drainage, and the like, shall be
considered as part of construction.
Construction Services: Uses such as plumbing, painting, building, well drilling, carpentry or electrical
installation and excavating.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 12
Cultivation: The planting, propagation, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming or other
processing of adult use marijuana for personal use, but not including manufacturing, testing, or
marijuana extraction.
Day Care Facility: Day care facility shall mean a house or other place in which a person, or
combination of persons maintains or otherwise carries out a regular program, for consideration, for any
part of a day providing care and protection for three (3) or more clients.
Deck: An uncovered structure with a floor, elevated above ground level.
Decorative Changes: Repainting or re-siding; removing or replacing trim, railings, or other nonstructural
architectural details; or the addition, removal or change of location of windows and doors.
Dimensional Requirements: Numerical standards relating to spatial relationships including but not
limited to setback from property lines, lot area, shore frontage and height.
Disability: A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of a person’s major
life activities, a record of having such and impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment,
but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance.
Domestic Animals: These include but are not limited to dogs, cats, birds and reptiles that are raised
within the confines of the household. They are not raised in multiple numbers for breeding, sale or
exchange for other goods or services and do not meet the requirements for kennels, agriculture
operations, or feed lots. This definition and restriction excludes service animals, which may include
animals that have been certified and trained to assist in aiding a person with a specific physical or
emotional disability.
Driveway: A vehicular access-way serving no more than two dwelling units or lots or a vehicular access
way serving an institutional or commercial site.
Drive Through and Drive-In Facility: A commercial/retail facility or operation which provides a
service directly to the occupants of a motor vehicle or where the customer can drive a motor vehicle
onto the premises and to a location, person or device through which an order may be placed and the
customer would be served with their order without exiting the vehicle.
Dwelling: Any building or structure or portion thereof designed or used for residential purposes.
1. Single-Family Dwelling: a building containing only one dwelling unit for occupation by not
more than one family.
2. Two-Family Dwelling: a building containing only two dwelling units, for occupation by not
more than two families.
3. Multi-Family Dwelling: a building containing three or more dwelling units, such buildings
being designed for residential use and occupancy by three (3) or more families living
independently of one another, with the number of families not exceeding the number of dwelling
units.
Dwelling Unit: A room or suite of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use by one family as a
habitation and which contains independent living, cooking, sleeping, bathing and sanitary facilities. The
term includes manufactured housing but not recreational vehicles or motel units.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 13
Edible Marijuana Product: A marijuana product intended to be consumed orally, including, but not
limited to, any type of food, drink or pill containing harvested marijuana, marijuana or marijuana
concentrate.
Excavation: Any digging, mining, or removal of borrow, topsoil, loam, rock, sand, gravel, clay, silt, or
other similar non-metallic earth materials whether alone or in combination.
Existing Excavated Area (Earth-Moving Operations): The area in which actual excavation has
occurred preceding 7/4/85. Stripping of vegetation shall not be considered to be excavation. The
boundaries of the existing excavated area shall be documented by photographs and site plans drawn to
scale and submitted to the CEO.
Existing Parcel (Earth Moving Operations): The total parcel which includes the existing excavated
area and may include areas where expansion of existing pit operations will occur. The parcel shall be in
single ownership or lease for at least a one-year period preceding 7/4/85 and which is intended to
continue. The Code Enforcement Officer shall require evidence which may include cash receipts,
affidavits, verbal testimony, photographs or other information to be presented on which to grant status as
an existing pit operation.
Existing Pit Operation: An excavation activity which is located on an existing parcel and for which
operation for remuneration has taken place in the existing excavated area during the one-year period
immediately preceding 7/4/85 and which is intended to continue. The code Enforcement Officer shall
require evidence which may include cash receipts, affidavits, verbal testimony, photographs or other
information to be presented on which to grant status as an existing pit operation.
Expansion of Existing Pit Operations: Any proposed earth moving, excavating, processing or storage
of earth materials operation which is expanded beyond the boundaries of the existing excavated area as
defined in this Ordinance. When an existing operation is expanded more than five (5) acres, the
operator shall file a copy of the DEP permit with the Planning Board. Expansions of existing pit
operations are subject to limited rehabilitation requirements as specified in this Ordinance.
Expansion of a Structure: An increase in the floor area or volume of a structure, including all
extensions such as, but not limited to attached: decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
Expansion of Use: The addition of weeks or months to a use's operating season; additional hours of
operation; or the use of more floor area or ground area devoted to a particular use.
Family: One or more persons living, sleeping, cooking and eating on the same premises as a single
housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house or hotel.
Such unit shall not exceed five (5) persons not related by blood or marriage unless the group can
demonstrate that it:
1. Shares the entire house;
2. Lives and cooks together as a single housekeeping unit;
3. Shares expenses for food, rent, utilities or other household expenses; and,
4. Is permanent and stable.
Farm Stand: A roadside stand not exceeding 200 square feet in floor area selling only farm, garden,
greenhouse, or nursery products, and between Labor Day and Christmas, cut Christmas trees, garlands,
wreaths and wreath material. A Farm Stand may not sell marijuana in any form for medical use or adult
use.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 14
Filling: Depositions or dumping any matter on or into the ground water.
Flea Market – Open Air Market: An occasional or periodic market held in an open area or structure
where groups of individual sellers offer goods for sale to the public. There are no long-term leases (over
6 months) between the sellers and operators. Flea markets are not considered retail trade or commercial
sales and service.
Flood: A temporary rise in stream flow that results in water overtopping its banks and inundating
adjacent areas.
Flood Insurance Map: The official map on which the Dept. of Housing and Urban Development or the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the
risk premium zones applicable to the Town.
Flood Plain: The lands adjacent to a body of water which have been or may be covered by the base
flood.
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved
in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot.
Floor Area, Gross: The sum, in square feet of the floor areas of all roofed portions of a building, as
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed
portions of a structure such as porches and decks.
Floor Area, Net: The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding the following: stairwells and
elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular parking or loading; and floors below the first or
ground floor, except when used for human habitation or service to the public.
Frontage: The horizontal distance, measured in a straight line, between the intersections of the side lot
lines with the front lot line, except in the case of a curved lot line, where the frontage shall be considered
the length of the curve.
Frontage, Street: That lot property line abutting on a street or private way, and ordinarily regarded as
the front of the lot. On any lot bounded on more than one property line by a street or private way, the
street frontage shall be that property line of the lot designated as “street frontage” in any building permit
application for such lot. All lots are required to have the minimum street frontage on a single street or
private way.
Gravel Pit: An excavation for removal, processing, or storage of borrow, topsoil, loam, gravel, rock,
sand, clay, silt, or other similar non-metallic earth materials whether alone or in combination.
Ground Water: All of the water found beneath the surface of the ground. For purposes of aquifer
protection, this term refers to the slowly moving subsurface water present in the aquifers and recharge
areas.
Harvested Marijuana: The plant material harvested from a mature marijuana plant, except the stalks,
leaves and roots of the plant that are not used for a qualifying patient's medical use, including marijuana
concentrate and marijuana products.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 15
Headquarters for Contracting Business: An establishment primarily engaged in the administration of
a business, which renders services on a fee or contract basis. This use is similar to construction services,
but generally is smaller in nature and usually includes the firm’s offices with little additional storage.
Heliport: A heliport restricted to private and personal use.
Home Occupation: A home occupation is defined as an occupation or business activity which results in
a product or service and is conducted in whole or in part in the dwelling unit or accessory structure.
Home Occupations shall not include any principal or accessory uses related to medical marijuana
cultivation facilities, medical marijuana registered dispensaries, adult use marijuana establishments,
marijuana food establishments, marijuana extraction, or the manufacturing of marijuana concentrate or
marijuana products as defined herein, unless expressly authorized herein.
Hotels/Motels: A building or group of buildings designed for overnight accommodations for travelers
and transients in rental guest rooms with or without cooking facilities but most accommodations having
their own bathrooms. This definition includes Bed and Breakfasts with more than five (5) rooms, tourist
courts, motor courts and motor lodges, but excludes lodging houses, boarding houses, rooming houses
and dormitories.
Household Pets: Those pets normally considered as household companions, but not including horses,
cattle, sheep, goats, swine, chickens, turkeys or any animals raised for sale or for the sale of their
products which shall be deemed farm animals.
Impervious Surface/Cover: Structures and other man-made improvements to land, and materials
covering the land, which substantially reduce the infiltration of water. Impervious surfaces shall include
but not be limited to roofs, paved areas, and parking lots and driveways, regardless of the surface
materials.
Kennel: Any place, building, tract of land, adobe, enclosure, or vehicle where three or more dogs or
three or more cats, owned singly or jointly are kept for any purpose, including but not limited to
breeding, hunting, show, field trials or exhibition, or where one or more dogs or other pets are kept for
their owners in return for a fee. This definition shall not apply to dogs or cats under the age of six
months. Conditional Use and Site Plan Review approval by the Planning Board are required for this use
to be established.
Leachable Wastes: Waste materials, including solid wastes, sludge, industrial uses and agricultural
wastes capable of releasing contaminants to the surrounding environment.
Light Manufacturing: The fully enclosed assembly or fabrication of materials specifically excluding
processes such as smelting, refining, distilling, forging, and similar uses that convert raw materials to a
finished or semi-finished product(s). This use may involve warehousing directly associated with the
light manufacturing but does not include more traffic-intensive use(s) such as a Trucking Terminal. This
use is subject to performance standards in the Light Manufacturing Overlay District. Light
Manufacturing shall not include any principal or accessory uses related to medical marijuana cultivation
facilities, medical marijuana registered dispensaries, adult use marijuana establishments, marijuana food
establishments, marijuana extraction, or the manufacturing of marijuana concentrate or marijuana
products as defined herein, unless expressly authorized herein.
Lot: A parcel of land having distinct and defined boundaries and described in a deed, plot or similar
legal document.
Lot Area: The total land surface area within the lot lines.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 16
Lot, Back: Any lot without direct frontage on a street. Legal access for development purposes can be
added to a back lot through the back lot easement provisions of this ordinance.
Lot, Corner: A lot with at least two (2) contiguous sides abutting upon a street and/or private way.
Lot, Coverage: The percentage of the lot covered by all buildings.
Lot Lines: The property lines bounding a lot and as further defined below:
1. Front Lot Line: Any line separating the lot from a street(s) or right(s) of way. On a corner lot,
the line separating the lot from both streets or rights of way. In such cases, both lines abutting the
street or private way are treated as front lot lines for the purposes of setbacks.
2. Rear Lot Line: The lot line opposite the front lot line. On a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot
line shall be an imaginary line between the side lot lines parallel to the front lot lines, not less
than ten (10) feet long, lying farthest from the front lot line. On a corner lot, the rear lot line shall
be opposite the front lot line of least dimension.
3. Side Lot Line: Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line.
Lot of Record: A parcel of land, a legal description of which or the dimensions of which are recorded
on a document or map on file with the County Register of Deeds.
Lot Width: The distance between the side lot lines of the lot measured at the front setback line.
Manufactured Housing Unit: Structures, transportable in one or more sections, which were
constructed in a manufacturing facility and transported to a building site and designed to be used as
dwellings when connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and
electrical systems contained therein.
Manufacturing/Processing: Uses such as a textile mill, shoe factory, metal fabrication, canning of
foods, meat packing or grain mill, the preparation of finished products made from foodstuff, fabrics,
leather, wood, paper, rubber, stone, clay, glass, plastics, manmade materials and other similar materials.
Manufacturing and Processing shall not include any principal or accessory uses related to medical
marijuana cultivation facilities, medical marijuana registered dispensaries, adult use marijuana
establishments, marijuana food establishments, marijuana extraction, or the manufacturing of marijuana
concentrate or marijuana products as defined herein, unless expressly authorized herein.
Marijuana: The leaves, stems, flowers and seeds of a marijuana plant, whether growing or not.
Marijuana includes marijuana concentrate, but does not include industrial hemp as defined by Maine law
or a Marijuana Product.
Marijuana Concentrate: The resin extracted from any part of a marijuana plant and every compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation from such resin, including, but not limited to,
hashish. In determining the weight of marijuana concentrate, the weight of any other ingredient
combined with marijuana to prepare a marijuana product may not be included.
Marijuana Extraction: The process of extracting marijuana concentrate from marijuana using water,
lipids, gases, solvents or other chemicals or chemical processes.
Marijuana Food Establishment: A factory, plant, warehouse or store in which food and food products
are manufactured, processed, packed, held for introduction into commerce or sold, by a Registered
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 17
Caregiver or Registered Dispensary that prepare food containing marijuana for medical use by a
qualifying patient.
Marijuana Manufacturing or Manufacture: The production, blending, infusing, compounding or
other preparation of marijuana, marijuana concentrate and marijuana products, including, but not limited
to, marijuana extraction or preparation by means of chemical synthesis, but not including cultivation or
testing.
Marijuana Paraphernalia: Equipment, products and materials of any kind that are used or intended for
use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, ingesting, smoking or otherwise introducing into the human body marijuana for medical use
or recreational use as defined in this Chapter, including without limitation, water pipes, hashish pipes,
glass pipes, bongs, vaporizers, scales, rolling papers, hydroponic equipment and grow lights, and general
tobacco products in so-called smoke shops.
Marijuana Product: A product composed of marijuana, harvested marijuana or marijuana concentrate
and other ingredients that is intended for medical use or consumption for adult use, including, but not
limited to, an edible marijuana product, a marijuana ointment and a marijuana tincture, but not including
marijuana concentrate.
Market Value: The estimated price a property will bring in the open market and under prevailing
market conditions in a sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer, both conversant with the
property and with prevailing general price levels.
Mechanical Repair Garage: A place where general mechanical repairs to motor vehicles and related
equipment that are predominantly not utilized on roads or highways may be performed. Collision
services such as bodywork, frame or fender straightening and repairs such as repainting and
undercoating are excluded. The storage or sale of engine fuels and kerosene or the storage of unlicensed
vehicles is not permitted. The fabrication of parts for such motor vehicles and related equipment may be
performed.
Medical Facilities: A facility, which contains establishment dispensing health services including clinics
and/or groups of doctors in an office complex. Medical Facilities shall not include any primary or
accessory uses associated with the cultivation, sale or dispensing of Medical Marijuana.
Medical Marijuana: Medical Marijuana means marijuana used for “medical use,” as that term is
defined herein.
Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary Cultivation Facility: A facility that is used solely for the
purpose of cultivating marijuana by a medical marijuana registered dispensary.
Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility: A registered tier 1 or tier 2 manufacturing facility or a
person authorized to engage in marijuana extraction under section 2423-F of Title 22 of the Maine
Revised Statutes, as amended.
Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary: An entity registered by the State of Maine under Section
2425-A of Title 22 of the Maine Revised Statutes, as amended, that acquires, possesses, cultivates,
manufactures, delivers, transfers, transports, sells, supplies or dispenses marijuana or related supplies
and educational materials to qualifying patients and caregivers of those patients. A Medical Marijuana
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 18
Registered Dispensary shall not include a caregiver retail store or an adult use marijuana establishment
as defined herein.
Medical Marijuana Testing Facility: A public or private laboratory that: a.) Is authorized in
accordance with section 2423-A, subsection 10 of Title 22 of the Maine Revised Statutes, as amended,
to analyze contaminants in and the potency and cannabinoid profile of samples; and b.) Is accredited
pursuant to standard ISO/IEC 17025 of the International Organization for Standardization, as amended,
by a 3rd-party accrediting body or is certified, registered or accredited by an organization approved by
the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.
Medical Use: The acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, delivery, transfer or
transportation of marijuana or paraphernalia relating to the administration of marijuana to treat or
alleviate a qualifying patient's medical diagnosis or symptoms for which a medical provider has
provided the qualifying patient a written certification under Maine law.
Mineral Exploration: Hand sampling, test boring or other methods of determining the nature or extent
of mineral resources, which create minimal disturbance to the land.
Minimum Lot Area: The land area of a parcel, not including the area of any land which is: beneath
roads or driveways serving more than two lots, and areas which are part of a right of way for a street or
easement, such as but not limited to, surface drainage easements or traveled rights of way (but not
including utility easements servicing that lot).
Mobile Home: A detached, single-family dwelling unit with the following characteristics:
1. Manufactured as a relocatable living unit without a permanent foundation, designed for longterm,
year-round occupancy and containing sleeping accommodations, a toilet, a tub or shower
bath and kitchen facilities, including major appliances and furniture, with plumbing and
electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems.
2. Designed to be transported, after fabrication, on its own chassis, and connected to utilities upon
being placed on a permanent foundation or mobile home stand.
3. Designed to be installed with only incidental unpacking and assembling operations.
Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land under unified ownership approved by the municipality for the
placement of three (3) or more mobile homes.
Mobile Vendor: Mobile Vendor shall mean and include any food service establishment not more than
eight (8) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length attached to wheels and which is capable of
moving under its own power or being a self-contained unit to be readily moved and must have a wash
basin and napkins if selling food, and which has all utilities and facilities contained within it or is
capable of hookup thereto, in order to serve persons present at its location. The term shall exclude any
use which falls exclusively within the definition of “lunch wagon” under 30-A.M.R.S.A. Sec. 3931 as
amended from time to time.
Municipal Uses: A municipally owned or operated facility performing any governmental function
including but not limited to municipal buildings, structures and facilities, public parks, public recycling
facilities, public recreation facilities and fire stations. This definition does not include public schools.
Multifamily Development: A lot which contains one or more multifamily dwellings, two or more
duplexes, three or more single family dwellings, or any combination of buildings containing three or
more dwelling units.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 19
Net Residential Area: The net area of a parcel or site that is generally suitable for development in its
natural state. Net residential area shall be determined by subtracting unsuitable and marginal areas from
the gross land area as calculated in Section 401.13.18 of the Town of Gray Subdivision Ordinance.
Net Residential Density: Net residential density shall mean the number of dwelling units allowed on a
parcel or site after unsuitable land is deducted and the minimum area per lot (or dwelling unit in the case
of multi-family) for the District is applied to the remaining suitable land area.
New Pit Operations: Creation of new sand, fill or gravel pits. New pit operations are subject to
rehabilitation requirements as specified in this Ordinance.
Non-Conforming Lot of Record: A lot shown on a plan or deed recorded prior to the effective date of
this ordinance or amendment which does not meet the area, frontage, width or depth requirements of the
District in which it is located but which met all such requirements at the time it was created.
Non-Conforming Structure: A structure that does not meet all of the following dimensional
requirements: set-backs, height, and lot coverage; but which met all such requirements at the time it was
constructed.
Nonconforming Use: Use of land or structures that is not permitted in the district in which it is located
or which does not meet the performance standards proscribed for it by this ordinance but which was
permitted and did meet all standards at the time it was established.
Nursing Home: An institution that provides nursing or convalescent care to chronic or convalescent
patients, but does not provide hospital services such as an operating room or x-ray facility unless
incidental to the delivery of nursing or convalescent care.
Office, Business or Professional: The place within and from which a person or persons conducts a
business providing, by way of example, but not limited to, a trade, professional or service to clients or
customers. Business and professional offices may include, but are not limited to, offices for plumbing,
electrical, and other construction trades, firms or contractors (including headquarters); and for lawn care
and building cleaning companies; and for lawyers, doctors, accountants, engineers and other
professional consultants. Personal services, medical marijuana cultivation facilities, medical marijuana
registered dispensaries, adult use marijuana establishments, marijuana food establishments, marijuana
extraction, or the manufacturing of marijuana concentrate or marijuana products as defined herein, are
not included in this definition.
Open Space: Land or water area not involving a structure, earth-moving activities, the removal or
destruction of vegetative cover, spawning ground of fish and aquatic life or bird and other wildlife
habitat.
Operator: The owner or operator of an excavation.
Passive Recreation: Outdoor recreational activities which involve no structural or mechanical
components or facilities, or earth moving, such as hiking, fishing, hunting, etc.
Patio: An uncovered floor, usually made on concrete, brick or other masonry material, which is not
elevated above the surface of the ground in any matter.
Permitted Use: A use specifically allowed in a zoning district without the need for any review by a
Town regulatory Board but subject to all zoning and building code requirements. Adult use marijuana
establishments are expressly prohibited in all zoning districts within the Town.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 20
Personal Property: Property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an individual or members of
his or her residence and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does
not include merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment.
Personal Service: Uses such as a laundromat, laundry, dry cleaning establishment, beauty shops, barber
shops, shoe repair, photographic studio and similar businesses providing services of a personal nature.
Planned Unit Development: A commercial and retail land development project comprehensively
planned as an entity via a unitary site plan which permits flexibility in building, siting, mixtures of
commercial and retail types and land uses, usable open spaces, and the preservation of significant
natural features.
Principal Building: The building in which the primary use of the lot is conducted.
Principal Use: The primary use to which the premises are devoted, and the main purpose for which the
premises exist, provided however that use of any portion of a lot pursuant to an easement for
Commercial Recreation, Outdoor shall not constitute a Principal Use or structure of said lot.
Private Assembly: A gathering of a number of people for meetings of a private nature such as social
clubs, fraternal and service organizations, or cultural enrichment and primarily not for profit.
Private Landing Strip for Personal Aircraft: A landing strip restricted to private and personal use.
Includes areas for landing helicopters subject to the provisions of the Ordinance.
Private Way: Any access way, designated for private or public use by a group of property owners, but
not under public ownership and maintenance.
Prohibited Use: All uses not specifically allowed as Permitted Uses or Conditional Uses, except as
provided by Section 402.5.2 D of this Ordinance.
Professional Offices: The place of business for doctors, lawyers, accountants, architects, surveyors,
psychiatrists, psychologists, counselors, but not including financial institutions or personal services.
Protected Natural Resource: As defined in 38 MRSA Section 480-B Subsection 8.
Public Assembly – Indoor: Use such as theaters, playhouses, arenas, field houses or auditoriums.
Public Assembly – Outdoor: Use such as drive-in movies, race tracks, or stadium.
Public Building: A building owned, operated or funded in whole or in part by the Town of Gray which
members of the general public have occasion to visit, either regularly or occasionally, such as, but not
limited to the Municipal Offices, Stimson Hall, the Gray Public Library, Newbegin Gym, the Public
Safety Building, and the Fire Stations.
Public Utilities: The office, plant, generating facility, substation, or transmission lines of a person, firm
or corporation, board or commission authorized to furnish gas, steam, electricity, communication
facilities, transportation or water to the public.
Public Works Projects: A project for the Town of Gray, other municipal entity, or the State of Maine
including, but not limited to, the Maine Department of Transportation, and the Maine Turnpike
Authority.
Qualifying Patient: A person who has been a resident of the State for at least 30 days and who
possesses a valid written certification regarding medical use of marijuana in accordance with 22
M.R.S.A. 2423-B, as may be amended.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 21
Quarry: An excavation for the extraction of rock.
Recharge Areas: Areas composed of porous sand and gravel, or other areas that collect precipitation or
surface water and carry it to aquifers.
Reclamation: Reclamation means the rehabilitation of the area of land affected by mining, including,
but not limited to, the stabilization of slopes and creation of safety benches, the planting of forests, the
seeding of grasses and legumes for grazing purposes, the planting of crops for harvest, the enhancement
of wildlife and aquatic habitat and aquatic resources and the development of the site for residential,
commercial, recreational or industrial use.
Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle or vehicular attachment designed for temporary sleeping or living
quarters for one or more persons, which is not a dwelling and which may include a pick-up camper,
travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and motor home. In order to be considered as a vehicle and not as
a structure, the unit must remain with its tires on the ground, and must possess a current registration
sticker from any state Division of Motor Vehicles.
Recreational Use of Marijuana: Recreational use of marijuana means personal use of marijuana as
permitted in 7 M.R.S.A. § 2452, as may be amended from time to time.
Redemption Center: A place of business which deals in acceptance of empty returnable beverage
containers from either consumers or from dealers, or both, and which is licensed by the State of Maine
as a redemption center.
Registered Patient: Registered patient means a “registered patient” as that term is defined in 22
M.R.S.A. § 2422(12), as may be amended from time to time.
Registered Caregiver: Registered caregiver means a caregiver who is registered by the Maine
Department of Administrative and Financial Services pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 2425-A, as may be
amended from time to time.
Registered Caregiver Cultivation Areas: An indoor area used for cultivation in accordance with
Chapter 558-C of Title 22 of the Maine Revised Statutes that is enclosed and equipped with locks or
other security devices that permit access only by a person authorized under said law.
Repair Service: A business engaged in the servicing or repair of equipment and goods customarily
associated with residential households rather than businesses. Such uses may include, but are not be
limited to, the servicing or repair of: appliances, watches, jewelry, bicycles, computers and electronic
equipment typically used in households. The servicing of any motorized vehicle, construction-related
equipment, or recreational vehicle or accessory is specifically excluded from this definition. In no event
shall there be any retail sales or outdoor storage associated with the repair service unless otherwise
allowed in the district and specifically approved under Site Plan Review.
Research Facilities: A building or buildings and/or structure or structures and any accessory equipment
or use in directing scientific or other forms of human inquiry into phenomena including but not limited
to nature, human nature, the physical environment, eco-systems, other systems and products and
devices.
Residential Open Space Subdivision: A form of single-family residential development that provides
flexibility in design and promotes creating open space by reducing lot area and bulk requirements for
individually owned lots, provided that the allowed number of lots does not exceed the required zoning
density standards for the respective district.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 22
Restaurant: A business establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and consumed
primarily within the principal building. Providing food to patrons shall clearly be the primary use and
the serving of alcoholic beverages shall be ancillary (see Tavern). Outdoor seating is permitted with
Planning Board approval. Drive-Through facilities shall not be permitted unless it is a
permitted/conditional use and specifically approved by the Planning Board. In no event shall a
Restaurant be permitted to prepare, sell, serve or allow to be consumed on premises marijuana or
marijuana products.
Retail Marijuana: Marijuana or Marijuana Concentrate that is cultivated, manufactured, distributed or
sold by a licensed Retail Marijuana Establishment or Retail Marijuana Social Club.
Retail Marijuana Cultivation Facility: An entity licensed to cultivate, prepare and package Retail
Marijuana and sell Retail Marijuana to Retail Marijuana Establishments and Retail Marijuana Social
Clubs.
Retail Marijuana Establishment: A Retail Marijuana Store, a Retail Marijuana Cultivation Facility, a
Retail Marijuana Products Manufacturing Facility or a Retail Marijuana Testing Facility.
Retail Marijuana Product: Concentrated retail marijuana and retail marijuana products that are
composed of Retail Marijuana and other ingredients and are intended for use or consumption, including,
but not limited to, edible products, ointments and tinctures.
Retail Marijuana Products Manufacturing Facility: An entity licensed to purchase Retail Marijuana;
manufacture, prepare and package Retail Marijuana Products; and sell Retail Marijuana and Retail
Marijuana Products only to other Retail Marijuana Products Manufacturing Facilities, Retail Marijuana
Stores and Retail Marijuana Social Clubs.
Retail Marijuana Social Club: An entity licensed to sell Retail Marijuana and Retail Marijuana
Products to consumers for consumption on the licensed premises.
Retail Marijuana Store: An entity licensed to purchase Retail Marijuana from a Retail Marijuana
Cultivation Facility and to purchase Retail Marijuana Products from a Retail Marijuana Products
Manufacturing Facility and to sell Retail Marijuana and Retail Marijuana products to consumers.
Retail Marijuana Testing Facility: An entity licensed and certified to analyze and certify the safety
and potency of Retail Marijuana and Retail Marijuana Products.
Retail Trade: Any business engaged in sales to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption and/or
use, and not for resale. The term retail trade shall include such uses as stores for the sale of hardware,
food, apparel, furniture, jewelry, drugs, general merchandise, photographic equipment, athletic
equipment, appliances, reading material, automobile sales and banks. Retail trade shall not include the
sale of marijuana for medical use or adult use, or marijuana paraphernalia.
Rock: A hard non-metallic material that requires cutting, blasting, or similar methods of forced
extraction.
Schools: An institution either public or private for education or instruction, including a college,
university or school conducting classes pursuant to a program approved by the State Board of Education
or similar governmental agency, but not including commercially operated schools, such as schools of
beauty culture, business, dancing, driving, music or recreation which shall be deemed retail businesses.
Self-Storage Facility: A structure containing separate storage spaces of varying size, leased or rented
on an individual basis.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 23
Setback: The horizontal distance from a lot line to the nearest part of a structure, including any building
overhangs.
Silt or Clay: A material that consists of particles of such size that forty-five (45) percent or more of the
fraction of those particles able to pass through a three (3) inch sieve pass through the United States
Standard Number 200 sieve, or a material that exhibits similar erosion potential, difficulty of
stabilization, or runoff based upon gradation, plasticity, permeability, or other relevant criteria.
Similar Use: A use which is not specifically listed as a permitted or conditional permitted use in the
Ordinance but is similar to and not more objectionable than those listed in the Ordinance as determined
by the Planning Board under the conditional use criteria of Section 402.9.3. In no event shall medical
marijuana cultivation facilities, medical marijuana registered dispensaries, adult use marijuana
establishments, marijuana food establishments, marijuana extraction, or the manufacturing of marijuana
concentrate or marijuana products as defined herein be deemed a similar use.
Site Plan Review: The process by which the Planning Board reviews and may attach conditions under
the conditional use criteria and site plan review standards to uses that are of such a scale and nature that
they may affect the physical and visual environment, the provision of public services, the value and
rights of adjoining properties, and the health, safety and welfare of the citizens.
Sludge: Residual materials produced by water or sewage treatment processes and by domestic septic
tanks.
Solid Waste: Useless, unwanted or discarded solid material with insufficient liquid content to be free
flowing. This includes, but is not limited to, rubbish garbage, scrap materials, junk and refuse.
Specified Sexual Activities:
1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
2. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy:
3. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
Stream, Year-Round: Any stream that is marked on a USGS map by a solid line.
Street: An existing state, county, or town way; a street shown upon a plan duly approved by the
Planning Board and recorded in the County Registry of Deeds: or a street shown on a plan duly
recorded in the County Registry of Deeds prior to the establishment of the Planning Board and the grant
to the Planning Board of its power to approve plans. The term "street" shall not include those ways
which have been discontinued or abandoned.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a fixed location on or in the
ground, or an attachment to something having a fixed location on the ground, including buildings,
commercial park rides and games, carports, decks, and other building features, but not including signs,
sidewalks, fences, patios, driveways, and parking lots.
Subdivision: This ordinance defines “Subdivision” as it is defined in 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 4401 to
mean the division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more lots within any five (5) year period
that begins after September 23, 1971. This definition applies whether the division is accomplished by
sale, lease, development, buildings or otherwise. The term “subdivision” also includes the division of a
new structure or structures on a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more dwelling units on a single
tract or parcel of land and the division of an existing structure or structures previously used for
commercial or industrial use into three (3) or more dwelling units within a five (5) year period. This
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 24
definition and all other provisions in 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 4401 as may be amended from time to
time is also incorporated into this definition.
Substantial Expansion: Floor space increase of 25% or new materials or processes not normally
associated with the existing use.
Substantial Improvement: Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is
started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored before the damage occurred. For
purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or for any alteration of a
structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historical Places.
Substantial Start: Completion of thirty (30) percent of a permitted structure or use measured as a
percentage of estimated total cost.
Subsurface Sewage Disposal System: A collection of treatment tank(s), disposal area(s), holding
tank(s) and pond(s), surface spray system(s), cesspool(s), well(s), surface ditch(es), alternative toilet(s),
or other devices and associated piping designed to function as a unit for the purpose of disposing of
wastes or wastewater on or beneath the surface of the earth. The term shall not include any wastewater
discharge system licensed under 38 MRSA Section 414, any surface wastewater disposal system
licensed under 38 MRSA Section 413 Subsection 1-A, or any public sewer. The term shall not include a
wastewater disposal system designed to treat wastewater which is in whole or in part hazardous waste as
defined in 38 MRSA Chapter 13, subchapter 1.
Sustained Slope: A change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is substantially maintained
or exceeded throughout the measured area.
Tavern: A business establishment, serving either the general public or a private party, where beverages
and/or food are prepared, served, and consumed predominantly within the principal building. Serving
beverages shall clearly be the primary use and providing food shall be ancillary (see Restaurant). The
retail sale of prepackaged beverages or food to be consumed off the premises is specifically prohibited.
Approval by the Planning Board for Conditional Use and Site Plan Review is required for any food or
beverage consumption outside the principal building. In no event shall a Tavern be permitted to prepare,
sell, serve, or allow to be consumed on premises marijuana or marijuana products.
Timber Harvesting: The cutting and removal of trees from their growing site, and the attendant
operation of cutting and skidding machinery, but not the construction or creation of roads. Timber
harvesting does not include the clearing of land for approved construction.
Topsoil: The top layer of soil that is predominantly fertile and ordinarily moved in tillage or the
equivalent of such a layer in uncultivated soils.
Travel Trailer: Any portable vehicle which is designed to be transported on its own wheels; which is
temporarily living quarters for travel, recreational, vacation or construction purposes; and which may or
may not contain one or all of the accommodations and facilities included in a mobile home.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 25
Trailer, Utility: A vehicle without motive power, designed to be towed by a passenger automobile but
not designed for human occupancy and which may include a utility trailer, boat trailer, horse trailer, or
snowmobile trailer.
Trucking Terminal: A building or buildings and/or structure or structures and any other facilities for
the loading and off-loading of goods from trucks, the temporary storage of said goods, spaces for the
temporary overnight parking of trucks, facilities for the normal and routine maintenance of trucks,
accessory uses thereto including but not limited to dispatcher’s office or administrative or recordkeeping
office.
Undue Hardship: Legal criteria established by State statute that must be met before a variance from the
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance can be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals:
1. That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted;
2. That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the
general conditions in the neighborhood;
3. That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and
4. That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
Use: The purpose for which land or a structure is arranged, designed, intended, or for which land or a
structure is or may be occupied.
Variance: A relaxation of the terms of this ordinance. Variances permissible under this ordinance are
limited to dimensional and area requirements subject to the hardship criteria. No variance shall be
granted for the establishment of any use otherwise prohibited, nor shall a variance be granted because of
the presence of nonconformities of other buildings or uses in the immediate or adjacent areas.
Warehousing: A land area where goods, wares, and merchandise are stored in a warehouse facility
and/or in outdoor areas. This use may involve light manufacturing directly associated with the
warehousing but does not include more traffic-intensive use(s) such as a Trucking Terminal. This use is
subject to performance standards in the Light Manufacturing Overlay District. Warehousing and
associated light manufacturing shall not include any principal or accessory uses related to medical
marijuana cultivation facilities, medical marijuana registered dispensaries, adult use marijuana
establishments, marijuana food establishments, marijuana extraction, or the manufacturing of marijuana
concentrate or marijuana products as defined herein, unless expressly authorized herein.
Wholesale Trade: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to
retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users; to other wholesalers; or
acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or
companies. Wholesale Trade shall not include the sale of marijuana or marijuana products.
Working Excavation: The area of extraction, including side slopes, of an excavation for borrow,
topsoil, loam, gravel, rock, sand, clay, silt, or other similar non-metallic earth materials whether alone or
in combination. The area of a "working excavation" does not include areas for stockpiles, permanent
fixed structures such as an office building, permanent processing facility, or fixed fuel storage.
Veterinary Hospital or Clinic: A building used for the diagnosis, care and treatment of ailing or
injured animals which may include overnight accommodations. The overnight boarding of healthy
animals shall be considered a kennel.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 26
Zoning District: A specified portion of the municipality, delineated on the Official Zoning Map, within
which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions
of this Ordinance.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 27
ARTICLE 3 – OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
402.3.1 Official Zoning Map
Districts are located and bounded as shown on the Official Zoning Map which is made a part of this
ordinance. The Shoreland Zoning District boundaries are determined by the terms of Chapter 403 the
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance creating that district, and any delineation of them on the Official Zoning
Map shall be for reference only and shall not supersede or modify such boundaries as created in that
Ordinance.
402.3.2 Certification of Zoning Map
The Official Zoning Map is certified by the attested signature of the Town Clerk under the following
words: "This is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section 402.3.2 of the Zoning Ordinance of the
Town of Gray," together with the date of the adoption of this Ordinance. The official copy shall be
located in the office of the Town Clerk.
402.3.3 Changes of the Official Zoning Map
If changes are made in the district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map such
changes shall be made on the Official Zoning Map within thirty (30) days after the amendment has been
adopted together with an entry on the Official Zoning Map as follows:
“On (insert date) by official action of the Town Council, the following change(s) was (were) made:
(insert brief description of the nature of change)."
Immediately beneath the entry the Town Clerk shall place their signature.
402.3.4 Rules Governing District Boundaries
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map the
following rules shall apply.
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways, railroad
rights-of-way, rivers, or streams shall be construed to follow such center lines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines shall be construed as following such lot
lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following Town limits shall be construed as following Town
limits.
D. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the
event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline.
E. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections A through D
above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall
be determined by the scale of the map.
F. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the
Official Zoning Map, or other circumstances not covered by subsections A through E above, the
Planning Board shall interpret the district boundaries.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 28
G. The delineation of the Wellhead Protection Districts is shown on the official Zoning Map. In
addition, delineation boundary markers, including coordinates are as follows: [To be provided by
Sevee & Maher, consulting engineers to the Gray Water District].
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 29
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
402.4.1 Zoning Districts Established
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the Town of Gray is hereby divided into fifteen (15) Districts and two
(2) Overlay Districts:
Districts & Overlay Districts created by the Zoning Ordinance
1. Rural Residential & Agriculture “RRA”
2. Lake District “LD”
3. Medium Density “MD”
4. Business Development 1 “BD-1”
5. Business Development 2 “BD-2”
6. Commercial “C”
7. Village Center “VC”
8. Village Center Proper “VCP”
9. Business Transitional 1 “BT-1”
10. Business Transitional 2 “BT-2”
11. Wellhead Protection 1 “WH-1”
12. Wellhead Protection 2 “WH-2”
13. Mobile Home Park Overlay District* “MHP”
14. Light Manufacturing Overlay District “LMOD”
* Mobile Home Park Overlay District created by separate Mobile Home Park
Ordinance.
Districts created by the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
15. Resource Protection “RP”
16. Limited Residential “LR”
17. Stream Protection “SP”
For regulations affecting the Resource Protection and Limited Residential, and Stream Protection
Districts, see the Town of Gray “Shoreland Zoning Ordinance” dated December 3, 1991 and as
amended.
402.4.2 Zoning Districts Purposes
A. Purposes of the Rural Residential and Agricultural District:
The Rural Residential and Agricultural District is located in the most rural and sparsely populated
sections of the Town, and extends beyond the areas of Gray that may reasonably be serviced by
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 30
public water and sewer. It is the intent of this district to encourage low density development which
will enhance, reinforce and protect the rural/open space environment currently characterizing these
areas of the Town and to promote Agritourism on agricultural, forested and open space land for the
use and enjoyment of these lands by allowing owners or operators of land to develop and offer
accommodations, food and hospitality services on lands within this zone.
B. Purposes of the Lake District
The Lake District contains the watershed areas of Gray’s lakes, exclusive of the land within the
boundaries of the Shoreland Zoning Districts. It is the intent of this district to help protect the
sensitive lake watershed areas and to contribute to the protection of surface water quality by limiting
the density of development.
C. Purposes of the Medium Density District
This district is located in areas, outside of the village center which are currently serviced by public
water, with the exception of the area on Route 100 from Whitney Road, south to the Cumberland
Town Line. Most of these areas are presently developed for predominantly residential uses. It is the
intent of this district to recognize present relationships between land use and natural features by
preserving the predominant residential character while allowing a somewhat denser development to
occur than in other areas of the Town.
D. Purposes of the Business Development District
This district is located in areas of the community which are most suited for larger scale business
activities such as business parks, warehouses, and manufacturing. The purpose of this district is to
allow more intense business uses, while protecting the public health and safety, environmental
quality and economic well-being of the Town of Gray. Businesses in this area must also maintain
the rural character of the community. Community services and road access were important criteria
for selecting such areas.
The Business Development District is further divided into two sub-districts as shown on the Gray
Zoning Map. The uses allowed in Business Development 2 (BD-2) District are less restrictive than
those in the Business Development 1 (BD-1) District and allow more flexibility reflecting the unique
nature of the existing business and industrial campus.
E. Purposes of the Commercial District
This is a district designed to continue the Rural New England character by providing services and
shopping opportunities to the residents of the community and to visitors. It is designed to encourage
a pleasant, shopping environment. Commercial establishments may be more auto intensive than in
the Village District.
F. Purposes of the Village Center and Village Center Proper Districts
The purpose of the Village Center District and the Village Center Proper District, which is contained
within the center of the Village Center District and is its most densely developed portion, is to
provide services and shopping opportunities to the residents of the community, and to visitors, in a
pleasant, village type, shopping environment.
G. Purposes of the Business Transitional Districts
This is a district designed to provide services and shopping opportunities to the residents of the
community and to visitors. It is designed to encourage a pleasant shopping environment that is
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 31
consistent with New England character and serves as a transitional zone between residential and
rural areas to the north and the more densely developed Village area to the south. This area lies near
the new Route 26A westerly bypass, and is proximate to the Wellhead Protection Zoning District,
meriting limitations on development and prohibition of certain uses in order to protect groundwater
quality and recharge potential for present and future use of this resource by individuals, industries, or
public bodies. Commercial establishments may be more auto intensive than in the Village District.
The Business Transitional District is further divided into two sub-districts. Business Transitional 1,
lies outside the wellhead capture zone of the Gray Water District as shown on the Gray Zoning Map.
Business Transitional 2 lies within the capture zone and adds special requirements to protect
groundwater quality and the Town’s drinking water supply. The uses allowed within Business
Transitional 1 are more restrictive due to the proximity to adjacent residential neighborhoods. The
uses allowed in Business Transitional 2 are less restrictive reflecting its proximity to the Maine
Turnpike, the downtown area, and its prior designation as Wellhead District 2.
H. Purposes of the Wellhead Districts
The intent of the Wellhead Protection Zoning Districts is to protect the ground water resources of the
Gray Water District from harmful contaminants that can reasonably be expected to accompany
certain uses of land. Wellhead Protection District 1 is the smaller and the more restrictive Wellhead
Protection District with its dimensions based upon an estimated two hundred (200) day water travel
time. Wellhead Protection District 2 is the larger and the less restrictive Wellhead Protection
District with its dimensions based upon the location of the wellhead capture zone and estimated
water travel times greater than two hundred (200) days.
I. Purposes of the Mobile Home Park Overlay District
See the Mobile Home Park Ordinance.
J. Purposes of Light Manufacturing Overlay District
The purpose of the Light Manufacturing Overlay District (LMOD) is to provide greater flexibility
for businesses engaged in manufacturing, warehousing, and directly associated uses to conduct and
expand operations in Gray. The performance standards and review criteria associated with the
District are intended to minimize the adverse impacts of the use to abutting and neighboring
properties.
K. Purposes of the Resource Protection, Limited Residential and Stream Protection Districts
See the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
402.4.3 Applicability of Zoning Provisions to Districts
All uses of land and development of property within the established Zoning Districts of the Town of
Gray shall conform to the standards, criteria, and administrative procedures set forth in this Zoning
Ordinance.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 32
ARTICLE 5 – ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
402.5.1 Basic Requirements for Compliance with Codes and Ordinances
Permitted Uses and Conditional Permitted Uses in all districts shall conform to all applicable
specifications and requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. A Plumbing Permit, Building Permit, and/or
Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for all buildings, uses of land and buildings, and sanitary
facilities, according to the provisions of this ordinance and all other applicable codes, ordinances, and
laws of the Town of Gray and the State of Maine.
402.5.2 Legal Rights and Responsibilities to Uses of Land and Property
The Uses listed in this Zoning Ordinance are divided into four categories:
A. Permitted Uses are “by right” provisions that require no special review or approval other than
standard building permits for most projects, and Planning Board site plan review when the proposed
development falls within the thresholds for site plan review based on the type of use and/or the scale
of development.
B. Conditional Permitted Uses are permitted whenever the Planning Board determines upon review that
the Conditional Use criteria have been met. The burden is on the applicant to demonstrate that
proposed development meets the Conditional Use criteria, but upon satisfactory demonstration of
compliance with the criteria, and subject to any conditions applied by the Planning Board to meet
those specific criteria, Conditional Permitted Uses have the same inherent rights under the Zoning
Ordinance as Permitted Uses.
C. Prohibited Uses include any use not specifically listed as a Permitted Use or a Conditional Permitted
Use. All unlisted land uses are prohibited on all lots and property in Gray unless specifically
provided for by State law and regulated by the State (e.g., forestry).
D. Similar Uses are uses that are variations of Permitted or Conditional Permitted Uses that develop
over time through market and/or technological changes and do not fit precisely in the ordinance list
of uses. This Zoning Ordinance grants to the Planning Board authority to determine that a use
similar to but not specifically listed as a Permitted or Conditional Permitted Use can be approved by
the Planning Board subject to the Conditional Use Criteria of Article 9.
402.5.3 District Regulations
Land uses permitted in each district, in conformance with the General Performance Standards in Articles
6 and where applicable, the Specific Performance Standards of Articles 7 and 8 are shown in the
following table:
Key: P - Permitted Use
C - Conditional Permitted Use: requires Planning Board review under Article 9 if classified as a
Major Development under Article 10 (Section 402.10.6). Minor Developments are treated as
Permitted Uses.
‡ - Subject to Specific Performance Standards in Article 7.
* - Subject to Specific Performance Standards in Article 8.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 33
TABLE 402.5.3 TABLE OF PERMITTED USES AND CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES
RRA LD
*
MD BD-1 BD-2 C VC
*
VCP
*
BT-1
*
BT-2
*
WH-1
*
WH-2
*
LMOD
1. Accessory Apartment ‡ P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C
2. Accessory Uses and
Structures P P P P P P P P P P P P
3. Adult Business* C
4. Agritourism Center* C
5. Agritourism Facility* C
6. Animal Husbandry P P C C C C C
7. Auto Body Shop C C C
8. Auto Repair Garage C
9. Auto Service Station C C
10. Bed and Breakfast ‡ C C C P P P P P P C C
11. Building Trades
Occupations – 1 P P P P P P P P P P C P
12. Campground ‡ C C
13. Cemetery P C
14. Church P P P P P C C C C
15. Commercial Recreation -
Indoor or Outdoor C C C C C C C C C C
16. Community Living
Arrangement P P P P P P P P P P P P
17. Construction Services P P C C
18. Day Care Facility for Five
(5) or fewer clients. P P P P P P P P P P P
19. Day Care Facility for Six
(6) or more C C C C C C C C C
20. Drive Through and Drive in
Facility 1C C C C C
21. Expansion of
Nonconforming Uses C C C C C C C C C C C C
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 34
RRA LD
*
MD BD-1 BD-2 C VC
*
VCP
*
BT-1
*
BT-2
*
WH-1
*
WH-2
*
LMOD
22. Farm Stand ‡ P P P P P P P P P P P
23. Flea Market, Open Air
Market ‡ C C C C C P P
24. Garage Sale P P P P P P P P P P P P
25. General Agriculture P P P P P C C
26. Headquarters for a
Contracting Business C C C P P C C
27. Heliport C C C C
28. Home Occupation ‡ P P P P P P P P P P C P
29. Hotel and Motel C C C C
30. In-Home Offices‡ P P P P P P P P P P P P
31. Kennels C C C C
32. Light Manufacturing P P P/C
33. Manufacturing and
Processing C C
34. Mechanical Repair
Garages C P P C
35. Medical Facility C C C C C C C C
36. Mineral Excavation P P P P P P
37. Mineral Exploration C P P P P P P P
38. Mobile Vendor P P P P P P P P P
39. Motel (< 11 rooms) C C C
40. Multi-family Development C C C C C C C
41. Municipal Uses C C C C C C C C C C
42. Nursing and Convalescent
Home C C C C C C C
43. Office C P P P P P C C C
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 35
RRA LD
*
MD BD-1 BD-2 C VC
*
VCP
*
BT-1
*
BT-2
*
WH-1
*
WH-2
*
LMOD
44. Personal Services C C C C C C
45. Planned Unit Development ‡ C C C C C C
46.
Places for Public
Assembly, Indoor and
Outdoor
C C C C P P
47. Private Assembly C C C C C
48. Private Landing Strips for
Personal Aircraft ‡ C C C
49. Public Utilities C C C C C C C C C C C C
50. Redemption Center C C P
51. Registered Caregiver* C C C C
52. Registered Caregiver
Cultivation Area* C C C C
53. Repair Service P P C P P C C
54. Research Facility C C C C
55. Residential Open Space
Subdivisions P P P
56. Restaurant P P C P P C C
57. Retail Trade P P C P P C C C
58. School P P P C C C C C C C
59. Self-Storage Facility C C C C
60. Single-Family Dwelling P P P P P P P P P P P P
61. Similar Uses C C C C C C C C C C C C
62. Tavern C C C C
63. Trucking Terminal C C
64. Two-Family Dwelling P P P P P P P P P P P
65. Warehousing P P P/C
66. Wholesale Trade C C P P
67.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 36
1 Drive through and drive in facilities are allowed only as an accessory use to the permitted and conditional uses in the
Business Development 2 District; see Section 402.8.8(A).
402.5.4 Districts Dimensional Requirements
Lots and structures in all districts shall meet or exceed the following minimum requirements.
TABLE 402.5.4 A - LOT DIMENSION & DENSITY STANDARDS
ZONING
DISTRICT
Minimum Lot
Area
Minimum Street
Frontage C
Minimum Area
Per Dwelling
Unit
(Town Water)
Minimum Area
Per Dwelling
Unit
(Private Well)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
RRA 80,000 sq. ft. 200 ft. 40,000 sq. ft. 40,000 sq. ft. N/A
LD 80,000 sq. ft. 200 ft. N/A 80,000 sq. ft. N/A
MD 40,000 sq. ft. A
(80,000)
150 ft. 20,000 sq. ft. 40,000 sq. ft. N/A
BD-1 80,000 sq. ft. 200 ft. 40,000 sq. ft. 40,000 sq. ft. 50 %
BD-2 80,000 sq. ft. 200 ft. 40,000 sq. ft. 40,000 sq. ft. 85 %
C 40,000 sq. ft. 200 ft. 20,000 sq. ft. 40,000 sq. ft. 65 %
VC 20,000 sq. ft. 40 ft. 10,000 sq. ft. 10,000 sq. ft. 75 %
VCP 20,000 sq. ft. 40 ft. 10,000 sq. ft. 10,000 sq. ft. 75 %
BT-1 40,000 sq. ft. 150 ft. 20,000 sq. ft. 40,000 sq. ft. 50 %
BT-2 40,000 sq. ft. 150 ft. 20,000 sq. ft. 40,000 sq. ft. B 10 (30) %
WH-1 4 Acres 200 ft. 4 Acres 4 Acres B 10 (30) %
WH-2 4 Acres 200 ft. 4 Acres 4 Acres B 10 (30) %
A Lots in MD District not served by public water require 80,000 square feet of lot area.
B Impervious surface and lot coverage in BT-2, WH-1, & WH-2 Districts can be increased to 30% of lot with
Planning Board approval subject to the requirements of Section 402.8.4 L for recharge protection.
C In accordance with Tables 402.5.4.A & B of the Zoning Ordinance, the Planning Board shall have the authority to
reduce the minimum street frontage to fifty (50) percent of the required frontage but in no case less than sixty (60)
feet of street frontage, whichever is greater, for lots in a Planning Board approved residential subdivision for one or
more lots having street frontage only on a cul-de-sac. In such instances, street frontage shall be measured along the
outside radius of the cul-de-sac. Lots which have any street frontage not on a cul-de-sac radius as well as lots in a
commercial subdivision shall not be eligible for reduced street frontage.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 37
TABLE 402.5.4 B - BUILDING CONSTRUCTION SPATIAL STANDARDS
ZONING
DISTRICT
Maximum Lot
Coverage
Minimum Lot
Line Setback
Front
Minimum Lot
Line Setback
Side
Minimum Lot
Line Setback
Rear
A Maximum
Building Height
RRA 10 % 50 ft. B 25 (15) ft. 50 ft. 35 ft.
LD 20 % 50 ft. B 25 (15) ft. 50 ft. 35 ft.
MD 15 % 50 ft. B 20 (15) ft. 20 ft. 35 ft.
BD-1 50 % 50 ft. B 25 (15) ft. 50 ft. C 35 (53) ft.
BD-2 85 % E 25 ft. E 0 ft. E 15 ft. C 35 (53) ft.
C 50 % 10 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft. C 35 (53) ft.
VC 75 % 10 ft. 0 ft. 10 ft. 35 ft.
VCP 75 % 0 ft. 0 ft. 0 ft. 35 ft.
BT-1 50 % 25 ft. D 15 (10) ft. 20 ft. 35 ft.
BT-2 10 (30) % 25 ft. D 15 (10) ft. 20 ft. 35 ft.
WH-1 10 (30) % 50 ft. B 25 (15) ft. 50 ft. 35 ft.
WH-2 10 (30) % 50 ft. B 25 (15) ft. 50 ft. 35 ft.
A Height requirements do not apply to flagpoles, chimneys, transmission towers, steeples, windmills or similar
structures usually erected at a greater height than the principal building; however such accessory structures or
appurtenances require a lot line setback distance of no less than its height.
B Side setback for non-conforming lots of record in RRA, LD, MD, BD-1, WH-1, & WH-2 Districts is 15 feet.
C Maximum building height in BD-1, BD-2, and C is 53 feet if public water is available and at least two sides of the
building are accessible by fire apparatus.
D Side setback in BT Districts is 10 feet if not abutting a residential property.
E For any lot in a BD-2 District, the setback for any property line(s) that abuts another district, including BD-1, shall
meet the minimum setback(s) for either the abutting district or BD-1, whichever is less restrictive.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 38
ARTICLE 6 – GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS
402.6.1 Land Use Requirements
Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no
building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, moved, or altered and no new
lot shall be created unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located, unless a variance is granted that meets the legal requirements of the Ordinance and
State law.
402.6.2 Lots
A. Lots with Multiple Street Frontages
B. Lots which abut on more than one street shall provide the required front setbacks along every street.
C. Developable Areas
D. No structure or other impervious surface may be constructed on land with sustained slopes of
twenty-five (25%) percent or greater, nor in any wetland. Subsurface wastewater disposal systems
may not be located where soils are unsuitable for septic systems according to the Maine State
Plumbing code, as amended.
E. Building Extensions to Meet Setbacks
F. All structures, whether attached to the principal structure or not, and whether open or enclosed,
including porches, carports, balconies, or platforms above normal grade level, shall not project into
any required minimum front, side or rear setback.
G. Only One Principal Building per Lot
H. No more than one (1) principal structure and its accessory buildings as regulated in this Ordinance
may be located on any one lot, except in the case of a Planned Unit Development and Cluster
Housing unless all applicable space and dimensional standards are met separately for each principal
structure or use on the lot, subject to the following:
1. Where a lot has more than one existing principal structure or use, any new principal structure or
use proposed for the lot, or any proposed division of the lot, shall meet all applicable space and
dimensional standards for the new lot or principal structure or use; provided, however, before
creation of a new principal structure or use on the lot or division of the lot, the property owner
shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer with a sketch plan, drawn to scale, in sufficient
detail to satisfy the Code Enforcement Officer that it accurately represents the current conditions
in the field; and
2. The creation of a new lot or new principal use or structure must satisfy current space or
dimensional standards established for the zone in which the lot is located. Where an existing
principal structure is legally nonconforming as to any applicable space or dimensional standard,
the creation of a new lot or principal use or structure shall not increase the degree of such
nonconformity.
3. For lots located in the Business Development 2 Zoning District, the number of uses per principal
structure shall be determined by standards established in Section 402.8.8 of this Ordinance.
4. No variances are allowed from the provisions of the preceding paragraphs of this section.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 39
402.6.3 Net Residential Area
Repealed and moved to Chapter 401 Residential Subdivision Ordinance effective February 2, 2017.
402.6.4 Net Residential Density
Repealed and moved to Chapter 401 Residential Subdivision Ordinance effective February 2, 2017.
402.6.5 Non-Conformance with the Requirements of this Zoning Ordinance
A. Continuation, Maintenance, & Replacement of Non-Conforming Structures and Uses
1. Continuance, Enlargement, Reconstruction: Any legally existing non-conforming use or nonconforming
structure may continue to exist but may not be extended, reconstructed, enlarged, or
structurally altered except as specified below.
2. Transfer of Ownership: Non-conforming structures, non-conforming lots of record, and nonconforming
uses may be transferred, and the new owner may continue the non-conforming use
or continue to use the non-conforming structure or lot, subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
3. Restoration or Replacement: This ordinance allows the normal upkeep and maintenance of nonconforming
uses and structures; repairs, renovations, or modernizations which do not involve
expansion of the non-conforming use or structure; and such other changes in a non-conforming
use or structure as Federal, State, or local building and safety codes may require. Any nonconforming
use or structure which is hereafter damaged or destroyed by fire or any cause other
than the willful act of the owner or his agent, may be restored or reconstructed within one (l)
year of the date of said damage or destruction, provided that:
a. The nonconforming dimensions of any restored or reconstructed structure shall not exceed
the non-conforming dimensions of the structure it replaces;
b. Any non-conforming structure shall not be enlarged except in conformity with this ordinance
and the Maine State Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules; and
c. Any non-conforming use shall not be expanded in area.
B. Nothing in this section shall prevent the demolition of the remains of any building so damaged or
destroyed.
C. Discontinuance of Non-Conforming Uses
D. Resumption Prohibited: A lot, building or structure in or on which a non-conforming use is
discontinued for a period exceeding one year, or which is superseded by a conforming use, may not
again be devoted to a non-conforming use, even if the owner has not intended to abandon the use. A
non-conforming use of land which is accessory to a non-conforming use of a building shall be
discontinued at the same time the non-conforming use of the building is discontinued.
E. Discontinuance of the use of a legally existing non-conforming structure shall not constitute
abandonment of the structure. Conforming use of the structure may be commenced at any time.
F. Expansions & Changes Involving Non-Conforming Uses
1. A Structure Non-Conforming as to Use: A building or structure, non-conforming as to use, shall
not be enlarged unless the non-conforming use is terminated or approved by the Planning Board
under the Conditional Use criteria of Article 9. A non-conforming use of part of a building or
structure shall not be extended throughout other parts of the building or structure unless those
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 40
parts of the building or structure were manifestly arranged or designed for such use prior to the
adoption of this ordinance, or of any amendment making such use non-conforming or is
approved by the Planning Board under the Conditional Use criteria of Article 9.
2. Change of Use: A legally existing non-conforming use may be changed to another nonconforming
use provided that the proposed use is equally or more appropriate to the district than
the existing non-conforming use, and the impact on adjacent properties is less adverse than the
impact of the former use as determined by the Planning Board under the Conditional Use criteria.
The determination of appropriateness shall require written findings on the probable changes in
traffic (volume and type), parking, noise, potential for litter, wastes or by-products, fumes, odors,
or other nuisances likely to result from such change of use. The Conditional Use criteria in
Article 9 of this ordinance shall apply to such requests to establish new non-conforming uses.
3. Use of Land: A non-conforming use of land may not be extended into any part of the remainder
of a lot of land.
G. Expansions not Involving Non-Conforming Uses
H. (Pertaining solely to dimensional requirements of lots and structures. Applications regarding nonconforming
uses shall be reviewed under the provisions above.)
1. Enlargements Controlled: A non-conforming structure shall not be added to or enlarged unless:
such addition or enlargement conforms to all the regulations of the district in which it is located;
the addition does not increase the non-conformity of the structure; or a variance is obtained. In
addition, state laws and local ordinance requirements must be adhered to. The following actions
are not considered to be expansions of non-conforming structures:
a. The addition of an open patio with no structures elevated above ground level shall not
constitute the expansion of a non-conforming structure. The addition of steps or the
enclosure of an existing deck shall not constitute the expansion of a non-conforming
structure. But the addition of a deck shall constitute the expansion of a non-conforming
structure and shall meet all the dimensional requirements of this ordinance.
b. The placing of a foundation below a lawfully existing non-conforming structure shall not
constitute the expansion of the structure so long as the first floor space of the structure is not
increased.
c. Construction or expansion of a foundation under an existing dwelling which expands
habitable space shall be considered an expansion and shall be subject to the State Plumbing
Laws (Title 30, Maine Revised Statutes Annotated, §322l, Subsection 4) requiring
documentation of wastewater disposal capabilities.
2. Lack of Required Parking or Loading Space: A building or structure which is non-conforming
as to the requirements for off-street parking and/or loading space shall not be enlarged, added to,
or altered unless off-street parking and/or loading space is provided to bring parking and/or
loading space into conformance with the requirements of this ordinance for both the addition or
alteration and for the original building or structure, or a variance is obtained.
a. The provision of required off-street parking for an existing non-conforming use that is not
being enlarged, added to, or altered shall not be considered the expansion of the use.
3. Disability Access Structures: The Code Enforcement Officer may approve construction of
access ramps not meeting setback requirements for the purpose of making that property
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 41
accessible to a person with a disability who is living on the property. The Code Officer shall
restrict any approval granted under this subsection solely to the installation of equipment or the
construction of structures necessary for access to or egress from the property by the person with
the disability. The approval shall be only for the duration of the disability or the time that the
person with the disability lives on the property. For the purposes of this subsection, a disability
has the same meaning as a physical or mental handicap under Title 5, M.R.S.A. Section 4553.
I. Existing Lots of Record Grandfathered
A single lot of record which, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, does
not meet the area or width requirements, or both, of the District in which it is located may be built
upon provided that such lot shall be in separate ownership and not contiguous with any other lot in
the same ownership, and that all other provisions of this Ordinance shall be met. Variance of yard or
other requirements not involving area or width shall be obtained only by action of the Board of
Appeals. (Any lot of record, established on or before January 1, 1970 is a legally nonconforming
lot.)
J. Required Combination of Substandard Sized Lots
If two (2) or more contiguous lots or parcels are in single ownership of record at the time of adoption
or amendment of this Ordinance, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the dimensional
requirements of this ordinance, the lands involved shall be considered to be a single parcel for the
purposes of this Ordinance and no portion of said parcel shall be built upon or sold which does not
meet dimensional requirements of this Ordinance; nor shall any division of the parcel be made which
creates any dimension or area below the requirements of this Ordinance.
Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this subsection, lots depicted on a subdivision plan
approved by the Planning Board, on or after 1977 shall be buildable, even if contiguous and in the
same ownership, provided however, that any such lot must meet the minimum requirements set forth
in 12 M.R.S.A., Subsection 4807-A for minimum lot size with septic systems.
K. Vested Rights when Ordinance is Amended
Non-conforming use rights cannot arise by the mere filing of a notice of intent to build, an
application for building permits, or an application for required state permits and approvals. Such
rights arise when substantial construction of structures, or development of infrastructure
improvements for town approved subdivisions, began prior to adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance. Such construction must be legal at the time it is commenced and the owner must be in
possession of and in compliance with all validly issued permits. In the case of pending applications,
vesting occurs when the substantive review process on an application has commenced. Substantive
review occurs when a completed application demonstrating compliance with all Ordinance
requirements has been submitted and reviewed by the Planning Board.
402.6.6 Special Permit Required for Temporary Events
A. Activities such as music festivals and car shows that are of a decidedly temporary nature or of short
duration which will, because of unusual circumstances, be unable to meet the minimum
requirements of the performance standards may be allowed under the provisions of a Special Permit
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. The conditions of issuance for this permit are:
1. The proposed activity or use will not continue beyond a maximum time period of one (1) week.
If, in the judgment of the Code Enforcement Officer, additional time is necessary or desirable,
extensions of the Permit may be granted for additional one week periods. Upon expiration of the
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 42
Special Permit the activity must be immediately discontinued or brought into conformance with
the minimum standards of performance or be violation of this code.
2. The proposed activity will not create, cause, or increase any health, safety, or public nuisance
problems. In making this determination, the Code Enforcement Officer shall seek input from the
Fire Chief and Public Works Director.
3. The proposed activity will not cause immediate or future damage to adjacent properties.
4. Reasonable provisions are made to prevent or minimize harmful environmental impacts of the
proposed activity.
B. To assist the Code Enforcement Officer in making these determinations a public hearing may be
required for the purpose of soliciting additional information or other municipal boards and
commissions may be consulted. If an extension of a Special Permit beyond one (1) week is
requested, the Code Enforcement Officer must obtain the concurrence of the Planning Board before
such an extension is granted.
402.6.7 Regulation of Signs
All signs are required to meet the requirements of the Sign Ordinance, Chapter 406.
402.6.8 Regulation of Mobile Home Parks
Mobile Home Parks shall be subject to the provisions of the Mobile Home Park Ordinance, Chapter
402.A.
402.6.9 Parking Requirements
All uses of land and development of property shall be provided with parking and loading facilities
meeting the standards of Section 402.10.11 B under Site Plan Review.
402.6.10 Townwide Erosion and Sedimentation Standard
A. All activities, except those specifically exempted in this Section 402.6.10, which involve filling,
grading, excavation, or other similar activities which result in unstabilized soil conditions, whether
or not a permit is required, are required to adhere to Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Best
Management Practices (BMP's) as published by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection
until the site is stabilized.
B. The following activities, as defined by the State of Maine and/or this Ordinance, are exempt from
following MeDEP's BMP's provided that all applicable State and local standards are met and
maintained:
1. Agriculture
2. Forestry and/or Timber Harvesting
3. Duly permitted Mineral Extraction/Gravel Pits
402.6.11 ADULT USE MARIJUANA
A. The following uses as defined by this Chapter and under the “Marijuana Legalization Act” (28-B
M.R.S.A. §§ 102 – 1504, as may be amended and successor provisions thereof) are hereby expressly
prohibited in all Zoning Districts within the Town of Gray:
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 43
(1) Adult Use Marijuana Establishments, including:
(a) Adult Use Marijuana Cultivation Facility
(b) Adult Use Marijuana Products Manufacturing Facility
(c) Adult Use Marijuana Testing Facility
(d) Adult Use Marijuana Store
(2) Any other use not included within the uses above, as defined herein, that includes the sale or
manufacturing of Adult Use Marijuana or Adult Use Marijuana Products and Marijuana
Extraction
B. This Section shall be construed to limit the use, possession, transport, cultivation, transfer or
purchase of Adult Use Marijuana to the greatest extent permitted by the Marijuana Legalization Act (28-
B M.R.S.A. §§ 102 – 1504, as may be amended from time to time and successor provisions thereof).
Further, this Section shall be deemed to prohibit, and does hereby prohibit, attempts to circumvent its
restriction on selling Adult Use Marijuana by persons or transferring or furnishing Marijuana or
Marijuana Concentrate without remuneration, in connection in any way with any lawful transaction
under the guise of being a gift or an enhanced consideration for same.
C. Home cultivation of personal Adult Use Marijuana is permitted within the Town of Gray in all zones
subject to the following restrictions:
(1) Persons cultivating Adult Use Marijuana must be 21 years of age or older;
(2) Cultivation of Adult Use Marijuana shall be limited to a total number of three (3) mature
marijuana plants and twelve (12) immature marijuana plants on any one parcel or tract of land
within the Town;
(3) Cultivation is only permitted on a parcel or tract of land within the Town on which the
person cultivating Adult Use Marijuana is domiciled;
(4) Cultivation that occurs outdoors shall be sufficiently screened to ensure that plants are not
visible from an abutting property or a public or private road or right of way; and
(5) Cultivation that occurs outdoors must meet all applicable setbacks required for structures
under this Ordinance, and in no event shall outdoor cultivation be less than ten (10) feet from any
lot line.
The limitations in this section shall apply per person domiciled on a parcel or tract of land and shall not
apply to seedlings.
D. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit any lawful use, possession or conduct pursuant
to the “Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act” (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 2421 – 2430-B, as may be amended
from time to time and successor provisions thereof).
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 44
ARTICLE 7 –STANDARDS APPLICABLE IN MOST ZONING DISTRICTS
402.7.1 Temporary Structures
A. Temporary Structures in Conjunction with Construction Work
B. Temporary structures used in conjunction with construction work shall be permitted only during the
period that the construction work is in progress. Permits for temporary structures shall be issued for
a six (6) month period and may be renewed by the Code Enforcement Officer.
C. Temporary Structures in Conjunction with Disasters
1. Temporary structures including temporary living quarters used in conjunction with disasters such
as fire, flood, lightening, hurricanes, and ice or snowstorms and other forces of nature shall be
permitted only during the period that restoration work is in progress.
2. Restoration work includes the repairing, rebuilding, and altering of a premise, land, or structure
to a former, normal or unimpaired state or condition including but not limited to the cleaning and
removal of debris, trash, and waste.
3. Temporary structures shall not encroach any further upon the setback requirements of the
structure destroyed. Any deviation from those setbacks must be approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
4. Temporary living quarters shall be connected to the existing septic system or to an alternate
system which, in either case, must comply with the Plumbing Code and be approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
5. Permits for temporary structures shall be issued for a six (6) month period and may be renewed
by the Code Enforcement Officer for a maximum of one extension provided a duly authorized
building and plumbing permit has been issued for a permanent structure.
402.7.2 Home Occupations
A. Intent and Purpose
B. Home Occupations when managed conscientiously and with respect for the neighborhood in which
they are situated can offer benefits to both the proprietors and the community, and a productive
alternative to the formally structured traditional workplace. Consequently, it is the intent and
purpose of this Ordinance to produce liberal, flexible standards for the establishment and
maintenance of home occupations, while simultaneously providing the town with a mechanism in
which to monitor and regulate their use.
C. Home Occupation Requirements:
1. A home occupation shall conform to the following requirements:
2. The home occupation shall be carried on primarily within the principal structure or accessory
structures.
3. The home occupation shall be carried on by a member or members of the family residing in the
dwelling unit. One employee, who is not part of the family residing in the dwelling unit, shall be
permitted.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 45
4. The home occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for
residential purposes.
5. There shall be no exterior storage of materials and no other exterior indication of the home
occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal building, except such signs
as are permitted.
6. There shall be no more than two (2) commercial vehicles kept outside the garage overnight.
7. Objectionable conditions such as noise, vibration, smoke, dust, electrical disturbance, hazardous
materials, odors, heat, or glare shall not be generated.
8. Hours of operation shall be reasonable and normal for residential areas.
9. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally
be expected in the neighborhood.
10. In addition to the off-street parking provided to meet the normal requirements of the dwelling,
adequate off-street parking shall be provided for the vehicle of each employee and the vehicles
of the maximum number of users the home occupation may attract during peak operation hours.
11. No more than fifty (50%) percent of the floor area of a residence and an accessory building shall
be used for a home occupation.
12. Retail sales are limited to the sale of products or goods produced, fabricated or substantially
altered on the premises as a result of the home occupation. This may include products that are
not fabricated on the premises as defined above, but which are customarily incidental to the
product created by the home occupation.
13. Retail businesses such as restaurants, new or used car sales, auto repair garages, auto body shops,
and auto service stations shall not be considered home occupations.
14. The size and number of signs used in connection with a home occupation shall be determined by
the sign ordinance.
402.7.3 Flea Markets & Open Air Markets
A. Authorization to Use the Property
B. Flea Markets and Open Air Markets must be held on land that is owned by the applicant or has
written permission from the owners to use.
C. Adequate Parking
D. Before the permit is issued by the Code Enforcement Officer or approved by the Planning Board,
whichever is appropriate, the applicant must prove adequate off street parking and provide means of
insuring parking provided is used.
E. Time Limit for Conduct
F. The market can operate no more than three (3) days a week. All evidence of use must be removed
from the premises for the balance of the week.
G. Site Plan Review Required
H. Markets are subject to the site plan review procedures of Article 10.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 46
402.7.4 Keeping of Large Animals
A. Minimum Lot Size Required
Bovine, cloven hoofed animals, horses or other types of riding or laboring animals such as horses
may be kept in any district except the Shoreland Zone and the WH1 Districts, provided that there is a
minimum of 120,000 square feet of land owned, rented or leased or the first animal to be kept
thereon and an additional 10,000 square feet for each additional animal to allow pasturing and
disposal of animal waste.
B. Enclosures & Nutrient Plan
Animals must be kept in enclosures at least fifty (50) feet from both the front and rear lot line and
twenty five (25) feet from any side lot lines and from the edge of any water body all in full
compliance with the best management practices and a Nutrient Management Program per the then
current State Law. Any increase in the number of animals kept on the minimum lot size shall first
require the owner to have and implement a Nutrient Management Plan prepared and approved by a
Nutrient Management Planning Specialist who has been certified by the Commissioner of
Agriculture before local approval may be granted.
C. Complaints
Complaints will be referred to the State of Maine Department of Agriculture for review of
compliance and resolution.
402.7.5 Back Lot Access Easements
Back lots used for single family purposes shall be permitted, provided they meet the following
standards:
A. Access Requirements
1. A fifty (50 ft.) foot wide access shall be provided for back lots.
2. Said access shall be owned either in fee or by permanent easement and maintained by the back
lot users.
3. Record of said access way shall be recorded as part of the deed of each back lot and shall be filed
with the County Register of Deeds.
4. The access way entrance to a street shall conform to standards of the Subdivision Ordinance and
shall be approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
5. The issuance of a building permit for a single family dwelling on a back lot shall in no way be
construed to imply the acceptance of any access way for the purpose of maintenance,
improvements or snow removal by the Town of Gray.
6. Creation of a subdivision requires compliance with the provisions of the Gray Subdivision
Ordinance.
B. Lot Frontage Requirements
Frontage equal to the street frontage required for the zoning district shall be required along the
access way.
C. Lot Size Requirements
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 47
1. Any back lot shall be equal to or greater than the minimum lot size required for the zoning
district. Computation of minimum lot size area shall not include any portion of the area devoted
to an access way for the lot across which the easement crosses and for the lot served by the
easement.
2. The side lot line nearest and generally parallel to the road to which the back lot access way leads
shall be equal to the street frontage required for the zoning district.
402.7.6 Residential Open Space Subdivisions and Multi-family housing
development
A. Purposes of Residential Open Space Subdivision: The purpose of Residential Open Space
Subdivision standards is to encourage greater flexibility and more creative design for the
development of single-family projects. It is intended to encourage a pattern of residential
development which will result in the following attributes:
1. Preservation of Gray's rural character by retention of open space and its natural resource values
as determined by the Planning Board with input from appropriate organizations, other Town
staff, and State departments.
2. To the greatest practical extent, preservation of existing landscape features and the utilization of
such features in a harmonious fashion.
3. Protection of environmentally sensitive areas.
4. Economical and efficient building arrangement, traffic circulation, and utility construction.
5. Outdoor recreational facilities that may be better utilized and located than would otherwise be
provided under more conventional land development.
B. Residential Open Space Subdivisions standards are contained in the Town of Gray Subdivision
Ordinance, Chapter 401, in Section 401.13.13.
C. Section 401.13.13.I establishes the purposes of locating individually owned lots in relation to the
configuration of the open space. Parties must pay particular attention to this section to ensure that the
overall layout of land development is consistent with these standards.
D. Space, bulk, and dimensional standards for Residential Open Space Subdivisions shall be subject to
the following:
1. The Planning Board shall have the authority to reduce setbacks to those stated in Table
401.13.13.B.1 of the Town of Gray Subdivision Ordinance.
2. Neither the Planning Board nor the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority to further
reduce the setbacks for the entirety of a project.
3. The Planning Board's ability to change setbacks within the project as detailed in Table
401.13.13.B.1 of the Subdivision Ordinance shall not be construed as granting variances to
relieve hardship, and the action of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not be required.
4. All other space standards except those specifically allowed in Table 401.13.13.B.1 of the
Subdivision Ordinance for the respective district shall apply to the Residential Open Space
Subdivision.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 48
E. Provisions for Multi-Family Development: Provisions for multi-family development are contained in
Section 402.10.14 of Site Plan Review. For the purposes of this Ordinance, multi-family
development is not considered to be a Residential Open Space subdivision.
402.7.7 Planned Unit Development for Commercial Subdivisions
A. Purposes of Planned Unit Development
1. The purpose of the Planned Unit Development shall be to encourage a commercial development
which will result in:
2. A choice in the types of environment, a mixture of commercial and retail uses and quality in land
use so that development will be a permanent and long-term asset to the Town.
3. An aesthetically-pleasing development, innovative design standards, open space and ample offstreet
parking and traffic circulation.
4. A pattern of development which reserves trees, outstanding natural topography and geologic
features and prevents soil erosion.
5. An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of streets and utilities, encouraging the use
of underground utilities.
6. An environment in harmony with surrounding development.
7. A more desirable environment than would be possible through the strict application of other
sections of this Ordinance.
8. Encouragement of central water and sewer systems.
B. Provisions for Planned Unit Development
The Planning Board, in reviewing and approving proposed commercial and retail developments
located in the Town, may modify provisions related to minimum lot size, lot frontage, number of
structures, and setback size to permit innovative approaches to commercial and retail development
and environmental design in accordance with the following standards. This shall not be construed as
granting variances to relieve hardship.
1. The Planning Board may reduce lot frontage requirements by up to fifty (50%) subject to the
conditional use and site plan criteria and standards.
2. The Planning Board may reduce front setback requirements by up to fifty (50%) subject to the
conditional use and site plan criteria and standards.
3. The Planning Board may reduce the minimum lot area by up to fifty (50%) percent subject to the
conditional use and site plan review criteria.
402.7.8 Mobile Homes, Motor Homes and Travel Trailers
A. Use of a Mobile Home as Temporary Living Quarters While Building a Home
A mobile home may be used as a temporary single-family dwelling subject to the following
requirements:
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 49
1. No person, firm or corporation shall move or cause to be moved into the Town of Gray a mobile
home to be located otherwise than in a duly-licensed mobile home park without first securing a
temporary permit from the Code Enforcement Officer to do so.
2. The application for such permit shall state the name of the owner of the mobile home, its make,
serial number, length, width, color and any other identification information that the Code
Enforcement Officer may require.
3. The applicant shall also state the proposed location in the Town where the mobile home is to be
placed. The owner of the mobile home must own the lot upon which the mobile home is to be
placed.
4. The applicant shall also furnish the Code Enforcement Officer with a plot plan showing the
boundary lines of the lot proposed for the location of the mobile home, and also showing the
sewage disposal area.
5. The applicant shall also furnish the Code Enforcement Officer with reliable information relating
to soil tests conducted on the sewage disposal area in accordance with any applicable state law,
code or regulation and must demonstrate that soil conditions are suitable for the absorption of
waste materials from septic tanks.
B. Issuance of a Temporary Mobile Home Permit
1. The temporary mobile home permit shall expire six (6) months after its issuance and if not
replaced by the permanent permit, as hereinafter provided. Within said period, any mobile home
moved or caused to be moved into the Town shall either be moved to a duly licensed mobile
home park or removed from the limits of the Town.
2. A temporary permit may be granted by the Code Enforcement Officer to reside in a mobile home
during the construction of a permanent home on the same lot as long as a valid building permit is
held by the applicant. The permit shall be subject to semi-annual review by the Code
Enforcement Officer and may be renewed if, in his/her judgment, reasonable progress is being
made and nuisance conditions do not exist.
C. Use of a Mobile Home as Permanent Living Quarters on a Single Lot
The Code Enforcement Officer may grant a permanent permit for the location of the mobile home on
the lot referred to in the temporary permit provided that the following additional requirements are
met:
1. The applicant shall have constructed a permanent and continuous masonry foundation for the
mobile home and located and securely fastened the mobile home upon said foundation.
2. Said foundation shall be around the entire perimeter of the mobile home and shall be on concrete
or building blocks bounded together on an 8” x 16” footing extending at least four (4) feet below
grade. Said foundation may contain suitable openings for ventilation not to exceed 32” x 16” in
area except that opening for windows or doors in said foundation may be of a larger size.
3. The ground floor area of said mobile home shall be at least four hundred (400) square feet.
4. The lot upon which said mobile home is located shall meet the space regulations set forth in this
Ordinance and shall have a minimum lot area required by the applicable zoning district.
D. Uses of Travel Trailers and Motor Homes
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 50
1. Temporary Occupancy: A householder may permit bona fide guests to park not more than two
(2) travel trailers or motor homes in the yard adjacent to such house for a period not exceeding
thirty (30) days per calendar year, provided that the travel trailer or motor home is used only for
sleeping purposes during said period and also provided that the householder shall have granted
permission to the travel trailer or motor home occupant to use the householder’s toilet facilities.
2. Storage: An unoccupied travel trailer or motor home may be stored on any lot subject to all
regulations concerning setbacks for buildings provided that it shall not be used for living or
sleeping purposes during said period of storage.
3. Construction Offices: No travel trailer or motor or mobile home shall be used as a permanent
office, but may be used for a temporary demonstration and sale of such articles or services as
may be readily transported or displayed in a trailer or mobile home by a distributor or
salesperson if situated in the applicable zoning district for a period not to exceed fifteen (15)
days; provided, further, that such a travel trailer or motor, or mobile home may be used as
temporary office headquarters (including electricity and phone) for a bona fide charitable
organization for a period not to exceed one year. During such period such a trailer or motor or
mobile home shall not be used for living or sleeping purposes. The Town Council may extend
said sixty (60) day period in the case of trailers or mobile homes used as offices on construction
work, renewable by the Code Enforcement Officer, until construction is completed.
E. Existing Mobile Homes and Travel Trailers
A travel trailer or mobile home lawfully established at the time of adoption of this section shall not
be affected by this Section and such travel trailer or mobile home may be replaced with another
travel trailer or mobile home, but not later than ninety (90) days after its destruction, removal, or
abandonment.
402.7.9 Accessory Apartments
A. General Standards:
1. Accessory Apartments shall only be located within a single-family dwelling (SFD) or a structure
permanently attached to the SFD by common walls and a permanent roof meeting the aesthetic
standards below in Section 402.7.9.C.
2. Accessory Apartments are specifically prohibited in, on, or within any of the following:
a. any detached accessory structure such as a separate garage;
b. any structure or parcel located in the Shoreland Zone;
c. any duplex or multi-family dwelling;
d. any SFD located on a back-lot that utilizes a right-of-way less than fifty (50) feet wide;
e. any individually owned lot in a Cluster/Open Space subdivision that contains less than 75%
of the minimum lot size for the zoning district in which the property is located;
f. any lot that contains less than 75% of the minimum lot size for the zoning district in which
the property is located, existing non-conforming lots of record;
g. any lot that contains one or more principal commercial use(s) either on the parcel or in any
structure located on such lot; or
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 51
h. any lot than contains less than 20,000 square feet.
3. Only one accessory apartment is allowed per lot, and only on a lot that the CEO has determined
the primary use to be a SFD.
4. Accessory Apartments are permitted uses, on lots which meet the minimum required lot area and
street frontage for the zoning district in which the lot is located. For lots in Cluster/Open Space
subdivisions with commonly owned area, only the lot that is individually owned may be used for
the purposes of this determination; fractional ownership of Open Space or other land may not be
counted for this purpose.
5. Accessory Apartments are conditionally allowed, subject to Planning Board approval, on
lawfully existing non-conforming lots of record provided that the lot size is at least 75% of the
minimum lot size for the zoning district in which the lot is located. For example, a lot in a
zoning district that requires 80,000 square feet for the minimum lot size must contain at least
60,000 sq. ft. For lots in Cluster/Open Space subdivisions with commonly owned area, only the
lot that is individually owned shall be used for the purposes of this determination; fractional
ownership of Open Space or other land may not be counted for this purpose.
6. The maximum square footage of finished living area for accessory apartments is six-hundred and
sixty (660) square feet. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the authority to increase
this maximum finished living area by variance or otherwise.
7. Although an existing single-family dwelling may be expanded or utilized for the purposes of
creating an Accessory Apartment, no portion of an Accessory Apartment shall be located within
minimum lot line setbacks, including non-conforming structures of record.
8. In addition to any off-street parking required for the SFD, there must be at least one year-round
off-street parking space for use by the Accessory Apartment occupant(s). There must also be
sufficient space on the site for vehicular turn-arounds without having to back out onto the street.
9. One Home Occupation use may be conducted, as otherwise allowed under the Ordinance, as an
accessory use to either an Accessory Apartment or an existing SFD, but not both. Solely for the
purposes of this paragraph 9, In-Home offices are not considered a Home Occupation.
10. Accessory Apartments must comply with applicable building and fire safety codes.
11. Accessory Apartments must have shared common utilities, such as water, electricity, etc.
B. Ownership Standards:
1. Ownership of the existing SFD and the Accessory Apartment must be held by the same
person(s).
2. Either the existing SFD or the Accessory Apartment must be owner-occupied. "Owneroccupied"
means that either the existing SFD or the Accessory Apartment must be occupied by a
person(s) who has a legal ownership and bears risk of decline in value of the property and who
receives any payment from the lease or rental of the property.
C. Aesthetics:
1. Accessory Apartments shall retain and respect the existing streetscape, character of the
neighborhood, and preserve the SFD appearance, architectural style, and character of the
dwelling.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 52
2. Any exterior modifications to the SFD associated with the construction or installation of the
Accessory Apartment must be consistent with architectural style and character of the SFD in
terms of exterior materials, roof pitch/form, and window type/spacing.
3. Any exterior alteration of the SFD must preserve the formal, front entrance of the building in
order to maintain the SFD appearance and architectural style of the building.
4. Exterior stairs more than five (5) feet above final finished grade shall be enclosed and are
restricted to the rear and sides of the SFD wherever practicable provided that that they are
integrated into and consistent with the architecture of the building.
5. Accessory Apartments shall have a full common wall with the principal dwelling.
6. In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer and the applicant for the Accessory Apartment
cannot agree on the aesthetic standards contained in this Section 402.7.9.C, the applicant may
appeal to the Planning Board within thirty (30) days of the CEO's written decision.
D. Wastewater Disposal:
1. An Accessory Apartment may be served by one of the following subsurface wastewater disposal
(SSWD) systems: (a) an existing SSWD system, (b) an upgraded SSWD system, or (c) a new
SSWD system, all as otherwise allowed by law.
2. In all cases, the SSWD system serving the Accessory Apartment must meet First Time System
criteria as established in the Maine SSWD Rules. Utilizing Replacement System or Expanded
System criteria per 10-144 CMR 241 is prohibited.
3. If an existing SSWD system is proposed to serve the Accessory Apartment without being
upgraded, the LPI shall require the applicant to submit sufficient documentation from a Maine
licensed site evaluator showing the SSWD system meets First Time System criteria.
4. If a new SSWD system is proposed to serve the Accessory Apartment, the LPI shall have the
authority to require the design be recorded at the CCRD if it does not need to be installed as may
be allowed in the Maine SSWD Rules.
E. Discontinuance:
1. If any of the applicable ordinance standards are no longer being met, use of the Accessory
Apartment must be discontinued, and the SFD must revert to single-family use by removing the
eating and cooking facilities/equipment support system(s) from the Accessory Apartment as
established in the definition of "Dwelling Unit" contained in the version of the International
Residential Building Code most recently in effect.
402.7.10 Private Landing Strips for Personal Aircraft & Helicopters
Private landing strips for personal aircraft and helicopters, as defined herein, shall be allowed in districts
where permitted by this Ordinance, subject to approval by the Planning Board under the Conditional Use
and Site Plan Review criteria and standards. Any and all necessary Federal and State approvals must be
obtained by the applicant prior to final Planning Board Private landing strips for personal aircraft and
helicopters shall be further subjected to the following provisions:
A. No commercial operations or activities shall be permitted on or from the private landing strip for
personal aircraft and helicopters.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 53
B. No more than six (6) aircraft shall be permitted at the private landing strip for personal aircraft and
helicopters at any one time.
C. The minimum runway length of the airstrip shall meet established manufacturers’ safety standards.
Maximum runway length shall not exceed 2,500 feet.
D. Operations at the private landing strip for personal aircraft and helicopters shall be restricted to
aircraft of gross weights not exceeding 3,500 pounds and rotor craft of gross weights not exceeding
3,500 pounds.
E. The minimum setbacks required for parcels containing a private landing strip for personal aircraft
shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet minimum setbacks to either side of the center line of the
runway, and a four hundred (400) foot minimum setback from either end of the runway.
F. Heliports shall require designated landing areas of fifty feet (50’) by fifty feet (50’), with setbacks
from all sides of the designated landing area of no less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the
property perimeter.
G. Temporary landing areas for aircraft in use for three (3) days or less in any calendar year are exempt
from the provision of this Ordinance.
H. The Planning Board may request an evaluation of the air safety aspects of the site plan from the
Division of Aeronautics of the Maine Department of Transportation.
402.7.11 Campgrounds
Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under State licensing procedures
and the following (in cases of possible conflict, the stricter rule shall apply):
A. General
1. A campground must be constructed on at least 10 acres of land, and all camping units or
structures shall be located at least 100 feet from any property line and 200 feet from any
residence (except residences belonging to the campground owners).
2. Campsites shall be laid out and screened in such a manner that none are within view from public
roads, navigable rivers, existing residences or approved subdivision lots. Any combination of
evergreen planting, landscaped earthen berms, or solid fencing may be used to achieve this
screening standard, when campsites would otherwise be visible from the locations described
above.
3. No trailers other than recreational vehicles or utility trailers as defined herein, shall be permitted
within any campground, temporarily or otherwise. No camping unit shall be stored or exhibited
for sale for commercial purposes within the park.
4. Tent sites and sites for recreational vehicles (RV's) shall be laid out so that the density of each
developed acre of land does not exceed the standards below (in terms of sites per acre of land,
excluding circulation roads):
Non-Shoreland Shoreland Zones
Tent Sites 14 per acre 8 per acre
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 54
RV Sites 11 per acre 7 per acre
5. The minimum frontage of a campsite along any shoreline shall be 100 feet. Minimum setback
from the normal high water elevation shall be 100 feet for all recreational vehicles, tents, or other
vehicles and temporary or permanent structures.
6. No campsite shall be located within a Resource Protection District or within the 100 year flood
plain.
B. Parking and Circulation
1. A minimum of three hundred square feet of off-street parking plus maneuvering space shall be
provided for each recreational vehicle, tent, or shelter site. Recreational vehicles shall be parked
in spaces so that:
a. there shall be a minimum of 50 feet between vehicles; and
b. there shall be a minimum of 75 feet between all recreational vehicles and tents, and all public
rights-of-way located inside the boundaries of the campground.
2. Vehicular access shall be provided onto a hard-surfaced road adequate for the volume and type
of traffic likely to be generated. Grades and sight distances specified in the town's subdivision
standards shall be observed in designing all intersections. Roads shall be constructed of at least
12" of bank-run gravel (no stone larger than 4"), 2" of crushed gravel (l/2" chips) and two
applications of liquid asphalt (l/2 gallon per sq. yd. each application). The minimum width of
roadways shall be twelve feet for one way roads and 22' for two-way roads. No vehicle parking
shall be permitted on the roadway.
C. Health and Safety
1. Each recreational vehicle, tent, or shelter site shall be provided with a picnic table and trash
receptacle. The park management shall dispose of refuse from said containers by transporting
the refuse in a closed truck or in enclosed containers or bags to an approved disposal area at least
once every three days.
2. A campground shall provide water and sewerage systems, sanitary stations, and convenience
facilities in accordance with the regulations of the State Wastewater Disposal Rules. In no case
shall less than one toilet and lavatory be provided for each sex for every ten camping and tent
sites. All recreational vehicle sites shall be equipped with water and sewage hook-ups,
connected to approved distribution or disposal systems.
3. Fire extinguishers capable of dealing with electrical and wood fires shall be kept in all service
buildings. A suitable ingress and egress shall be provided so that every campground may be
readily serviced in emergency situations. 24 hour emergency communication service (e.g.
telephones) shall be provided.
4. Each campsite shall be provided with a masonry or metal fireplace, approved in writing by the
Fire Chief.
D. Planning and Review
1. Roads, parking, campsites and required facilities shall be planned in accordance with the basic
principles outlined below, and shall be shown on the proposed plan which is submitted for
review and approval as a Conditional Permitted Use:
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 55
a. A logical sequence of entry and circulation should be created: entrance, administration and
storage, parking, campsites, toilets and laundry, playing fields or shoreline.
b. Campsites should be clustered in groups according to intensity of use (low density, medium
density, etc.) and also related to common support service areas (laundries, play areas, etc.)
serving a number of campsite clusters. The purpose is to minimize road length, increase
accessibility, and preserve open space.
c. Footpaths and roads should follow "desire lines" of pedestrian and vehicular movement
between campsites and all jointly used facilities. Parking areas may be grassed provided
there is a dry and stable subbase.
d. Access roads shall be laid out as loops to the greatest extent that is practicable, although "culde-
sacs" or "dead-ends" may be allowed to serve up to twenty campsites.
2. A soil erosion and sedimentation control approved by the County Soil and Water Conservation
District shall be submitted. In addition to data on soils, slopes and drainage, a vegetation map
showing the following items may be required:
a. The major types of vegetation should be identified and described (as to age, height, openness
or density, and pattern, either natural or reforested).
b. New planting should be selected to provide screening and shelter, to tolerate existing and
proposed site conditions, and to blend compatibly with existing natural vegetation.
c. All vegetative clearing should avoid creating straight-line edges between open land and
surviving stands.
d. Areas of activity and/or traffic should be sited to avoid wildlife areas (such as thickets for
birds and small mammals, or deer yards and trails).
402.7.12 Fire and Explosive Hazards
All above ground and underground fuel storage tanks shall meet the requirements of the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection (Chapter 691 & 692) and the Maine Department of Public
Safety (Chapter 34).
402.7.13 Lighting
A. No lights shall be placed or maintained upon or in view of any public roadway or street so that its
beams or rays are directed at any portion of the road when the light is of such brilliance and so
positioned as to blind, dazzle or otherwise impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle upon
said roadway.
B. No rotating or flashing light or signals except safety-signaling devices are required by law is
permitted.
C. Adequate buffers using either the natural landscape or artificial screening are required to prevent
unnecessary or undesirable light from being directed beyond lot lines onto adjacent properties.
402.7.14 Storage of Materials
All materials stored outdoors shall be stored in such a manner as to prevent the breeding and harboring
of insects, rats, or other vermin. This shall be accomplished by placing containers in enclosures, storing
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 56
materials above ground, separation of material, elimination of stagnant water, extermination procedures
and other means that would provide for decent, safe, and sanitary living conditions.
402.7.15 Farm Stands
A. Farm Stands for the sale of farm, garden, greenhouse and nursery products shall conform to the
following standards:
1. They shall be used exclusively for the sale of farm, garden, greenhouse, and nursery products.
2. No farm stand shall be permitted unless such use is allowed in the underlying zoning district.
3. They shall be located on land owned or leased by the producer or the operator of the farm stand,
and not within or on any public ways
4. The licensee must demonstrate to the Code Enforcement Officer that there is sufficient access,
parking and maneuvering space, that the location and adequacy of approached are sufficient, and
that there is suitable and safe access for pedestrians, and that customer parking is away from the
travel way and in close proximity to the farm stand.
5. Front, rear and side setbacks shall conform to those of the underlying zoning district.
6. No farm stand shall operate within 200 feet of any fixed base retail establishment or other farm
stand offering the same or substantially similar goods or services.
7. Farm Stand Signs: Farm Stands must conform with the Town of Gray Sign Ordinance.
8. The hours of operation shall be from sunrise to sunset.
9. Noise Level: No loud speakers or any unnecessary noise will be allowed on the site. Noise is
required to be muffled so as not to be objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency or
shrillness. The average d.b.a. count resulting shall not exceed 60 d.b.a. at any point on or beyond
the site.
10. A sufficient number of covered, metal rubbish containers shall be provided at each site
immediately adjacent to the farm stand to hold material. The licensee shall keep sidewalks,
roadways, and other public and private spaces adjacent to the site free from refuel and dust
which may be generated by the operation of the business.
B. Fees: The annual fee to operate a farm stand shall be as established in the Town Fee Schedule and
will cover the period of January 1st of the calendar year to December 31st. Fees will not be
prorated.
C. Insurance: The licensee shall provide written evidence of insurance coverage for the period of the
license and executed by an insurance company authorized to issue such policy in the State, in the
usual form of liability insurance policies in this State for injuries to persons and property resulting
from the use and operation of the farm stand to be licensed.
Such policy of insurance shall be issued for the principal sum, no less than $300,000 for bodily
injury, death and property damage. A certificate of insurance bearing an endorsement thereon by the
issuing agent shall be deposited with the Clerk. Such certificate shall state that the issuing agent will
notify the Clerk in writing no less than thirty (30) days prior to the cancellation thereof.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 57
402.7.16 Bed and Breakfast Establishments
A. The only meal served in a bed and breakfast shall be breakfast and food service shall be limited to
overnight guests.
B. A bed and breakfast with three (3) guest rooms or less shall be considered a home occupation
accessory to principal use of the dwelling and shall be allowed under the standards applicable to
home occupations.
C. The average occupancy is not to exceed three (3) persons per guest room per night.
D. A structure shall not be used or occupied as a bed and breakfast establishment until all necessary
State approvals have been received and a certificate of use and occupancy has been issues by the
local Code Enforcement Officer.
402.7.17 In-Home Offices
A. In any district, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a permit for the operation of an in-home
office by one or more residents of a dwelling unit as an accessory use to the dwelling unit. An inhome
office shall not be considered a home occupation if the following conditions are met:
1. Customers or clients do not come to the dwelling to receive goods or services;
2. Communication with customers, clients, and business associates is primarily by mail, electronic
mail, telephone, or other telecommunication device, and deliveries or pick-ups by truck, if any,
occur at an average frequency not substantially greater than the ordinary frequency of delivery
truck traffic at a single family residence;
3. There are no signs or any other exterior indications of the in-home office activity;
4. The activities conducted within the in-home office are limited to processes, such as data
processing, word processing, desktop publishing, and electronic research, which do not create
noise, pollution, or nuisance conditions detectable outside the dwelling;
5. The in-home office does not employ any persons who are not residents of the dwelling unit; and
6. There are no signs (other than a name on a mail box which complies with U.S. Postal Service
regulations), exterior exhibits, exterior storage of materials, or any other exterior indications of
the in-home office.
402.7.18 Boat Storage
No vessel exceeding twenty-four (24) feet in length shall be stored or parked on any residential property
unless the vessel is stored or parked so as to not violate the minimum front, rear, or side yards for
structures. For the purposes of measuring vessel length, any permanently attached element of the vessel
shall be included specifically including a bowsprit and/or stern step(s).
402.7.19 Building Trades Occupation-1
A. The person conducting the contracted services must reside on the property where the Building Trade
Occupation accessory residential use occurs.
B. The occupation or profession shall not alter the existing character of the surrounding area or the
zoning district to the extent that it becomes a nuisance.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 58
C. The occupation or profession shall not utilize more than ten (10) percent of the finished floor area of
the dwelling unit nor more than five hundred (500) square feet of indoor storage or materials,
supplies or equipment.
D. Any sign must meet applicable standards contained Gray's Sign Ordinance (Chapter 406).
E. No outdoor storage of any vehicle associated with the occupation or profession shall be allowed
except for a maximum of one (1) vehicle less than 16,000 gross vehicle weight and one (1) trailer
less that twenty (20) feet in total length at any time. For the purposes of this use, an additional trailer
or other registered, over the road implement utilized for the occupation of profession shall constitute
a vehicle.
F. Adequate off-street parking and turn-around area shall be provided on the property where the
Building Trades Occupation use is occurring to avoid the necessity to back out onto a publically
maintained roadway.
G. There shall be no exterior display, no exterior storage of materials, supplies, or equipment and no
exterior indication of the occupation or profession or variation of the residential character other than
a duly authorized sign.
H. No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, or electrical disturbances shall be
generated by the occupation or profession.
I. Traffic in excess of that customarily occurring in a residential neighborhood shall not be generated
by the occupation or profession. Residential traffic shall be measured according to the current
edition of the Institute of Traffic Engineers handbook.
J. The CEO approval is only valid for the applicant. In the event that the applicant/ owner of the
property changes, a new approval is required to operate the Building Trades Occupation-1 use.
402.7.20 RETAIL MARIJUANA
A. The following uses as defined by this Chapter and under the “Marijuana Legalization Act” (7
M.R.S.A. §§ 2441 – 2454, as may be amended and successor provisions thereof) are hereby
expressly prohibited in all Zoning Districts within the Town of Gray:
1. Retail Marijuana Cultivation Facility
2. Retail Marijuana Establishment
3. Retail Marijuana Products Manufacturing Facility
4. Retail Marijuana Social Club
5. Retail Marijuana Store
6. Retail Marijuana Testing Facility
B. This Section shall be construed to limit the use, possession, transport, cultivation, transfer or
purchase of Retail Marijuana to the greatest extent permitted by the Marijuana Legalization Act (7
M.R.S.A. §§ 2441 – 2454, as may be amended from time to time). Further, this ordinance shall be
deemed to prohibit, and does hereby prohibit, attempts to circumvent its restriction on selling retail
marijuana by persons or firms giving it away, nominally without charge, in connection in any way
with any lawful transaction under the guise of being a gift or an enhanced consideration for same.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 59
C. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit any lawful use, possession or conduct pursuant
to the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act (22 M.R.S.A. 2421 – 2430-B, as may be amended from
time to time).
ARTICLE 8 –STANDARDS ONLY APPLICABLE IN SPECIFIC DISTRICTS
402.8.1 Adult Businesses
A. Location of Adult Businesses Restricted
B. No adult business shall be located:
1. In any zoning district other the Commercial District “C.”
2. In any location where the customer entrance to the adult business would be closer than one
thousand (1,000 ft.) feet, measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or
objects, to the nearest point on the boundary of any property which is:
a. Occupied by a residence, school, park, playground, church or public building; or,
b.Occupied by another adult business.
3. In any location closer than seven-hundred and fifty (750) feet of a residential zoning district,
measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects.
C. Outside Displays Prohibited
No materials or devices displaying or exhibiting specified sexual activities shall be visible from the
exterior of the building in which the adult business is located.
402.8.2 Business Transitional District Standards
A. Design Guidelines: All development in Business Transitional Districts 1 and 2 shall conform to the
Town’s Business Transitional District Design Guidelines, adopted November 13, 2007.
B. Vehicle Access and Parking: Vehicle access to the site must be on roads which have adequate
capacity to accommodate the additional traffic generated by the development, as demonstrated by a
traffic impact study conducted by a Maine licensed professional engineer. The use may not cause
unreasonable safety hazards for pedestrians, cyclists, and operators of motor vehicles and may not
result in a decrease in overall level of service below LOS D at study area intersections or the project
driveway during the design hour. (Levels of service are defined by the latest edition of the Highway
Capacity Manual, 30th highest hour of the year for the intersection.)
C. Layout and Parking: The layout of the site must provide for the safe movement of pedestrians, and
passenger, service and emergency vehicles through the site. Parking layout and design are
specifically exempted from the site plan review standards of Section 402.10.11 B.5 but must instead
conform to the parking standards contained in the Town’s Business Transitional District Design
Guidelines, adopted November 13, 2007.
D. Stormwater Design: Adequate provision must be made for the collection and disposal of all
stormwater that runs off from proposed streets, parking areas, roofs, and other surfaces, through a
stormwater management and maintenance plan certified by a Maine licensed professional engineer
as conforming to the Maine Department of Environmental Protection’s Chapter 500 standards, as
amended from time to time, such that groundwater quality is protected and there are no unreasonable
impacts to abutting and downstream properties.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 60
E. Stormwater Standard: Stormwater runoff from unusually severe storm events shall not cause erosion
of man-made drainage features. Culverts and drainage ditches shall be designed to accommodate the
twenty-four (24) hour, fifty (50) year storm.
F. Stormwater Maintenance: Provisions shall be made to ensure the long-term operation and repair of
drainage facilities on the site. A maintenance plan shall document the maintenance requirements and
the parties responsible for maintenance of the storm water control system.
G. Wellhead District Aquifer Protection: All portions of the Business Transitional District-2 are
located within the recharge zone of the Gray Water District wells located on Shaker Road, and all
uses and activities within that sub-district are therefore subject to all provisions and requirements of
Section 402.8.4.
H. Signs: Signage in the Business Transitional District is specifically exempt from the standards of
Chapter 406, the Sign Ordinance, but shall instead conform to the signage standards contained in the
Town’s Business Transitional District Design Guidelines, adopted November 13, 2007.
I. Noise: The development must satisfy the following noise standards:
1. Sound From Routine Operation of Developments: Hourly sound levels resulting from routine
operation of the development shall not exceed the following limits:
a. 75 dBA at any time of day, at any property line of the development or contiguous property
owned by the developer, whichever is farther from the proposed development's regulated
sound sources.
b. At any protected location in an area outside the Business Transitional zoning districts:
(i) 60 dBA between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. (the "daytime hourly limit"), and
(ii) 50 dBA between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (the "nighttime hourly limit").
c. At any protected location also located within a Business Transitional zoning district:
(i) 70 dBA between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. (the "daytime hourly limit"), and
(ii) 60 dBA between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (the “nighttime hourly limit”).
d. When a proposed development is to be located in an area where the daytime pre-development
ambient hourly sound level at a protected location is equal to or less than 45 dBA and/or the
nighttime pre-development ambient hourly sound level at a protected location is equal to or
less than 35 dBA, the hourly sound levels resulting from routine operation of the
development shall not exceed the following limits at that protected location:
(i) 55 dBA between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. (the "daytime hourly limit"), and
(ii) 45 dBA between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (the "nighttime hourly limit").
e. Notwithstanding the above, the developer need not measure or estimate the pre-development
ambient hourly sound levels at a protected location if he demonstrates, by estimate or
example, that the hourly sound levels at the property line resulting from routine operation of
the development will not exceed 50 dBA in the daytime or 40 dBA at night.
f. Except as specifically approved by the Planning Board, non-residential uses in the Business
Transitional zoning district shall not be open to the public between the hours of 12:00 a.m.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 61
and 5:00 a.m. Deliveries and other external loading and unloading operations, including
dumpster servicing, shall not be conducted between the hours of 7 p.m. and 7 a.m.
2. Sound from Construction of Developments
a. Construction is prohibited between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., provided that the
Code Enforcement Officer may approve construction between these hours where an applicant
demonstrates short-term circumstances of special need during the construction process.
b. Sound from construction activities between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. shall not exceed the
following limits at any protected location:
Duration of Activity Sound Level Limit
12 hours 87 dBA
8 hours 90 dBA
6 hours 92 dBA
4 hours 95 dBA
3 hours 97 dBA
2 hours 100 dBA
1 hour or less 105 dBA
3. Exemptions from Noise Standards:
a. Sound from registered and inspected vehicles, when such vehicles are operating on public
ways, or enter the development to make a delivery or pickup, when such vehicles are
moving, starting or stopping, but not when they are parked for over 60 minutes in the
development.
b. Snow removal, landscaping and street sweeping activities.
c. Warning signals and alarms.
4. For purposes of this subsection, a “protected location” is defined as any location, accessible by
foot, on a parcel of land containing a residence or fully approved and permitted residence or fully
approved residential subdivision.
402.8.3 Village Center District Standards
A. Replacement of Existing Buildings and Structures
Existing buildings or other structures in the Village Center District are allowed to be rebuilt or
replaced with new construction provided that the existing “footprint” is not exceeded unless in
conformance with the standards in Section 402. 5.4 for the Village Center District and the Village
Center Design Guidelines in Section 402.8.3. B below.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 62
1. Replacement of Destroyed or Damaged Building: The owner of a building or structure in the
Village Center District that is destroyed or damaged by any means beyond the control of the
owner shall have the option of rebuilding or restoring the building or structure either on the same
“footprint” or in accordance with the space standards of Section 402.5.4 within a period of one
(1) year from the date of destruction or damage. The Code Enforcement Officer may issue a
permit for one additional one (1) year period if reasonable progress is being made and is
nuisance conditions do not exist.
2. Voluntary Replacement: A building or structure in the Village Center District may be
voluntarily replaced provided that the existing “footprint” is not exceeded. The construction of
the replacement building or structure must be completed in accordance with a building permit
drawn within one (1) year of the demolition of the prior building or structure and construction
must be completed within a period of two (2) years from the date of the building permit. The
building permit shall expire if the work or change involved is not commenced within one (1)
year of the date on which the permit is issued, and if the work or change is not substantially
completed within the two (2) years. The Code Enforcement Officer may issue a permit for one
additional one (1) year period if reasonable progress is being made and if nuisance conditions do
not exist. Before a building or structure is voluntarily replaced to the existing “footprint” under
this paragraph, the owner must provide the Code Enforcement Officer with a Class D survey,
conducted before demolition of the building or structure showing its exact location on the lot
unless the replacement building or structure is proposed to be in accordance with the space
standards of Section 402.5.4.
B. Special Performance Standards:
The following standards apply in the Village Center District to those uses requiring site plan review
by the Planning Board:
1. All development shall conform to the Town’s Village Center District Design Guidelines, adopted
December 18, 2007.
402.8.4 Wellhead District Standards
Commercial and agricultural chemical and petroleum products use, storage, and handling activities
within the Wellhead Protection Districts shall be subject to the requirements of this section. Normal
home activities such as gardening, lawn care, and landscaping are exempt from the requirements of this
Section.
A. Chemicals of Special Concern in Wellhead Districts
1. The principal chemicals of concern regarding groundwater contamination include agricultural
chemicals, petroleum products, various solvents, road salt, manure, and various waste products:
a. Agricultural chemicals include nutrients, fertilizers, and various pesticides (including
fungicides, herbicides, and insecticides).
b. Petroleum products include gasoline and jet fuels that have low viscosity and soluble
components such as MTBE and benzene as well as home heating oil.
c. Harmful solvents include a variety of cleaners and degreasers such as trichloroethylene
(TCE), perchloroethylene (PCE), and methylene chloride.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 63
d. Harmful waste products include unused paints, paint scrapings or sandings, spent solvents,
and wash water.
2. Major potential sources of groundwater contamination include:
a. Leakage of liquid chemicals, petroleum products, and solvents from tanks or drums.
b. Leaching of solid chemicals in bulk if exposed to precipitation.
c. Spills during transport and delivery.
d. Leaching of chemicals by water during fire-fighting emergencies.
3. The lists of materials of the National Primary Drinking Water Standards, National Secondary
Drinking Water Standards, State Primary Drinking Water Standards, and State Secondary
Drinking Water Standards, as amended from time to time, shall be utilized to identify chemicals
subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Specific Prohibition of Certain Activities in Wellhead Districts due to the Risk to the Public Water
Supply
Due to the inherent risks to the public water supply system of certain activities, the following uses
and activities area specifically prohibited in the Wellhead Protection Districts:
1. Disposal of solid wastes (except brush and stumps), leachable wastes (except subsurface disposal
of domestic sewage), and sludge.
2. Storage of leachable wastes or solid wastes.
3. Mining or Excavation in excess of ten (10) cubic yards other than excavation for permitted uses
or approved special exceptions.
4. Application of de-icing chemicals with a salt content of more than ten (10) percent unless the
entity responsible for such activities submits an agreement satisfactory in all respects to the
Town Council that will assure adequate protection of the potable water supply wells, together
with a non-binding recommendation from the Gray Water District. Homeowners undertaking
normal residential activities are exempt from this provision.
5. Large and medium Concentrated Animal Feed Operations (CAFOs) as defined by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) under the Clean Water Act (CWA) as amended from
time to time.
6. Manure application to land other than in accordance with an approved State of Maine Nutrient
Management Plan.
7. Application of sludge to land.
8. Storage of Petroleum or Gasoline in excess of one-hundred (100) gallons except for such storage
necessary for petroleum use on site as a fuel. In accordance with Maine law, installation of new
or replacement underground storage tanks is prohibited in the Wellhead Protection Districts.
9. Vehicles transporting petroleum or gasoline, other than the vehicle propulsion fuel, are not
permitted to be stored in Wellhead Protection 1 District. Vehicles transporting petroleum or
gasoline in excess of one-hundred (100) gallons, other than the vehicle propulsion fuel, are not
permitted to be stored in Wellhead Protection 2 District or Business Transitional 2 District.
Vehicles transporting petroleum or gasoline in excess of one-hundred (100) gallons are permitted
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 64
to routinely pass through the Wellhead Protection Districts and to make deliveries, but are not
permitted to be stopped or parked for a time longer than that needed for making deliveries.
10. For any proposed use or activity, not specifically listed above, deemed by either the Code
Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board “likely to be detrimental” to the quality of the
groundwater, the proponent of the proposed use or activity shall have the burden of proving to
the Planning Board, after notice to the Gray Water District, that the use or activity will not be
detrimental. The Planning Board shall seek comments on the same from the Gray Water District
before making a determination.
C. Submission Requirements for Applications in Wellhead Districts involving Chemical and Petroleum
Products
Where commercial and agricultural chemical and petroleum products use, storage, and handling
activities occur within the Wellhead Protection Districts, the following information, where
applicable, shall be submitted for review and approval by the Code Enforcement Officer in
consultation with the Gray Water District:
1. Type and volume of chemical compounds and petroleum products handled and/or stored.
2. Intended uses of chemical compounds and petroleum products.
3. Site plan showing all storage, handling, and use areas for raw materials and wastes.
4. For inside areas, plans to contain spills including the:
a. Location of control dikes.
b. Location of floor drains and floor drain outlets.
c. Location of separators, holding tanks, and/or drain outlets.
d. Location and design of piping systems for wash water discharge to appropriate sewers or
treatment systems.
5. For outside areas, plans to contain spills including:
a. Information to demonstrate the prevention of the flow of natural runoff from entering the
storage area and keeping leaks or spills from flowing off site.
b. Plans to control chemical, petroleum product, and solvent spills.
c. Provisions to segregate underground systems to ensure that there are no cross connections.
d. Provisions to prevent accidental containment breach due to vehicle or equipment collisions.
e. A plan for emergency measures which can be implemented for surface drainage systems.
6. A Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasures (SPCC) plan detailing:
a. Materials and equipment to be available.
b. A training plan and schedule of training.
c. A list of contacts (EPA/DEP/local fire officials) with phone numbers.
d. An inspection schedule.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 65
e. A Pre-Plan tailored to the chemicals and materials on site. The Pre-Plan should address the
procedures the fire department can utilize to minimize leaching of chemicals by water in
order to limit groundwater contamination in case of a fire.
7. An Integrated Pest Management Plan in accordance with guidance from the Maine Board of
Pesticide Control.
8. An on-site soils evaluation to assess nutrient holding capacity and permeability of the soils.
9. Plans for control of surface water run-off and erosion in areas where chemicals will be applied.
D. Performance Standards in Wellhead Districts involving Chemical and Petroleum Products
Performance Standards for commercial and agricultural chemical and petroleum products use,
storage, and handling, where applicable include:
1. All chemical and petroleum products shall be stored under cover and on an impervious surface,
without floor drains.
2. Secondary containment of liquids shall be provided to contain at least 110% of the stored
product.
3. Tanks for liquid chemical and petroleum products storage shall be equipped with automatic shutoff
valves and high level alarms.
4. Above-ground piping shall be designed to prevent line breakage due to collision.
5. Containers and piping shall be constructed of corrosion resistant materials.
6. Containers shall be clearly labeled with the contents name and date of purchase.
7. When a Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasures (SPCC) plan is required by the Maine
DEP, a copy shall be provided to the Code Enforcement Officer, the Gray Fire Department, and
the Gray Water District with a statement of procedures the fire department can utilize to
minimize leaching of chemicals by water in order to limit groundwater contamination in case of
a fire.
8. All agricultural restricted use pesticides and herbicides shall be in accordance with current Maine
Board of Pesticide Control rules and regulations, as amended from time to time, for application,
storage, and disposal.
9. The use of chemicals and petroleum products or residuals shall not cause or contribute to the
cumulative, calculated, or actual levels of any contaminants in the groundwater within the
Wellhead Protection Districts for the Gray Water District Wells to exceed fifty (50) percent of
the Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) as published in the National and State Primary and
Secondary Drinking Water Standards, as amended.
10. Only pesticides with low leachability applied by Maine licensed applicators are allowed.
11. Provisions shall be made to control surface run-off and erosion in areas where pesticides are
being applied.
12. Pesticide logs and reports maintained as required by the Maine Board of Pesticide Control shall
be made available on request by the Code Enforcement Officer.
E. Submission Requirements for Applications in Wellhead Districts involving Agricultural Manure and
Fertilizers
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 66
Where agricultural manure and fertilizer use, storage, and handling activities occur within the
Wellhead Protection Districts occur, the following information, where applicable, shall be submitted
to the Code Enforcement Officer for review and approval in consultation with the Gray Water
District:
1. A nutrient management plan for agricultural activities within the Wellhead Protection Districts.
2. Type and volume of manure and fertilizer handled and/or stored.
3. An on-site soils evaluation to assess nutrient holding capacity and leachability of the soils.
4. Plans for control of surface water run-off and erosion in areas where manure and fertilizer will be
applied.
5. Site plan showing all storage, handling, and use areas for manure and fertilizer.
F. Performance Standards in Wellhead Districts involving Agricultural Manure and Fertilizers
Performance Standards for agricultural manure and fertilizer storage and application, where
applicable:
1. Sludge shall not be applied to any land within the Wellhead Protection Districts
2. All agricultural fertilizers shall be applied in accordance with label directions and shall be
applied in accordance with an approved Nutrient Management Plan.
3. Fertilizer applications shall be tailored to the specific needs of the crop, as determined by soil
suitability analyses.
4. Use of slow-release fertilizer is preferred.
5. Irrigation schedules shall be coordinated with nutrient application to minimize leaching potential.
6. Manure may be used within the Wellhead Protection Districts in accordance with a nutrient
management plan.
7. Applications of approved residuals, not including sludge, and manures shall be tailored to the
specific needs of the crop, as determined by a soil suitability analyses.
8. Residuals and manures shall not be applied over very shallow soils of less than one (1) foot or
over exposed bedrock.
9. Residuals and manure shall not be applied on frozen ground or immediately before storm events.
G. Submission Requirements in Wellhead Districts involving Commercial Vehicle Storage and
Maintenance
Where commercial vehicle maintenance and storage activities occur within the Wellhead Protection
Districts, the following information shall be provided to the Code Enforcement Officer for review
and approval in consultation with the Gray Water District:
1. The number and types of commercial vehicles to be maintained or stored.
2. A site plan, drawn to scale, showing locations and designs of secondary containment for fuel and
storage and refueling pads.
H. Performance Standards in Wellhead Districts involving Commercial Vehicle Storage and
Maintenance
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 67
Performance Standards for vehicular maintenance and storage:
1. Precautionary measures such as portable drip pans shall be taken to ensure that no spills occur
when draining oils or fluids from vehicles.
2. All fuel oil, waste oil, lubricants, antifreeze, or other potential contaminants shall have secondary
containment of at least one-hundred-ten (110) percent of the liquid volume stored.
3. Washing of vehicles in the Wellhead Protection Districts shall be in accordance with Best
Management Practices.
4. Refueling of commercial vehicles :
a. A portable drip catch pan shall be in place beneath the fill tube at all times during the
refueling operation.
b. Refueling shall be done on a concrete pad or other impermeable surface.
I. Submission Requirements in Wellhead Districts involving Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
All applications for a wastewater disposal system permit in Wellhead Districts shall include the
following information submitted for review and approval by the Code Enforcement Officer in
consultation with the Gray Water District:
1. A hydrogeologic analysis of nitrate concentrations at the property line for systems using a tank
greater than one-thousand (1,000) gallons,
2. Design plans for all floor drains, grease traps, and holding tanks.
J. Performance Standards in Wellhead Districts involving Wastewater Disposal Systems
1. Nitrate and nitrite concentrations shall not exceed five (5) mg/L at the property line for systems
using a tank greater than one-thousand (1,000) gallons.
2. Floor drains, grease traps, and holding tanks that are not connected to a subsurface waste
disposal system designed and installed in accordance with the Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules of the Department of Human Services are prohibited.
3. The Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the Gray Water District in writing of any installation,
expansion, or replacement of any waste water disposal system within the Wellhead Protection
Districts.
K. Submission Requirements and Performance Standards in Wellhead Districts involving Stormwater
Management
New construction and stormwater management activities shall be in accordance with the following
requirements within the Wellhead Protection Districts:
1. Calculations and plans which provide following information, where applicable, shall be included
in Site Plan Application submissions for new construction and new stormwater management
activities within the Wellhead Protection Districts:
a. Design of dry wells, storage, retention, or detention facilities and other surface water
Impoundments.
b. Stormwater system outlets.
c. Delineation of post development drainage areas.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 68
d. Plans for snow removal, ice control, and use of road salt.
2. Performance Standards for Stormwater Management:
Stormwater shall be directed to an appropriate vegetated buffer, detention, or treatment system.
L. Submission Requirements and Criteria for Increasing Lot Coverage and Impervious Surfaces in the
Wellhead Protection Districts
The Planning Board may authorize an increase in the allowable lot coverage and/or impervious
surfaces as indicated in Tables 402.5.4 A and B for proposed development in the Wellhead and
Business Transitional-2 Districts (except for areas within four-hundred (400) feet from the springs
and well site controlled by the Gray Water District), provided that the Board finds that criteria
established in subsections 1. through 6. below have been met. Evidence as to whether the criteria
below have been met shall be submitted by the applicant in the form of a stormwater management
plan prepared by a qualified registered professional engineer and a hydrogeologic analysis prepared
by a certified geologist. The Planning Board shall, when deemed necessary to determine compliance
with the criteria contained in this section, retain the peer review services of the Town Engineer and
hydrologist; the cost of such services to be covered by the applicant:
1. Recharge to the aquifer shall not be significantly impaired. To avoid reduction in recharge, the
ground surface of the site in question shall be modified so as to create recharge swales and/or
recharge dry wells. Swales and dry wells shall be designed to accept stormwater from a twentyfour
(24) hour, ten (10) year storm, falling on the total area of impervious surface and the area of
the swale itself.
2. Stormwater runoff shall be satisfactorily infiltrated into the aquifer. Wetland conditions shall not
be created in recharge swales. Test pit logs, water level readings from wells or piezometer or
other climatological data shall determine that the bottom of recharge swales and/or dry wells will
not intersect the seasonal-high water level.
3. For the purposes of encouraging recharge, evaporation of impounded stormwater shall be
minimized. Surface and subsurface soil permeabilities shall be sufficient to drain runoff
generated by the twenty-four (24), ten (10) year storm within a period of seven (7) days.
4. The hydrogeologic analysis shall provide evidence that the resultant water quality of the runoff
due to the increased impervious cover will not be degraded over existing, predevelopment
conditions.
5. Stormwater runoff from unusually severe storm events shall not cause erosion of man-made
drainage features. Culverts and drainage ditches shall be designed to accommodate the twentyfour
(24) hour, fifty (50) year storm.
6. Provisions shall be made to ensure the long-term operation and repair of drainage facilities on
the site. A maintenance plan shall document the maintenance requirements and the parties
responsible for maintenance of the stormwater control system.
M. Control of Existing Threats in the Wellhead Protection Districts
1. Inspection
a. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the right to inspect any property or building
located in a Wellhead Protection District at reasonable hours, with owner or occupant
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 69
permission, as provided in 30-A MRSA section 4452, for the purpose of determining
compliance with this Ordinance or any permit issued hereunder.
b. The Code Enforcement Officer may be accompanied by a representative of the Gray Water
District, or its designee.
c. In the event the landowner denies or prevents access for this purpose, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall be authorized to apply for an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to Rule
80E, Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
2. Monitoring
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer finds, or becomes aware of from any source, that any
use commencing on or after the date of adoption of this Ordinance on February 6, 2006,
including but not limited to uses of the types identified in Section 402.8.4 of this Ordinance, is
located within a Wellhead Protection District designated by this Ordinance and poses an actual
or potential threat to the safety or quality of the public groundwater supply, the Code
Enforcement Officer, with the concurrence of the Gray Water District, may:
a. Order the property owner to grant permission for installation of groundwater monitoring
wells and testing at reasonable hours and at the sole cost of the Gray Water District.
b. In the event the owner of the property refuses to comply with an order to grant permission for
installation of groundwater monitoring wells and testing at reasonable hours at the sole cost
of the Gray Water District the Town of Gray may apply to the Maine District Court for an
order to permit such monitoring.
c. If testing indicates that the groundwater has been contaminated to fifty (50) percent or greater
of the Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) as published in the National and State Primary
and Secondary Drinking Water Standards, as amended, then the source of that contamination
shall be determined by further testing at the sole cost of the Gray Water District.
d. If it is determined by further testing that the current owner or occupant of the property is
responsible for all of the contamination of the groundwater to fifty (50) percent or greater of
the Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) as published in the National and State Primary and
Secondary Drinking Water Standards, as amended, then the owner or occupant shall
reimburse the Town or the Water District, as appropriate, for expenses incurred in testing and
remediation.
e. The owner or occupant of the property shall not be required to pay for the expense of testing,
prevention, or remediation of contamination that originates on another property.
3. Enforcement
If any use causes or contributes to groundwater contamination of fifty (50) percent or greater of
the Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) as published in the National and State Primary and
Secondary Drinking Water Standards, as amended, within, or at the boundary line of, a Wellhead
Protection District designated by this Ordinance, the Code Enforcement Officer may require the
owner or occupant of the property on which the contaminating use occurs to cease activity,
install or construct mechanisms, or enact appropriate procedures to reduce the contamination.
402.8.5 Agritourism
A. Agritourism Center
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 70
1. The minimum lot size for an Agritourism Center in the RRA District shall be one hundred (100)
acres. Development shall follow a master plan approved by the Planning Board that includes:
A minimum of:
a. 30 percent dedicated to passive open space and trails
b. 20 percent dedicated to agriculture
And a maximum of:
c. 25 percent dedicated to active recreational fields & facilities
d. 25 percent dedicated to Agritourism Facility & office development
2. A minimum buffer of one hundred (100) feet shall be maintained along any public roadway. A
minimum buffer of fifty (50) feet shall be maintained along a property line in the location of an
abutting residence and yard. If existing vegetation does not provide adequate screening as
determined by the Planning Board, additional plantings may be required.
3. An Agritourism Center may be built in phases subject to a schedule approved by the Planning
Board.
N. Agritourism Facility
The minimum lot size for an Agritourism Facility in the RRA District shall be fifty (50) acres. An
existing residential building as of January 1, 2006 on a parcel of land that meets the minimum lot
size for an Agritourism Facility may be converted to an Agritourism Facility and maintained,
repaired and replaced notwithstanding that it does not meet the street frontage, height, and setback
standards set forth in this ordinance, provided that such structure shall not be expanded in a manner
that increases the non-conformity.
402.8.6 Watershed Protection Measures in the Lake District (LD)
A. Roads and Driveways
The following standards shall apply to the construction of roads and/or driveways and drainage
systems, culverts and other related features in the Lake District.
1. Roads and driveways shall be set back at least seventy-five (75) feet from the normal high-water
line of tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland unless no reasonable alternative exists
as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer. If no other reasonable alternative exists, the
Code Enforcement Officer may reduce the road and/or driveway setback requirement to no less
than fifty (50) feet upon clear showing by the applicant that appropriate techniques will be used
to prevent sedimentation of the water body. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to,
the installation of settling basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and
turnouts placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland.
On slopes of greater than twenty (20) percent the road and/or driveway setback shall be
increased by ten (10) feet for each five (5) percent increase in slope above twenty (20) percent.
This paragraph shall neither apply to approaches to water crossings nor to roads or driveways
that provide access to permitted structures, and facilities located nearer to the shoreline due to an
operational necessity.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 71
2. Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right-of-way regardless of its
setback from a water body.
3. New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection District except to provide
access to permitted uses within the district, or as approved by the Planning Board upon a finding
that no reasonable alternative route or location is available outside the district, in which case the
road and/or driveway shall be set back as far as practicable from the normal high-water line of a
water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland.
4. Road banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two (2) horizontal to one (1) vertical, and shall be
graded and stabilized in accordance with the provisions for erosion and sedimentation control
contained in subsection P.
5. Road grades shall be no greater than ten (10) percent except for short segments of less than two
hundred (200) feet.
6. In order to prevent road surface drainage from directly entering water bodies, roads shall be
designed, constructed, and maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip at least (50) feet
plus two times the average slope, in width between the outflow point of the ditch or culvert and
the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland. Road
surface drainage which is directed to an unscarified buffer strip shall be diffused or spread out to
promote infiltration of the runoff and to minimize channelized flow of the drainage through the
buffer strip.
7. Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnouts shall be installed in a
manner effective in directing drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before the flow in the road
or ditches gains sufficient volume or head to erode the road or ditch. To accomplish this, the
following shall apply:
a. Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water turnouts shall be spaced along the
road at intervals no greater than indicated in the following table:
Road Grade (Percent) Spacing (Feet)
0-2 250
3-5 200-135
6-10 100-80
11-15 80-60
16-20 60-45
21+ 40
b. Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only where the road grade is ten
(10) percent or less.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 72
c. On road sections having slopes greater than ten (10) percent, ditch relief culverts shall be
placed across the road at approximately a thirty (30) degree angle downslope from a line
perpendicular to the centerline of the road.
d. Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly installed in order to allow for
effective functioning and their inlet and outlet ends shall be stabilized with appropriate
materials.
8. Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other storm water runoff control installations
associated with roads shall be maintained on a regular basis to assure effective functioning.
O. Stormwater Runoff
9. All new construction and development shall be designed to minimize storm water runoff from
the site in excess of the natural predevelopment conditions. Where possible, existing natural
runoff control features, such as berms, swales, terraces and wooded areas shall be retained in
order to reduce runoff and encourage infiltration of stormwaters.
10. Storm water runoff control systems shall be maintained as necessary to ensure proper
functioning.
P. Erosion and Sedimentation Controls
11. All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or other similar activities which result in
unstabilized soil conditions and which require a permit shall require a written soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan. The plan shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer for
approval and shall include, where applicable, provisions for:
a. Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
b. Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt fencing or diversion ditches.
c. Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or riprap.
12. In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall be designed to fit with the
topography and soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be required
shall be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours shall be followed as closely as possible.
13. Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed project
involving land disturbance, and shall be in operation during all stages of the activity. The
amount of exposed soil at every phase of construction shall be minimized to reduce the potential
for erosion.
14. Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently stabilized within one (1) week
from the time it was last actively worked, by use of riprap, sod, seed, and mulch, or other
effective measures. In all cases permanent stabilization shall occur within nine (9) months of the
initial date of exposure. In addition:
a. Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one (1) bale per five hundred
(500) square feet and shall be maintained until a catch of vegetation is established.
b. Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable method may be required to
maintain the mulch cover.
c. Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to avoid siltation into the water.
Such measures may include the use of staked hay bales and/or silt fences.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 73
15. Natural and man-made drainage ways and drainage outlets shall be protected from erosion from
water flowing through them. Drainageways shall be designed and constructed in order to carry
water from a twenty five (25) year storm or greater, and shall be stabilized with vegetation or
lined with riprap.
Q. Erosion and Sedimentation Controls
All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or structures can be
established or maintained without causing adverse environmental impacts, including severe erosion,
mass soil movement, improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during or after construction.
Proposed uses requiring subsurface waste disposal shall require a soils report based on an on-site
investigation and be prepared by state-certified professionals. Certified persons may include Maine
Certified Soil Scientists, Maine Registered Professional Engineers, Maine State Certified Geologists
and other persons who have training and experience in the recognition and evaluation of soil
properties. The report shall be based upon the analysis of the characteristics of the soil and
surrounding land and water areas, maximum ground water elevation, presence of ledge, drainage
conditions, and other pertinent data which the evaluator deems appropriate. The soils report shall
include recommendations for a proposed use to counteract soil limitations where they exist.
402.8.7 Medical Marijuana
A. The following uses as defined by this Chapter and under the “Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act”
(22 M.R.S.A. §§ 2421 – 2430-B, as may be amended from time to time and successor provisions
thereof) are hereby expressly prohibited in all Zoning Districts within the Town of Gray:
(1) Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary
(2) Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary Cultivation Facility
(3) Medical Marijuana Testing Facility
(4) Caregiver Retail Store
(5) Marijuana Food Establishment
(6) Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility
(7) Any other use not included within the uses above, as defined herein, that includes the
harvesting, production, manufacturing, testing, or sale of medical marijuana.
B. Location Criteria
1. Registered Caregivers and Registered Caregiver Cultivation Areas shall only be located consistent
with Table 402.5.3 of this Ordinance. Registered Caregivers and Registered Caregiver Cultivation
Areas shall be conditional permitted uses in the zoning districts identified in Table 402.5.3 and shall be
subject to Planning Board review and approval subject to the provisions of this Section 402.8.7 and
Section 402.9.3 of this Ordinance.
2. In addition, no Registered Caregivers or Registered Caregiver Cultivation Areas, where permitted,
shall be sited within one thousand feet (1,000') of any of the following preexisting uses:
a. A church, synagogue, or other house of religious worship;
b. A public, private or charter school;
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 74
c. An athletic field, park, playground, or recreational facility owned and/or operated by a public entity
such as the Town or a school as defined in subsection B(2)(b) of this Section;
d. Any juvenile or adult halfway house, correctional facility, or substance abuse rehabilitation treatment
center;
e. A licensed day care home or facility licensed by the State of Maine; or
f. A lot on which another Registered Caregiver or Registered Caregiver Cultivation Area is sited;
provided, however, that this subsection shall not preclude two Registered Caregivers who are members
of the same household from sharing a cultivation area on the same lot. The 1,000-foot minimum
separation distance between properties utilized for Registered Caregiver purposes shall be measured at
their closest point between their lot lines.
3. The 1,000 foot minimum separation distance for uses cited in Section 402.8.7.B.2, subsections a
through e, shall be measured from the closest lot line where any such use(s) is occurring to any of the
following:
a. Closest vehicular access to the property where the Registered Caregiver is located; and
b. Any area on the property utilized for Registered Caregiver or Registered Caregiver Cultivation
Area purposes.
4. In addition, no Registered Caregivers or Registered Caregiver Cultivation Areas, where permitted,
shall be sited within five hundred (500’) of a lot located in any of the following Zoning Districts:
(a) Village Center Proper (VCP);
(b) Rural Residential & Agriculture (RRA);
(c) Lake District (LD);
(d) Medium Density (MD);
(e) Business Transitional 1 (BT-1);
(f) Business Transitional 2 (BT-2);
(g) Wellhead Protection 1 (WH-1);
(h) Wellhead Protection 2 (WH-2);
(i) Limited Residential Shoreland Zone (LR);
(j) Limited Commercial Shoreland Zone (LC);
(k) Stream Protection Shoreland Zone (SP); and
(l) Resource Protection Shoreland Zone (RP).
5. The 500-foot minimum separation distance cited in Section 402.8.7.B.4 above shall be measured from
the closest lot line of any parcel located in any Zoning District listed in subsections "a" through "l" to
any of the following:
a. Closest vehicular access to a property where a Registered Caregiver is located; and
b. Any area on the property utilized for Registered Caregiver or Registered Caregiver Cultivation
Area purposes.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 75
C. Hours of Operation
Registered Caregivers and Registered Caregiver Cultivation Areas may be open for business only
between the hours of 8:00 AM and 8:00 PM, local prevailing time.
D. Signage and Advertising
All signage and advertising for Registered Caregivers and Registered Caregiver Cultivation Areas shall
comply with the standards of Chapter 406, the Sign Ordinance. In addition, no signage or advertising
shall use the word “marijuana”, “cannabis”, or any other word, phrase, or symbol commonly used or
understood to refer to marijuana unless such word, phrase, or symbol is immediately preceded by the
word “medical” in type and font that is at least as readily discernable as all other words, phrases, or
symbols on the sign. Such signage and advertising must clearly indicate that the products and services
are offered only for registered medical marijuana patients and registered primary caregivers. Signs,
advertising and marketing used by a Registered Caregiver for any purpose shall comply with all
requirements of 22 M.R.S.A. 2429-B and any rules adopted by the Department of Administrative and
Financial Services, and shall not be located within 1,000 feet of the property line of any of the uses
outlined in Subsection B.2 above, nor within 500 feet of any lot located in the Zoning Districts outlined
in Section B.4 above.
E. Security Measures
Security measures at Registered Caregivers and Registered Caregiver Cultivation Areas shall include, at
a minimum, the following:
1. Security surveillance cameras installed and operating 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to monitor all
entrances, and the interior and exterior of the premises, to discourage and facilitate the reporting of
criminal acts, loitering and nuisance activities occurring at the premises;
2. Door and window intrusion robbery and burglary alarm systems with audible and law enforcement
notification components that are professionally monitored and maintained in good working condition;
3. A locking safe permanently affixed to the premises that is suitable for storage of all prepared
marijuana and cash stored overnight on the premises;
4. Exterior lighting that illuminates the exterior walls of the premises and complies with applicable
ordinances of the Town;
5. Deadbolt locks on all exterior doors and locks or bars on any other access points (e.g. windows); and
6. All security recordings shall be preserved for at least seventy-two (72) hours by the Registered
Caregiver. The Registered Caregiver shall provide local law enforcement or its designee with the name
and functioning telephone number of a 24-hour on-call person to whom the Town or local law
enforcement may provide notice of any operating problems associated with the Registered Caregiver or
Registered Caregiver Cultivation Area.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 76
F. Caregivers and Patients
Cultivation, processing and/or sales of Medical Marijuana in any zoning district other than a zoning
district that allows Registered Caregivers and Registered Caregiver Cultivation Areas shall be limited to
Qualifying Patients and Caregivers who are not required to register with the Maine Department of
Administrative and Financial Services pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. 2423-A(3)(C), as may be amended.
F. On-site Consumption of Medical Marijuana
The consumption, ingestion, or inhalation of Medical Marijuana on the premises of a Registered
Caregiver must occur indoors.
G. Visibility of Activities; Control of Emissions; and Disposal Plan
1. All activities of Registered Caregivers and Registered Caregiver Cultivation Areas , including,
without limitation, cultivating, growing, processing, displaying, selling and storage, shall be conducted
indoors.
2. No marijuana or paraphernalia shall be displayed or kept in a Registered Caregiver or Registered
Caregiver Cultivation Area so as to be visible from outside the premises.
3. Sufficient measures and means of preventing smoke, odors, debris, dust, fluids and other substances
from exiting the premises of a Registered Caregiver or Registered Caregiver Cultivation Area must be
provided at all times. Sufficient measures shall be provided for the proper disposal of all such materials,
items and other substances in a safe, sanitary and secure manner and in accordance with all applicable
federal, state and local laws and regulations.
4. Odor management. For all Registered Caregivers and Registered Caregiver Cultivation Areas, the
odor of marijuana must not be perceptible at the exterior of the building at the premises of the
Registered Caregiver or Registered Caregiver Cultivation Area, or at any adjoining use of the property.
Registered Caregivers and Registered Caregiver Cultivation Areas must utilize and properly maintain
appropriate ventilation and filtration systems to satisfy the odor standards contained herein. While these
standards do not mandate any particular equipment specifications with regard to filtration, Registered
Caregivers and Registered Caregiver Cultivation Areas are strongly encouraged to adopt best
management practices with regard to implementing state-of-the art technologies in mitigating marijuana
odor, such as air scrubbers and carbon filtration systems.
5. All Registered Caregivers and Registered Caregiver Cultivation Areas shall have in place an
operational plan for proper disposal of marijuana and related byproducts.
H. Quiet Enjoyment
The cultivation, processing or sale of Marijuana by Registered Caregivers shall not adversely affect the
health or safety of residences or nearby properties through the creation of mold, mildew, dust, glare,
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 77
heat, noise, noxious gasses, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts, or create a hazardous
condition due to the use or storage of material, processes, products or waste.
I. Code Compliance
Registered Caregivers and Registered Caregiver Cultivation Areas must be in compliance with all State
adopted codes applicable to municipalities, including, without limitation, National Electrical Code,
Uniform Plumbing Code, National Fire Prevention Association (NFPA) Codes and Standards, and
Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code.
J. Sale of Edible Products
No Edible Marijuana Products shall be sold, prepared, produced or assembled by a Registered
Caregiver, except in compliance with all operating and other requirements of state and local law and
regulation, including, without limitation, food establishment licensing requirements. Any goods
containing Marijuana for human consumption shall be stored in a secure area, and all Marijuana must be
labeled with a list of all chemical additives, such as non-organic pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers
used in the cultivation and production.
K. Other Laws Remain Applicable
Registered Caregivers and Registered Caregiver Cultivation Areas shall meet all operating and other
requirements of state and local law and regulation. To the extent the State of Maine has adopted or
adopts in the future any stricter law or regulation governing Registered Caregivers, the stricter law or
regulation shall control. Nothing in this Section 402.8.7 is intended to prohibit any lawful use,
possession or conduct pursuant to the Marijuana Legalization Act (28-B M.R.S.A. §§ 102 – 1504, as
may be amended from time to time and successor provisions thereof), unless otherwise prohibited by
this Chapter.
402.8.8 Business Development District 2 Standards
A. Accessory Uses. Drive through and drive-in facilities are allowed as an accessory use to the
permitted and conditional uses in the Business Development 2 District.
B. Uses per Principal Structure. Notwithstanding Section 402.6.2(D), no more than five permitted or
conditional uses are allowed in any principal structure in the Business Development 2 District. No
more than one (1) principal structure and its accessory buildings may be located on any one lot
unless all applicable space and dimensional standards are met separately for each principal structure
on the lot, subject to the conditions that apply to new principal structures in Section 402.6.2(D).
C. Sign Standards. Signage in the Business Development 2 District is subject to the standards in
Chapter 406, the Sign Ordinance, except that: (i) the maximum aggregate sign area may not exceed
two percent (2%) of the area of the building footprint per lot; and (ii) one freestanding sign and one
freestanding directory sign are permitted per frontage, with up to 100 square feet maximum sign area
allowed per sign; and (iii) the maximum sign area for wall, projecting and roof signs is 10% of the
wall area or roof area on which they are located and/or attached.
402.8.9 Light Manufacturing Overlay District Standards (LMOD)
A. Applicability
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 78
1. All uses that are either Permitted or Conditionally Permitted in the Light Manufacturing Overlay
District (LMOD) shall conform to applicable standards in this section 402.8.9 including any
referenced standards such as Design Standards.
2. Article 10 of this Ordinance contains the applicable Site Plan Review (SPR) thresholds, the
reviewing authority, and standards.
3. Subject to SPR thresholds and standards, LMOD uses for buildings up to 10,000 sq. ft. of
footprint area and/or total sq. ft. area shall be "Permitted" uses.
4. Subject to SPR thresholds and standards, LMOD uses for buildings from 10,000 sq. ft. to 20,000
sq. ft. of footprint area and/or total sq. ft. area shall be "Conditionally Permitted" uses.
5. Individual buildings larger than 20,000 sq. ft. of footprint area and/or total sq. ft. for uses
allowed in the LMOD are not permitted in the LMOD.
6. In addition to applicable SPR and Conditional Permitted use review(s), the applicant shall submit
written documentation detailing how each applicable LMOD standard will be met and
maintained.
7. The reviewing authority and CEO shall ensure that all LMOD uses meet and maintain the review
criteria and applicable standards.
8. All uses and standards that are applicable in the underlying Commercial Zoning District shall be
applicable except those specifically stated in the Ordinance to be applicable in the LMOD.
R. Review Criteria: In addition to other applicable review standards, the reviewing authority shall
ensure that uses on the property are consistent with this Ordinance and that the following criteria are
addressed:
9. Applicable standards established in Sections 402.8.9.C through 402.8.9.E of this Ordinance.
10. The applicant shall submit a detailed description of all proposed uses on the property including
the timing of such uses.
11. Proposed hours of operation shall be submitted by the applicant.
12. All areas proposed for outdoor storage, including temporary storage, shall be shown on the
submitted plan. The applicant shall submit written documentation of the proposed uses, the
proposed frequency for each area of the site, and how these uses meet the Outdoor Performance
Standards in Section 402.8.9.E of this Ordinance.
13. All areas proposed to be utilized for any outdoor manufacturing, fabrication, or processing that
is/are clearly ancillary to other allowed uses on the property shall be submitted as well as a
detailed description of the maximum frequency of such uses.
14. The applicant shall submit the maximum anticipated traffic generation with specific attention to
volumes during non-traditional business hours, the type of vehicular traffic (i.e. GVWR), and the
sources of these estimates. The reviewing authority may require a peer review of these estimates
at the applicant's expense.
15. The applicant shall submit documentation regarding the maximum estimated emissions and noise
generated on the property for all proposed uses. The reviewing authority may require a peer
review of these estimates at the applicant's expense.
S. Design Standard Applicability
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 79
16. All uses and/or structures, or change of use for uses that are either Permitted or Conditionally
Permitted in the LMOD that are within two hundred and fifty (250) feet of the edge of a
publically maintained road or right-of-way shall conform to Gray's Business Transitional District
Standards & Design Guidelines as determined by the reviewing authority.
17. Parking for all vehicles:
a. Strongly encouraged to be located behind building(s)
b. Discouraged close to the edge of a publically maintained road
c. Discouraged to be visible from a publically maintained road to avoid the prominence of
impervious surfaces.
d. Shared parking is encouraged
18. The internal layout of the site should anticipate possible future use(s) and/or other building(s) or
improvement(s) on the site.
19. The property should be designed from the initial development forward to be able to be served by
one (1) curb cut on a publically maintained road even when future use(s) or building(s) are added
over time.
20. The property should be designed from the initial development forward to provide vehicular
accessways to adjacent properties.
T. District Performance Standards
21. Noise inherently and recurrently generated shall not exceed 65 Dba between the hours of 7:00
AM and 7:00 PM and 55 Dba between 7:00 PM and 7:00 AM as measured at the property line
using a frequency weighting network and fast response on a sound level meter manufactured
according to standards prescribed by the American Standards Association.
22. No use(s) shall occur on the property that constitute a high-hazard storage or occupancy as
determined by the 2015 International Building Code as determined by the CEO.
23. Trucking Terminals are specifically prohibited.
24. Only one curb cut on a publically maintained road shall be permitted for each property. For
properties that contain more than four hundred (400) feet of frontage, the reviewing authority
may permit one curb cut for each 400 feet provided that the applicant demonstrates the practical
need.
25. All building, improvements, and parking areas for uses allowed in the LMOD shall be subject to
outdoor performance and design standards in this Ordinance.
26. For all uses allowed in the LMOD, a buffer at least fifty (50) feet in width is required from the
front lot line or edge of a publically maintained right-of-way and any property located in a
residential Zoning District.
27. Where no natural buffering can be maintained, landscaping for the purposes of these standards
including tree plantings, hedges, fencing, walling, and combinations thereof may be required by
the reviewing authority.
28. The 20,000 sq. ft. maximum footprint area and/or total sq. ft. established in Section 402.8.9.A.5
shall not allow multiple LMOD uses on the same parcel or immediately adjacent when the
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 80
aggregate footprint and/or total sq. ft. area exceeds the 20,000 sq. ft. The objective is to
encourage multiple uses and/or structures on the same parcel utilizing the same shared access in
accordance with applicable standards.
29. The proposed use(s) shall not create unsafe traffic conditions nor excessive traffic. Traffic
generation during non-traditional business hours shall be kept to a minimum to avoid
unnecessary adverse impacts to abutting properties.
30. All vibrations, smoke, heat or glare, fumes, dust, or odors noticeable at the property line shall be
kept to a minimum and not be objectionable as determined by the Reviewing Authority.
U. Outdoor Performance Standards
31. Outdoor manufacturing, fabrication, or processing shall not occur regularly and shall only be
permitted when, in aggregate, it is clearly ancillary to the principal use(s) occurring on the
property and shall only be allowed to occur intermittently. The reviewing authority shall review
detailed documentation submitted by the applicant to ensure this standard is met and that
sufficient measures have been taken to provide sufficient screening, buffering to minimize
adverse impacts to abutting properties and/or a publically maintained road.
32. No outdoor storage of any type is permitted within any minimum zoning setback applicable for
structures.
33. All outdoor storage areas shall be adequately fenced or screened as determined by the reviewing
authority. The reviewing authority shall have the ability to require sufficient landscaping in
addition to fencing when the storage area is located in a location that is visually prominent from
a publically maintained road or an adjacent property.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 81
ARTICLE 9 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
402.9.1 Duties and Authority of the Code Enforcement Officer
A. Code Enforcement Officer: It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of
Gray to enforce the provision of this Ordinance. If the code Enforcement Officer shall find that any
of the provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, he/she shall notify in writing the person
responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
necessary to correct it. He/she shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, building, or
structures, removal of illegal building or structures or of additions, alternations, or structural changes
thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by
this Ordinance to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. The Code
Enforcement Officer may employ such independent, recognized consultant necessary, at the expense
of the applicant, to assure compliance with performance standards of this code and abatement of
nuisances.
B. Legal Action and Violation: When any violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be found
to exist, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the Town Council who shall then initiate any and
all actions to be brought in the name of the Town.
C. Fines: Any person, firm or corporation being the owner of or having contact or use of any building
or premises who violates any of the provisions hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on
conviction thereof shall be fined not less than twenty-five (25) dollars nor more than one-hundred
(100) dollars. Each day such a violation is permitted to exist after notification thereof shall
constitute a separate offense. All fine collected hereunder shall insure to the Town of Gray.
D. Building Permits: No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally
altered without a permit thereof issued except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance,
except after written order from the Board of Appeals. A Building Permit secured under the
provisions of this Ordinance shall expire if the work or change is not commenced within six (6)
months of the date on which the permit is granted, and if the work or change is not substantially
completed within one (1) year of the date on which the permit is granted. All building permits
heretofore issued shall be subject to the provisions of this paragraph.
E. Application for Building Permit: All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by
plans drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact
sizes and locations and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. The application shall
include such other information as lawfully may be required by the Code Enforcement Officer to
determine conformance with and provide for the enforcement of this Ordinance.
F. Certificate of Occupancy:
1. New Buildings: No building hereafter erected shall be used or occupied in whole or in part until
the certificate of use and occupancy shall have been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
2. Building hereafter altered: No building hereafter enlarged, extended or altered to change from
one use group to another, in whole or in part, and no building hereafter altered for which a
certificate of use and occupancy has not been heretofore issued, shall be occupied or used until
the certificate shall have been issued by the building inspector, certifying that the work has been
completed in accordance with the provisions of the approved permit; except that any use or
occupancy, which was not discontinued during the work of alteration, shall be discontinued
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 82
within thirty (30) days after the completion of the alteration unless the required certificate is
secured from the Code Enforcement Officer.
3. Existing Buildings: Upon written request from the owner of an existing building, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate of use and occupancy provided there are no
violations of law or orders of the building officials pending, and it is established after inspection
and investigation that the alleged use of the building has heretofore existed. Nothing in the
Zoning Ordinance shall require the removal, alteration or abandonment of, or prevent the
continuance of the use and occupancy of a lawfully existing building, unless such use is deemed
to endanger public safety and welfare.
4. Changes in Use and Occupancy: After a change of use has been made in a building, the
reestablishment of a prior use that would not have been legal in a new building of the same type
of construction is prohibited unless all the applicable provisions of the Basic Code are complied
with. A change from one prohibited use, for which a permit has been granted, to another
prohibited use shall be deemed a violation of the Zoning Ordinance
G. Plumbing Permit: Must be obtained prior to issuance of a building permit. The State of Maine
Plumbing Code standards will be used. The application shall also furnish the Code Enforcement
Officer with reliable information relating to soils tests conducted in the sewage disposal area, in
accordance with any applicable state or Local law, code, or regulation and must demonstrate that soil
conditions are suitable for the absorption of waste materials from septic tanks. The results of the soil
tests shall be submitted on the HHE 200 form or Maine Department of Environmental Protection,
whichever is applicable.
402.9.2 Duties and Authority of the Board of Zoning Appeals
A. Appointment and Composition:
1. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Town Council of the Town of Gray, and
shall consist of five (5) members and two (2) associates, all of whom shall be legal residents of
the Town of Gray. Terms of members shall be for three (3) years except that initial
appointments shall be such that the terms of office of no more than two (2) members shall expire
in any single year. The board shall elect annually a chair and vice-chair from its membership. A
recorder shall keep the minutes of the proceedings of the Board of Appeals, which shall show the
vote of each member upon each question. All minutes of the Board shall be public record. A
quorum shall consist of three (3) members.
2. Town Council members and/or their spouses may not serve as members or associate members of
the Board.
3. Any question of whether a particular issue involves a conflict of interest sufficient to disqualify a
member from voting thereon shall be decided by a majority vote of the members, except the
member who is being challenged.
4. A member of the Board may be dismissed for cause by the Town Council upon written charges
and after public hearing.
B. Powers and Duties:
Appeals shall lie from the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer to the Board of Appeals and
from the Board of Appeals to the Superior Court according to the provision of Maine Revised
Statues. The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties:
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 83
1. Administrative Appeals: To hear and decide where it is alleged there is an error in any order,
required, decision, or determination by the Code Enforcement Officer in the enforcement of this
Ordinance. The actions of the Code Enforcement Officer may be modified or reversed by the
Board of Appeals, by concurring vote of at least three (3) members of the Board. Decisions of
the Code Enforcement Officer may be reversed only upon a finding that the decision is clearly
contrary to specific provisions of this Ordinance.
2. Variance Appeals: To hear and decide, upon appeal, in specific cases where a relaxation of the
terms of this Ordinance would not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to
conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal
enforcement of this Ordinance would result in unnecessary or undue hardship. A variance may
be granted by the Board only where strict application of the Ordinance, or a provision thereof, to
the petitioner and his/her property would cause undue hardship. The words “undue hardship”
mean:
a. That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted;
b. That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the
general conditions in the neighborhood;
c. That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and
d. That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
Establishment or expansion of a use or structure otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by
variance, not shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the
Zoning District or uses in adjoining Zoning Districts. The Board of Appeals shall grant a
variance only by concurring vote of at least three (3) members and in so doing may prescribe
conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this Ordinance.
3. Practical Difficulty Variance: The Board may grant a variance from the dimensional standards
of the Zoning Ordinance when strict application of the ordinance to the petitioner and the
petitioner's property would cause a practical difficulty and when the following conditions exist:
a. The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the
general condition of the neighborhood;
b. The granting of a variance will not produce an undesirable change in the character of the
neighborhood and will not unreasonably detrimentally affect the use or market value of
abutting properties;
c. The practical difficulty is not the result of action taken by the petitioner or a prior owner;
d. No other feasible alternative to a variance is available to the petitioner;
e. The granting of a variance will not unreasonably adversely affect the natural environment;
and
f. The property is not located in whole or in part within shoreland areas as described in Title 38,
section 435.
As used in this subsection, "dimensional standards" means and is limited to ordinance provisions
relating to lot area, lot coverage, frontage and setback requirements.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 84
As used in this subsection, "practical difficulty" means that the strict application of the ordinance
to the property precludes the ability of the petitioner to pursue a use permitted in the zoning
district in which the property is located and results in significant economic injury to the
petitioner.
4. Variance Review Criteria: In hearing variance appeals under this section, the Board of Appeals
shall determine that the applicant has demonstrated that all of the undue hardship or practical
difficulty criteria in sub-Sections 2 and 3 above have been met. Additionally, the Board shall
consider the following criteria in its decision to grant any variances or impose conditions:
a. What effect will be proposed variance have on the prevailing character of the area?
b. Does the proposed variance require special screening or fencing to separate or protect the
property of abutting owners?
c. Will the proposed variance create drainage, erosion or flooding problems?
d. Will the proposed variance increase water pollution?
e. Will the proposed variance generate vehicular traffic, access circulation or parking conditions
which create hazardous situations?
f. Will granting of the variance violate any of the performance standards of this Ordinance
apart from the specific relief authorized by this Section?
g. Will the proposed variance create to any degree nuisances to abutting property owners?
h. Is the variance request the least modification of the Zoning Regulations necessary to afford
relief?
i. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as
it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this Ordinance.
C. Appeal Procedure:
1. In all cases, persons aggrieved by decision of the Code Enforcement Officer shall commence
their appeal within thirty (30) days after a decision is made by the Code Enforcement Officer.
The appeal shall be filed with the Board of Appeals on forms approved by the Board and
aggrieved person shall specifically set forth on the form the grounds for the appeal
2. In appeals involving variances, the applicant shall include as part of the appeal application,
information demonstrating that the criteria listed in Section 402.9.2 B above are met for the
applicant’s situation.
3. The fee to cover the administrative costs of an appeal shall be set by the Council annually.
4. Following the filing of an appeal, and before taking action on any appeal, the Board of Appeals
shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within thirty (30) days. The Board of Appeals shall
notify the Code Enforcement Officer and the Planning Board, at least twenty (20) days in
advance, of the time and place of the hearing, and shall publish notice of the hearing at least ten
(10) days in advance in a newspaper of general circulation in the area.
5. In the case of administrative or variance appeals, the Board of Appeals shall notify by mail the
appellant and only the owners of property abutting that property for which an appeal is taken at
least ten (10) days in advance of the hearing, of the nature of the appeal and of the time and place
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 85
of the public hearing thereon. For the purpose of this section, abutting properties shall include
property directly across the street from the property for which the variance is requested.
6. The owners of property shall be considered to be those against whom taxes are assessed. Failure
of any property owner to receive a notice of public hearing shall not necessitate another hearing
nor invalidate any action by the Board of Appeals.
7. At any hearing, a party may be represented by agent or attorney. Hearing shall not be continued
to other times except for good cause.
8. The Code Enforcement Officer or his/her designated assistant shall attend all hearings and may
present to the Board of Appeals all plans, photographs, or other material he or she deems
appropriate for an understanding of the appeal.
9. The Board may receive any oral or documentary evidence but shall provide as a matter of policy
for the exclusion of irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence. All parties shall have
the right to present their case of defense by oral or documentary evidence, to submit rebuttal
evidence and to conduct cross-examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure of
the fact.
10. The transcript of testimony, if any, and exhibits, together with all papers, and requests filed in the
proceedings, shall constitute the record. All decisions shall become a part of the record and shall
include a statement of findings and conclusions, as well as the reasons or basis therefore, upon
all the material issues of fact, law or discretion presented and the appropriate order, relief or
denial thereof. Notice of any decision shall be mailed to the petitioner or his/her representative
or agent within seven (7) days of their decision.
11. In reviewing appeals involving variances the Board of Appeals shall follow the criteria outlined
under “Variance Review Criteria” of this section before reaching a decision. In granting any
variance, the board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of this Ordinance.
12. If the Board grants a variance under this Section, a certificate indicating the name of the current
property owner, identifying the property by reference to the last recorded deed in its chain of title
and indicating the fact that a variance, including any conditions on the variance, has been granted
and the date of the granting, shall be prepared in recordable form. This certificate must be
recorded in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds within ninety (90) days of the date of the
final written approval of the variance or the variance is void. The variance is not valid until
recorded as provided in this subsection. For the purpose of this subsection, the date of the final
written approval shall be the date stated on the written approval.
13. Upon submission of a recorded certificate of variance approval, the Code Enforcement Officer
may issue a Building Permit in accordance with the conditions of the approval.
14. A right of appeal under the provisions of this Ordinance secured by vote of the Board of Appeals
shall expire if the work or change involved is not commenced within six (6) months of the date
of which the appeal is granted and if the work or change is not substantially completed within
one (1) year of the date on which such appeal is granted.
15. If the Board of Appeals shall deny an appeal, a second appeal of a similar nature shall not be
brought before the Board within one (1) year from the date of the denial by the Board of the first
appeal, unless in the opinion of a majority of the Board, substantial new evidence shall be put
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 86
forward or unless the Board finds, in its sole and exclusive judgment, that an error or mistake of
law of misunderstanding of fact shall have been made.
16. Any party may take an appeal within forty five (45) days of the vote on the original decision, to
Superior Court from any order, relief or denial in accordance with Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure, Article 80B. This time period may be extended by the court upon motion for good
cause shown. The hearing before the Superior Court must be without a jury.
17. The Board of Appeals may reconsider any decision reached under this section within forty-five
(45) days of its prior decision. A request to the board to reconsider a decision must be filed
within 10 days of the decision that is to be reconsidered. A vote to reconsider and the action
taken on that reconsideration must occur and be completed within forty-five (45) days of its prior
decision. The Board may conduct additional hearings and receive additional evidence and
testimony as provided in this subsection.
402.9.3 Duties and Authority of the Planning Board for Approval of
Conditional Permitted Uses and Site Plan Review Permits
A. Authorization: The Planning Board is hereby authorized to hear and decide upon applications for
Conditional Permitted Use Permits and Site Plan Review Permits, in accordance with the provisions
of this ordinance. The Planning Board shall approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or
disapprove an application for a Conditional Permitted Use Permit in accordance with the criteria of
this Section 402.9.3. No Conditional Permitted Use Permit shall be authorized unless specific
provision for such Conditional Permitted Use is made in this Ordinance. The Planning Board shall
also approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or disapprove an application for a Site Plan
Review Permit in accordance with the criteria of Section 402.10.
B. Existing Conditional Permitted Use or Structure: A Conditional Permitted Use which existed prior
to the effective date of this ordinance may not be changed to another Conditional Permitted Use nor
substantially expanded or altered except in conformity with all regulations of this ordinance
pertaining to Conditional Permitted Uses. Substantial expansion shall be defined as:
1. Floor space increase of twenty-five (25%) percent; or,
2. New materials or processes not previously associated with the existing use.
No changes shall be made in any approved Conditional Permitted Use without approval of the
change by the Planning Board.
C. Application Procedure: A person informed by the Code Enforcement Officer that a proposed use
requires a Conditional Permitted Use permit shall file an application for the permit with the Planning
Board on forms provided for the purpose. The applicant shall be responsible for a filing fee, which
covers administrative and legal advertisement costs. All plans for Conditional Permitted Uses
presented for approval under this section shall be drawn at a scale of not smaller than one (1) inch
equals fifty (50) feet and show the following information unless the Planning Board waives these
requirements:
1. The name and address of the applicant (or his authorized agent) plus the name of the proposed
development, and a copy of the deed or record of ownership, the assessor's map and lot number.
2. Total floor area, ground coverage, and location of each proposed building, structure, or addition.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 87
3. Accurate depiction of the property in question. In most cases a mortgage survey will be
adequate, but the Board may request a perimeter survey of the parcel made and certified by a
registered land surveyor licensed in Maine, relating to reference points, showing true north point,
graphic scale, corners of parcel and date of survey and total acreage.
4. The appropriate fees as established by the Town Council.
D. Public Hearing: Within ten (10) days of the filing of an application, the Planner shall determine
whether the application is complete. If the application is not complete, the Planner shall notify the
applicant in writing of the information needed to make the application complete. The Planning
Board shall hold a public hearing on the application within thirty (30) days of determining that the
application is complete.
1. The Planner shall notify by regular U.S. mail, first class, postage prepaid, the applicant and the
owners of all abutting property involved at least ten (10) days in advance of the hearing, of the
nature of the application and of the time and place of the public hearing. Notice shall also be
advertised at least seven (7) days in advance in a newspaper of general circulation in the area
2. The owners of property shall be considered to be those against whom taxes are assessed. Failure
of any property owner to receive a notice of public hearing shall not necessitate another hearing
or invalidate any action by the Planning Board.
3. The Planner, Code Enforcement Officer, or a designated assistant shall attend all hearings and
may present to the Planning Board all plans, photographs or other material deemed appropriate
for an understanding of the application.
4. The applicant’s case shall be heard first. To maintain orderly procedure, each side shall proceed
without interruption. Questions may be asked through the Chair. All persons at the hearing shall
abide by the order of the Chairman.
E. Decision
1. Within thirty (30) days of the public hearing the Planning Board shall reach a decision on the
Conditional Permitted Use application and shall inform, in writing, the applicant and the Code
Enforcement Officer of its decision and shall prepare detailed finding and conclusions. Upon
notification of the decision of the Planning Board, the Code Enforcement Officer, as instructed,
shall immediately issue, issue with conditions prescribed by the Board, or deny a Building
Permit.
2. A Conditional Permitted Use Permit secured under the provisions of this ordinance by vote of
the Planning Board shall expire if the work or change involved is not substantially started within
two (2) years of the date on which the Conditional Permitted Use is authorized.
3. Any party may take an appeal within forty five (45) days of the vote on the original decision, to
Superior Court from any order, relief or denial in accordance with Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure, Article 80B. This time period may be extended by the court upon motion for good
cause shown. The hearing before the Superior Court must be without a jury.
4. The Planning Board may reconsider any decision reached under this section within thirty (30)
days of its prior decision. The Board may conduct additional hearings and receive additional
evidence and testimony as provided in this subsection.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 88
F. Standards Applicable to Conditional Permitted Uses: It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
demonstrate that the proposed use meets all of the following criteria. The Board shall approve the
application unless it makes written findings that one or more of these criteria have not been met:
1. Will be compatible with the general character of the neighborhood with regard to design, scale,
and bulk of proposed structures;
2. Will not have a significant detrimental effect on the use and peaceful enjoyment of abutting
property as a result of noise, vibrations, fumes, odor, dust, light or glare.
3. Will not have a significant adverse effect on adjacent or nearby property values;
4. Will not result in significant hazards to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or significant traffic
congestion;
5. Will not result in significant fire danger;
6. Will not result in significant flood hazards or flood damage, drainage problems, ground or
surface water contamination, or soil erosion;
7. Will be served adequately by, but will not overburden, existing public services and facilities,
including fire protection services, roads, water and storm drainage systems.
Upon a showing that a proposed use is a Conditional Permitted Use in the district where it is to be
located, a Conditional Permitted Use permit shall be granted unless the Board determines that the
proposed use will not meet one of the standards set forth in paragraphs 1. through 7. of this
subsection, due to unique or distinctive characteristics or effects associated with the proposed use or
its location which differ substantially from the characteristics or effects which would normally occur
from such a use in that district. In order to have “significant” impacts adequate to deny a permit, a
proposed Conditional Permitted Use must have impacts that are measurable by objective standards
and are readily apparent to disinterested parties.
G. Conditions Attached to Conditional Permitted Uses: Upon consideration of the factors listed above,
the Planning Board may attach such conditions, in addition to those specifically required in this
Ordinance that it finds necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance. Violation of any of these
conditions shall be a violation of this Ordinance. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to
specifications for:
1. Type of vegetation used for buffering;
2. Increased setbacks and yards;
3. Specified sewage disposal and water supply facilities;
4. Landscaping and planting screens;
5. Period of operation;
6. Operational controls;
7. Professional inspection and maintenance;
8. Deed restrictions, restrictive covenants;
9. Locations of parking and signs; type of construction; or
10. Any other conditions necessary to fulfill the purposes of this ordinance.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 89
In evaluating each application the Board may request the assistance of the County Soil and Water
Conservation District, a State or Federal agency, or consultant which can provide technical
assistance.
H. Projects needing Site Plan Review
When an applicant needs Site Plan Approval from the Planning Board due to the scale of the project,
the Conditional Permitted Use review shall be conducted and completed prior to commencing
deliberations and determination of compliance with the Site Plan Review criteria and standards. In
such cases, the time frames and procedures of Article 10 for Site Plan Review shall apply to both
applications, which shall be combined into a single, two-step proceeding (conditional use review &
site plan review). The applicant may, however, choose to submit a separate application for
Conditional Permitted Use review in order to get a preliminary determination on the Conditional Use
criteria prior to fully designing the project.
I. Review Fees & Consultant Escrows: The Town Council shall annually set the amount of all fees
required by this Ordinance. The fee structure shall include for Conditional Permitted Use
applications the following fees for the Planning Board to use in hiring independent consulting
services to review the application.
1. The applicant shall pay into a special account the cost to the Town of hiring independent
consulting services according to the schedule set by the Town Council. If the balance in the
special account is drawn down by seventy-five (75%) percent of the required escrow fund, the
Board shall notify the applicant and require an additional amount. Any balance in the account
remaining after a final decision on the application shall be returned to the applicant.
2. In the event that an application involves both Conditional Permitted Use Review and Site Plan
Review, the applicant shall establish a single review escrow account sufficient to cover review
costs.
402.9.4 Severability of Individual Ordinance Sections and Provisions
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid such decision
shall not invalidate any other section or provisions of this Ordinance.
402.9.5 Conflicts with Other Ordinances
This Ordinance shall not repeal, annul, or in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with
any other rules, regulation, bylaw, permit or provision of law. Where this Ordinance imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of land, buildings, or structures the provision of this Ordinance shall control.
402.9.6 Planning Board Rules of Procedure
In order to provide for the efficient management of its duties and the fair hearing of items coming before
it, the Planning Board may adopt and amend written rules governing the conduct of its meetings,
provided such rules shall not conflict with this Ordinance or the provisions of any other Ordinance or
Charter requirement. Such rules may include a provision that the Town Planner, in conjunction with the
Planning Board Chair, may refuse to schedule an item for the Planning Board agenda unless and until
the application in question is complete, including all Town staff reports. The Planning Board has the
right to postpone a decision on an application to the Board if a significant amendment or additional
information is proposed after the initial completed submission.
402.9.7 Effects of New Ordinance Enactment
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 90
The Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Gray originally adopted March 1, 1958, and as subsequently
amended through January of 2008, is hereby repealed as of the effective date of this new Zoning
Ordinance. The Town of Gray Shoreland Zoning Ordinance shall remain unaffected by the adoption of
the Ordinance.
402.9.8 Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map
All amendments to the Town of Gray Zoning Ordinance and Map must be in conformance with the
Comprehensive Plan. Amendments which affect the Wellhead Protection or Business Transitional 2
Districts must be reviewed by the Gray Water District.
402.9.9 Conditional or Contract Zoning
Addition of 402.9.9 adopted: November 15, 2011 / Effective December 15, 2011 (Note: Refer to Policy
adopted by Town Council October 16, 2012 for process)
Pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4352.8 conditional or contract zoning is hereby authorized where, for
reasons such as the unusual nature or unique location of the development proposed, the Town Council
finds it necessary or appropriate to impose, by agreement with the property owner or otherwise, certain
conditions or restrictions not generally applicable to other properties similarly zoned. All rezoning
under this section shall establish rezoned areas which are consistent with the existing and permitted uses
within the original zones. Nothing in this section shall authorize a rezoning, or an agreement to change
or retain a zone, which is inconsistent with the Town’s Comprehensive Plan.
A. The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing prior to any property being rezoned under this
section. Notice of this hearing shall be posted in the town clerk’s office at least thirteen (13) days
prior to the public hearing and shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the
town at least two (2) times, the date of the first publication must be at least twelve (12) days prior to
the hearing and the second notice at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Notice shall also be
sent to the owners of all property abutting the property to be rezoned at their last-known address.
This notice shall contain a copy of the proposed conditions and restrictions, with a map indicating
the property to be rezoned.
B. Conditions and restrictions imposed under the authority of this section shall relate only to the
physical development and operation of the property and may include, by way of example:
1. Limitations on the number and types of permitted uses;
2. Restrictions on the scale and density of development;
3. Specifications for the design and layout of building and other improvements;
4. Schedules for commencement and completion of construction;
5. Performance guarantees securing completion and maintenance of improvements, and guarantees
against defects;
6. Preservation of open space and buffers, and protection of natural areas and historic sites;
7. Contributions toward the provision of municipal services required by the development; and,
8. Provisions for enforcement and remedies for breach of any condition restriction.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 91
ARTICLE 10 – SITE PLAN REVIEW
402.10.1 Purposes of Site Plan Review
The site plan review provisions set forth in this Section are intended to protect the public health and
safety, promote the general welfare of the community, and conserve the environment by assuring that
nonresidential and multi-family construction is designed and developed in a manner which assures that
adequate provisions are made for traffic safety and access; emergency access; water supply; sewage
disposal; management of stormwater, erosion, and sedimentation; protection of the groundwater;
protection of the environment, wildlife habitat, fisheries, and unique natural areas; protection of historic
and archaeological resources; minimizing the adverse impacts on adjacent properties; and fitting the
project harmoniously into the fabric of the community.
402.10.2 Applicability of Site Plan Review
A person who has right, title, or interest in a parcel of land must obtain site plan approval prior to
commencing any of the following activities on the parcel, obtaining a building or plumbing permit for
the activities, or undertaking any alteration or improvement of the site including grubbing or grading:
A. The construction or placement of any new building or structure for a nonresidential use, including
accessory buildings and structures, if such buildings or structures have a total area for all floors of
one thousand (1,000) square feet or more.
B. The expansion of an existing nonresidential building or structure, including accessory buildings, if
the enlargement increases the total area for all floors within a five (5) year period by more than
twenty (20%) percent of the existing total floor area or one thousand (1,000 sq. ft.) square feet,
whichever is greater.
C. The conversion of an existing building in which one thousand (1,000 sq. ft.) or more square feet of
total floor area are converted from residential to nonresidential use.
D. The establishment of a new nonresidential use even if no buildings or structures are proposed,
including uses such as, cemeteries, golf courses, and other nonstructural nonresidential uses.
E. The conversion of an existing nonresidential use, in whole or in part, to another nonresidential use if
the new use changes the basic nature of the existing use such that it increases the intensity of on- or
off-site impacts of the use subject to the standards and criteria of site plan review.
F. The construction of a residential building containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
G. The modification or expansion of an existing residential structure that increases the number of
dwelling units in the structure by three (3) or more in any five (5) year period.
H. The conversion of an existing nonresidential building or structure, in whole or in part, into three (3)
or more dwelling units within a five (5) year period.
I. The construction or expansion of paved areas or other impervious surfaces, including walkways,
access drives, and parking lots involving an area of more than two thousand five hundred (2,500 sq.
ft.) square feet within any three (3) year period.
402.10.3 Exempt Activities
The following activities shall not require site plan approval. Certain of these activities will, however,
require the owner to obtain a building permit, plumbing permit or other state or local approvals:
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 92
A. The construction, alteration, or enlargement of a single family or two-family dwelling, including
accessory buildings and structures.
B. The placement, alteration, or enlargement of a single manufactured housing or mobile home
dwelling, including accessory buildings and structures on individually owned lots.
C. Agricultural activities, including agricultural buildings and structures, unless located in a Wellhead
District or the Business Transitional 2 District.
D. Timber harvesting and forest management activities.
402.10.4 Review and Approval Authority
The review and approval authority for site plans shall depend on the classification of the project:
A. Major Developments
The Planning Board is authorized to review and act on all site plans for major developments. In
considering site plans under this section, the Planning Board may act to approve, disapprove, or
approve the project with such conditions as are authorized by this Section.
B. Minor Developments
The Staff Review Committee is authorized to review all site plans for minor developments and may
approve, disapprove, or approve the project with such conditions as are authorized by this Section. In
addition, the Committee may reclassify a minor development as a major development and forward it
to the Planning Board with its recommendations for Planning Board action.
402.10.5 Staff Review Committee
A. Staff Review Committee Established
There is hereby created a Staff Review Committee. The Staff Review Committee shall consist of the
Planner, Code Enforcement Officer, and Planning Board Chairman or his/her designee.
B. Operation of the Staff Review Committee
The Planner shall serve as Chair of the Staff Review Committee and shall be responsible for calling
meetings of the Committee, presiding at its meetings, and maintaining the records of the Committee.
The Staff Review Committee shall meet biweekly or on an as-needed basis.
C. Authority of the Staff Review Committee:
1. In addition to reviewing Minor Developments for Site Plan Review projects as authorized in
Section 402.10.4, the Staff Review Committee is also authorized to review the establishment of
or expanding a new use(s) that requires Staff Review Committee approval as expressly stated in
this Ordinance within the thresholds for a minor development.
2. In addition to the powers granted to the Committee under the Zoning Ordinance, it shall have the
authority to conduct business and make such recommendations as shall be expressly delegated to
it by any other ordinance or Town Council order.
402.10.6 Classification of Projects
The Planner shall classify each project as a major or minor development. Minor developments are
smaller scale, less complex projects for which a less complex review process is adequate to protect the
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 93
Town’s interests. Major developments are larger, more complex projects for which a more detailed
review process and additional information are necessary.
A. Minor Developments
Projects meeting one or more of the thresholds listed below shall be considered a Minor
Development. For calculation purposes, the baseline for meeting these threshold standards shall
consider all changes during the five (5) year period prior to the date of application for Site Plan
Review:
1. Construction or addition of 2,500 square feet or fewer of gross non-residential floor area.
2. Converting the use of an existing structure and/or property from one (1) lawfully existing nonresidential
use to another single non-residential use provided that a building permit is not
required for 50% or more of the structure.
3. Addition of one (1) non-residential use to a structure that is currently utilized for one (1) lawfully
existing non-residential use.
4. Adding less than 10,000 square feet of impervious surface and associated infrastructure, such as
drainage, to one parcel. Existing impervious surfaces shall be counted to determine the 10,000
sq. ft. calculation. Any increase in impervious cover that exceeds 10,000 sq. ft. constitutes a
Major Development for Site Plan Review purposes.
5. Establishing or expanding a municipal use on one (1) Town-owned parcel within the thresholds
stated above for a Minor Development.
6. Components of a Major Development for Site Plan Review specifically delegated by the
Planning Board subject to Planning Board appear per 402.10.7.D.
7. Establishing or expanding a new use(s) that requires Staff Review Committee approval as
expressly provided in this Ordinance within the thresholds for a minor development.
B. Major Developments
Projects meeting any one of the following require Site Plan Review approval by the Planning Board:
1. Construction or addition of more than 2,500 square feet of gross non-residential floor area in the
previous five years including square footage duly approved by the Staff Review Committee as a
minor development.
2. Change of use of a structure and/or property principally used for residential purposes to one (1)
or more non-residential uses
3. Addition of two (2) or more non-residential uses within the previous five years
4. Construction of impervious surfaces exceeding 10,000 square feet. Existing impervious surfaces
shall be counted to determine the 10,000 sq. ft. calculation.
5. Projects than involve two (2) or more parcels/properties.
6. Projects that trigger Conditional Use review in addition to Site Plan Review.
7. Any Site Plan Review project(s) which is/are not classified as Minor Developments
402.10.7 Site Plan Review Procedure for Minor Developments
A. Preapplication Conference
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 94
Applicants for site plan review of a minor development are encouraged to schedule a preapplication
conference with the Planner. The purpose of this meeting is to familiarize the applicant with the
review procedures and submission requirements, and approval criteria, and to familiarize the Planner
with the nature of the project. Such review shall not cause the plan to be a pending application or
proceeding under Title 1 M.R.S.A. §302. No decisions relative to the plan may be made at this
meeting.
In connection with the preapplication review, the Planner may determine that an on-site inspection
be held to familiarize the Staff Review Committee with the project site. The on-site inspection shall
be scheduled by the Planner and shall be attended by the applicant and/or the applicant’s
representative and members of the Staff Review Committee. All abutters to the property shall be
notified, in writing, of the time and date of the site inspection.
B. Application Process for Minor Developments
The property owner or his/her representative must submit a formal minor development application
for review and approval to the Planner.
1. Receipt of Application and Review for Completeness
Upon receipt of the application, the Planning Office shall provide the applicant with a dated
receipt showing the nature of the application and the fees paid. Within five (5) working days of
receipt of an application for a minor development, the Planner shall review the application and
determine if the application meets the submission requirements. The Planner shall review any
requests for a waiver from the submission requirements and shall act on these requests prior to
determining the completeness of the application. If the application is incomplete, the Planner
shall notify the applicant in writing of this determination, specify what additional materials or
information are required to complete the application, and advise the applicant that the revised
application package will be re-reviewed for completeness when it is resubmitted.
2. Notifications of Pending Application
Once the application is deemed to be complete, the Planner shall notify the applicant and the
Chair of the Planning Board in writing of this determination and the action on any waivers and
shall provide copies of the application to the Code Enforcement Officer, and Department Heads.
The Planner shall notify all abutters to the site as shown on the assessor’s records, by first-class
mail that an application has been filed. This notice shall contain a brief description of the
proposed activity and the name of the applicant. It shall advise the party that a copy of the
application is available for inspection and that written comments on the application will be
received and considered by the Staff Review Committee, and provide the date, time, and place of
the Committee meeting at which the application will be considered. Failure of any abutter to
receive such notice shall not be grounds for delay of any consideration of the application nor
denial of the project.
C. Staff Review Committee Meetings
Within ten (10) working days of the application being determined to be complete, the Staff Review
Committee shall consider the application at a regular meeting of the Committee. The Planner shall
notify the applicant, Chair of the Planning Board, and abutters, in writing of the date, time, and place
of the meeting.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 95
The Staff Review Committee shall consider if the application complies with the Site Plan Review
standards and criteria and any specific Ordinance requirements for the use proposed. If the
Committee finds that the application conforms to these requirements, it shall make written findings
of fact and it shall vote to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. Approval by
the Committee shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Committee. The
applicant, Chair of the Planning Board, and abutters shall be notified in writing of the Committee’s
action.
For uses listed in Table 402.5.3 as Conditional Permitted Uses, compliance with Site Plan Review
Criteria and approval by the Staff Review Committee as a minor development shall be considered
satisfactory demonstration of compliance with the Conditional Use Criteria of Section 402.9.3.G.
D. Appeal of Staff Review Committee Decisions to the Planning Board
Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Staff Review Committee, including the applicant, may seek
an appellate review by the Planning Board. The appellant shall have ten (10) working days in which
to file such an appeal with the Chair of the Planning Board. The appeal must be in writing and must
specify why the appellant believes the action of the Staff Review Committee was in error.
If an appeal is filed, the application shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the
Planning Board subject to notification requirements. The appellant, applicant, and abutters shall be
notified in writing of the Board meeting on the appeal. The Planner shall provide members of the
Board with copies of the application, supporting material, staff review comments and decision of the
Committee.
The Board shall review the existing record of materials on an appellate basis and shall determine if
the application conforms to the approval criteria and standards. If the Board finds that the application
conforms to the standards, it shall approve the application; otherwise it shall deny the same.
The Planner shall notify the appellant, applicant, and abutters who participated in the review of the
action of the Planning Board.
E. Application Fees for Review of Minor Developments
Application fees and technical review fees shall be the same as for major developments and shall be
set by the Town Council.
F. Submission Requirements for Review of Minor Developments
Site Plan applications for Minor Developments shall contain the submissions indicated in Sections
402.10.10 A (Site Inventory) and 402.10.10 C (Site Plan Submissions) unless waived by the Planner
and/or Site Plan Review Committee.
402.10.8 Site Plan Review Procedure for Major Developments
A. Pre-application Conference
Applicants for site plan review of a major development are required to schedule a pre-application
conference with the Planning Board. The purpose of this meeting is to familiarize the applicant with
the review procedures and submission requirements, and approval criteria, and to familiarize the
Planning Board with the nature of the project. Such review shall not cause the plan to be a pending
application or proceeding under Title 1 M.R.S.A. §302. No decisions relative to the plan may be
made at this meeting.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 96
B. Procedure and Information Required for Pre-Application Conferences
Applicants for site plan review of a major development are required to provide fourteen (14) copies
of a packet ready for distribution to the Planning Board containing the submittals detailed in this
section. The Town Planner shall have the authority to determine if the pre-application submittal is
complete to place the item on the next Planning Board agenda.
The applicant's oral presentation and submitted materials regarding the present conditions and scope
and nature of the project must provide adequate information to allow the Planning Board to
understand the project, identify possible concerns, and provide meaningful input and to determine
whether the approval standards have been met.
The submittal shall consist of following three components:
1. Narrative and site photographs
The applicant shall provide an accurate narrative outlining the present on-site conditions as well
as the nature of the proposed development. In addition to aerial and/or on-site photographs
(color 11" x 17") that accurately depict present on-site conditions, the narrative must include the
following:
a. Description of existing development constraints and implications on the proposed
development;
b. The proposed use of the parcel including conceptual zoning use classification(s);
c. Initial estimate of the traffic generation for the proposed use;
d. Estimates of water use and wastewater generation;
e. Initial input, as appropriate, from State of Maine regulatory agencies, such as the DEP, DOT
and the Department of Public Safety;
f. List of ordinance waivers (as opposed to Zoning Ordinance variances) requested;
g. Any unusual or hidden site characteristics that relate to the approval standards; and
h. Any other matters with regard to which the applicant seeks comments from the Planning
Board.
2. Initial Site Inventory Plan
The applicant shall provide one or more scaled plans containing readily available information
including the following:
a. Basic parcel information, i.e., boundaries, size, zoning district(s), north arrow, etc.;
b. Surrounding land uses and accesses to street;
c. Significant site features, both natural and developed, including significant trees, rock
outcroppings, any developed portions;
d. Estimated sight distance in both directions entering the street;
e. Readily available soils information, such as the 1974 Cumberland County Medium Intensity
Soils maps and soil descriptions for the requisite site;
f. Topographic information, such as USGS maps delineating site;
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 97
g. Wetland information that is readily apparent on-site or available through National Wetland
Inventory Maps;
h. Location and size/extent of any stormwater measures on site, such as culverts; and
i. Location and features on site that may be subject to State regulatory agency review.
3. Conceptual Site Development Plan
The applicant shall provide a plan, to a readable scale, containing the following information:
a. Overall site layout including access in, out, and within the parcel;
b. Approximate location of water supply and wastewater disposal;
c. Estimate of the size, extent, and location of impervious surfaces;
d. Anticipated stormwater measures and their location;
e. Buffering and screening that is proposed to be retained and/or added;
f. Site elements to be retained; and
g. Location and size of anticipated structures.
C. Application Process for Major Developments
1. Receipt of Application
Upon receipt of a formal site plan review application, the Planner shall give a dated receipt to the
applicant.
2. Determination of Completeness
Within ten (10) working days of the receipt of a formal development review application, the
Planner shall review the material and determine whether or not the submission is complete. If the
application is determined to be incomplete, the Planner shall notify the applicant in writing of
this finding, shall specify the additional materials required to make the application complete and
shall advise the applicant that the application will not be considered by the Board until the
additional information is submitted to the Board. These steps, except the notification
requirements, shall be repeated until the application is found to be complete.
3. Placement on the Planning Board Agenda
When the Planner determines that the application is complete, the Planner shall notify the
applicant in writing of this finding, and place the item on the agenda of the Planning Board for
substantive review at the next available meeting subject to the notification requirements of
subsection 4 below.
4. Meeting Notice Requirements
The Planner shall give written notice of the date, time, and place of the meeting at which the
application will be considered by the Planning Board to the applicant and all abutters of the
property involved at least ten (10) days in advance of the meeting. For major developments, a
notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the community
at least once; the date of publication shall be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing (Note:
This generally requires that an application be submitted a minimum of twenty-one (21) days
before the meeting).
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 98
5. Planning Board Site Inspection
The Board may hold an on-site inspection of the site to field verify the information submitted
and investigate the development proposal. The Board may schedule this visit either before or
after the public hearing. The Board may decide not to hold an on-site inspection when the site is
snow covered. If an application is pending during a period when there is snow cover, the Board
will request that the applicant agree to extend the review period to allow an on-site inspection.
The inability of the Board to hold a site inspection due to snow cover shall be sufficient grounds
for denial of an application. If the Board decides to hold a site walk, the Board shall establish the
day and time of the site inspection at its duly advertised meeting during their review of the
application or written notice of the site inspection shall be provided to all abutters receiving
notice of the pending application.
D. Public Hearing on Major Development Applications
1. Conduct of the Public Hearing
The Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Planning Board shall chair the public hearing. The
Chairman shall open the public hearing by identifying the application and explaining the purpose
of the hearing and the procedures to be followed.
2. Purpose of the Public Hearing
The purpose of the public hearing is to allow the applicant and affected property owners to
provide information as part of the record that the Board will use in considering its action on the
application. Testimony presented at the hearing should be related to factual information about the
application and related submissions and the project’s compliance with the review standards and
other regulations and requirements of this Ordinance or other municipal ordinances. The
Planning Board is not a policy-making body and must apply the Ordinance as it has been
enacted.
3. Process of Public Hearing Input
The Chairman shall provide the applicant or his/her representative with an opportunity to make
any statement or presentations at the beginning of the hearing. The Planner shall then present any
comments or recommendations from the staff and Department Heads. The Chairman shall then
allow the members of the Board to ask questions of the applicant and/or the Planner. Following
Board questions, the Chairman shall open the public hearing to the public for statements,
information submissions, or questions about the project. At the close of the public comment
period, the Chairman shall afford the applicant an opportunity to answer any questions raised by
the public and rebut any statements or information submitted. The Chairman may allow the
applicant this opportunity after each member of the public testifies if that is deemed to be
desirable. At the conclusion of the applicant’s response, the hearing shall be closed.
4. Final Action on the Application
The Planning Board shall take final action on said application within thirty (30) days of the
public hearing. The Board shall act to deny, to approve, or to approve the application with
conditions. The Board may impose such conditions as are deemed advisable to assure
compliance with the standards of approval and performance standards of this Ordinance for
Zoning Districts, Conditional Permitted Uses, and for projects requiring Site Plan Review. In
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 99
issuing its decision, the Board shall make written findings of fact that establish whether the
proposed development does or does not meet the requirements of this Ordinance.
The Board shall notify the applicant and abutters who requested to be notified of the action of the
Board including the findings of fact and any conditions of approval.
5. Extension of Time Limits
All time limits provided for in this section may be extended by mutual agreement of the
applicant and Board.
6. Final Approval and Filing
Upon completion of the requirements of this Article and an approval vote by the majority of the
Planning Board members, the application shall be deemed to have final approval and the site
plan shall be signed by a majority of the members of the Board and must be filed by the
applicant with the Code Enforcement Officer. Any plan not so filed within thirty (30) days of the
date upon which such plan is approved and signed by the Board as herein provided shall become
null and void. The Planning Board may by vote extend the filing period for good cause.
402.10.9 Application and Technical Review Fees for Site Plan Review
A. Application Fee
An application for site plan review must be accompanied by an application fee. This fee is intended
to cover the cost of administrative processing of the application, including notification, advertising,
mailings, and similar costs. The fee shall not be refundable. This application fee must be paid to the
municipality, and evidence of payment of the fee must be included with the application.
B. Technical Review Fees
In addition to the application fee, the applicant for site plan review must also pay a technical review
fee to defray the technical costs of the application review. This fee must be paid to the Town and
must be deposited in the Development Review Account, which shall be separate and distinct from all
other municipal accounts. The application will be considered incomplete until this fee is paid. The
Board may reduce the amount of the technical review fee or waive it if it determines that the scale or
nature of the project will require little or no outside review.
The technical review fees may be used by the Board to pay for reasonable costs incurred by the
Board, at its discretion, which relate directly to the review of the application pursuant to the review
criteria. Such services may include, but need not be limited to, planning consultant reviews,
consulting engineering or other professional fees.
The applicant shall pay into a special account the cost to the Town of hiring independent consulting
services according to the schedule set by the Town Council. If the balance in the special account is
drawn down by seventy-five (75%) percent of the required escrow fund, the Board shall notify the
applicant and require an additional amount.
The municipality shall provide the applicant, upon written request, with an accounting of his or her
account and shall refund all of the remaining monies in the account after the payment by the Town
of all costs and services related to the review. Such payment of remaining monies shall be made no
later than sixty (60) days after the approval of the application, denial of the application, or approval
with condition of the application.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 100
C. Establishment of Fees
The Town Council may, from time to time and after consultation with the Board, establish the
appropriate fees following posting of the proposed schedule of fees and conducting a public hearing.
402.10.10 Required Submissions for Site Plan Review
Site Inventory and Analysis: The site inventory and analysis is intended to provide both the applicant
and the Planning Board with a better understanding of the site and the opportunities and constraints
imposed on its use by both the natural and built environment. This analysis will result in a development
plan that reflects the conditions of the site; ensuring that those areas most suitable for the proposed use
will be utilized, while those that are not suitable or present significant constraints will be avoided to the
maximum extent possible. Therefore, the submission requirements provide that the applicant submit
basic information about the site and an analysis of that information.
A. Site Inventory Plan
The site inventory must contain, at a minimum, the following information:
1. The names, addresses, and phone numbers of the record owner and the applicant.
2. The names and addresses of all consultants working on the project.
3. Evidence of right, title, or interest in the property.
4. Three (3) copies of an accurate scale inventory plan of the parcel at a scale of not more than one
hundred (100) feet to the inch, one universally accessible digital format e.g. PDF, and twelve
(12) 11 x 17 inch copies showing as a minimum:
a. The name of the development, north arrow, date and scale.
b. The boundaries of the parcel and existing zoning.
c. The relationship of the site to the surrounding area (i.e., access roads and abutting uses).
d. The topography of the site at an appropriate contour interval depending on the nature of the
use and character of the site (in many instances, submittal of the U.S.G.S. contours will be
adequate);
e. The major natural features of the site and within five hundred (500) feet of the site, including
wetlands, streams, ponds, floodplains, groundwater aquifers, significant wildlife habitats and
fisheries or other important natural features (if none, so state).
f. Existing buildings, structures, or other improvements on the site (if none, so state).
g. Existing restrictions or easements on the site (if none, so state).
h. The location and size of existing utilities or improvements servicing the site (if none, so
state).
i. Mapping of all wetlands and/or potential vernal pools on site regardless of size.
j. A Class B high intensity soil survey if any portion of the site is located in a resource
protection district or has wetlands covering more than ten (10%) percent of the site.
k. A Class D medium intensity soil survey if vernal pools and/or significant wetlands are not
present.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 101
B. Site Analysis Plan
The site analysis must contain, at a minimum, the following information:
1. Twelve (12) copies of a site analysis plan at the same quantity, size, and scale as the inventory
plan highlighting the opportunities and constraints of the site. This plan should enable the
Planning Board to identify:
a. Portions of the site that are unsuitable for development or use;
b. Portions of the site that are unsuitable for on- site sewage disposal;
c. Areas of the site that have environmental limitations (steep slopes, flat poorly drained areas,
wetlands, vernal pools, aquifers, wildlife habitat, floodplains, drainage, etc.) that must be
addressed in the development plan;
d. Areas that may be subject to off-site conflicts or concerns (i.e., noise, lighting, traffic, etc.);
and which areas are well suited to the proposed use.
2. Twelve (12) copies of a narrative describing the existing conditions of the site, the proposed use
and the constraints or opportunities created by the site. This submission should include any
traffic studies, utility studies, or other preliminary work that will assist the Planning Board in
understanding the site and the proposed use.
3. Any requests for waivers from the submission requirements for the site plan review application.
C. Site Plan Review Application Submission Requirements
Applications for site plan review must be submitted on application forms provided by the Town.
The complete application form, evidence of payment of the required fees, and the required plans and
related information must be submitted to the Planner. In addition to the site inventory and analysis,
the submission must contain at least the following exhibits and information, unless specifically
waived in writing:
1. A fully executed and signed copy of the application for development review.
2. Evidence of payment of the application and technical review fees.
3. Twelve (12) copies of written materials plus twelve (12) sets of maps or drawings containing the
information listed below. The written materials must be contained in a bound report. The maps
or drawings must be at a scale sufficient to allow review of the items listed under approval
criteria. Three (3) full sets of plans or drawings shall be submitted that are not more than one
hundred (100) feet to the inch for that portion of the tract of land being proposed for
development. The remaining nine (9) full sets shall be 11 x 17 inch copies. One (1) universally
accessible digital format e.g. PDF of all plans shall also be submitted.
4. The bound report and maps or drawings shall contain the following general information (Note:
asterisks (*) following an item indicate information to be included on the approved Site Plan):
a. Record owner's name, address, and phone number and applicant's name, address and phone
number, if different.*
b. The location of all required building setbacks, yards, and buffers.*
c. Names and addresses of all property owners within five hundred (500 ft.) feet of any and all
property boundaries.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 102
d. Sketch map showing general location of the site within the municipality based upon a
reduction of the tax maps.
e. Boundaries of all contiguous property under the total or partial control of the owner or
applicant regardless of whether all or part is being developed at this time.
f. The tax map and lot number of the parcel or parcels on which the project is to be located.*
g. A copy of the deed to the property, an option to purchase the property or other
documentation to demonstrate right, title or interest in the property on the part of the
applicant.
h. The name, registration number and seal of the person who prepared the plan, if applicable.*
i. Evidence of the applicant’s technical and financial capability to carry out the project as
proposed.
5. The bound report and maps and drawings shall contain the following information pertaining to
existing conditions of the site:
a. Zoning classification(s), including overlay and/or sub-districts, of the property and the
location of zoning district boundaries if the property is located in two (2) or more zoning
districts or sub-districts or abuts a different district.*
b. The bearings and length of all property lines of the property to be developed and the source
of this information. The Planning Board may waive this requirement of a boundary survey
when sufficient information is available to establish, on the ground, all property boundaries.*
c. Location and size of any existing sewer and water mains, culverts and drains, on-site sewage
disposal systems, wells, underground tanks or installations, and power and telephone lines
and poles on the property to be developed and on abutting streets or land that may serve the
development and an assessment of their adequacy and condition to meet the needs of the
proposed use. Appropriate elevations must be provided as necessary to determine the
direction of flow.
d. Location, names, and present widths of existing public and/or private streets and rights-ofway
within or adjacent to the proposed development.*
e. The location and dimensions and photographs of all existing buildings on the site.
f. The location and dimensions of existing driveways, parking and loading areas, walkways,
and sidewalks on or immediately adjacent to the site.
g. Location of intersecting roads or driveways within two hundred (200) feet of the site.
h. The location of open drainage courses, wetlands, stonewalls, graveyards, fences, stands of
trees, and other important or unique natural areas and site features, including but not limited
to, floodplains, deer wintering areas, significant wildlife habitats, habitat for rare and
endangered plants and animals, unique natural communities and natural areas, sand and
gravel aquifers, and historic and/or archaeological resources, together with a description of
such features.
i. The direction of existing surface water drainage across the site.
j. The location, front view, dimensions, and lighting of existing signs.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 103
k. Location and dimensions of any existing easements and copies of existing covenants or deed
restrictions.
l. The location of the nearest fire hydrant, dry hydrant or other water supply for fire protection.
6. The bound report and maps and drawings shall contain the following information pertaining to
proposed development of the site:
a. Estimated demand for water supply and sewage disposal, together with the location and
dimensions of all provisions for water supply and wastewater disposal, and evidence of their
adequacy for the proposed use, including soils test pit data for on-site sewage disposal.
b. The direction of proposed surface water drainage across the site, and from the site, with an
assessment of impacts on downstream properties.
c. Provisions for handling all solid wastes, including hazardous and special wastes, and the
location and proposed screening of any on-site collection or storage facilities.*
d. The location, dimensions, and materials to be used in the construction of proposed
driveways, parking and loading areas, and walkways and any changes in traffic flow onto or
off-site.*
e. Proposed landscaping and buffering.
f. The location, dimensions, ground floor plan, and architectural elevations of all proposed
buildings or building expansion proposed on the site.*
g. Location, front view, materials, and dimensions of proposed signs together with the method
for securing the sign(s).
h. Location and type of exterior lighting.*
i. The location of all utilities, including fire protection systems.
j. A general description of the proposed use or activity.
k. An estimate of the peak hour and daily traffic to be generated by the project.
l. Stormwater calculations, erosion and sedimentation control measures, and water quality
and/or phosphorous export management provisions, if the project requires a stormwater
permit from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, if the project is located in
the Wellhead Protection or Business Transitional 2 Districts, or if the Planning Board
determines that such information is necessary based upon the scale of the project or the
existing conditions in the vicinity of the project.
7. One drawing of the plan set shall be labeled as the Site Plan and shall contain the following
information:
a. All mapping information contained in subsections 4, 5, and 6 above that are followed by an
asterisk (*).
b. Space provided on the plan drawing for the signatures of the Planning Board and date,
together with the following words, “Approved: Town of Gray Planning Board.”
D. Additional Engineering Information Required for Major Developments
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 104
In addition to the information required for all applicants, an application for a major development
must contain the following additional information:
1. A narrative and/or plan describing how the proposed development plan relates to the site
inventory and analysis.
2. A grading plan showing the existing and proposed topography of the site at two (2) foot contour
intervals, or such other interval as the Planning Board may determine.
3. A stormwater drainage and erosion control program showing:
a. The existing and proposed method of handling stormwater runoff.
b. The direction of flow of the runoff, through the use of arrows.
c. The location, elevation, and size of all catch basins, dry wells, drainage ditches, swales,
retention basins, and storm sewers.
d. Engineering calculations used to determine drainage requirements based upon the twentyfive
(25) year twenty-four (24) hour storm frequency; this is required only if the project will
significantly alter the existing drainage pattern due to such factors as the amount of new
impervious surfaces (such as paving and building area) being proposed.
e. Methods of controlling erosion and sedimentation during and after construction.
4. A groundwater impact analysis prepared by groundwater hydrologist for projects involving onsite
water supply or sewage disposal facilities with a capacity of two thousand (2,000) gallons or
more per day.
5. The name, registration number, and seal of the architect, engineer, landscape architect and/or
similar professional who prepared the plan.
6. A utility plan showing, in addition to provisions for water supply and wastewater disposal, the
location and nature of electrical, telephone, cable TV, and any other utility services to be
installed on the site.
7. A planting schedule keyed to the site plan indicating the general varieties and sizes of trees,
shrubs, and other vegetation to be planted on the site, as well as information pertaining to
provisions that will be made to retain and protect existing trees, shrubs, and other vegetation.
8. A traffic impact analysis demonstrating the impact of the proposed project on the capacity, level
of service and safety of adjacent streets, if the project or expansion will provide parking for fifty
(50) or more vehicles or generate more than one hundred (100) trips during the a.m. or p.m. peak
hour based upon the latest edition of the trip generator manual of the Institution of Traffic
Engineers.
9. A written statement from the Gray Water District as to the adequacy of the water supply in terms
of quantity and pressure for both domestic and fire flows, if public water will be utilized.
10. Estimated cost of the proposed development and evidence of the applicant’s financial capacity to
complete it. This evidence should be in the form of a letter from a bank or other source of
financing indicating the name of the project, amount of financing proposed or available, and
individual’s or institution’s interest in financing the project or in the form of a letter from a
certified accountant or annual report indicating that the applicant has adequate cash flow to cover
anticipated costs.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 105
E. Waiver of Submission Requirements
The Planning Board may waive any of the submission requirements based upon a written request of
the applicant. Such request must be made at the time of the preapplication conference or at the initial
review of the application if no preapplication conference is held. A waiver of any submission
requirement may be granted only if the Board finds that the information is not required to determine
compliance with the standards and criteria. Provisions for waivers of the performance standards of
the following Sections 402.10.11 through 402.10.14 are contained in Section 402.10.15.
402.10.11 Site Development Standards for Site Plan Review
The following criteria shall be used by the Planning Board in reviewing applications for site plan review
and shall serve as minimum requirements for approval of the application. The application shall be
approved unless the Planning Board determines that the applicant has failed to meet one or more of
these standards. In all instances, the burden of proof shall be on the applicant who must produce
evidence sufficient to warrant a finding that all applicable criteria have been met.
A. Utilization of the Site
The plan for the development must reflect the natural capabilities of the site to support development.
Buildings, lots, and support facilities must be clustered in those portions of the site that have the
most suitable conditions for development. Environmentally sensitive areas, including but not limited
to, wetlands, steep slopes, floodplains, significant wildlife habitats, habitat for rare and endangered
plants and animals, unique natural communities and natural areas, and sand and gravel aquifers must
be maintained and preserved to the maximum extent. Natural drainage areas must also be preserved
to the maximum extent. The development must include appropriate measures for protecting these
resources, including but not limited to, modification of the proposed design of the site, timing of
construction, and limiting the extent of excavation.
B. Traffic Access and Parking
1. Adequacy of Road System - Vehicular access to the site must be on roads which have adequate
capacity to accommodate the additional traffic generated by the development. For developments
which generate one hundred (100) or more peak hour trips based on the latest edition of the Trip
Generation Manual of the Institute of Traffic Engineers, intersections on major access routes to
the site within one (1) mile of any entrance road which are functioning at a Level of Service of D
or better prior to the development must function at a minimum at Level of Service D after
development.
Levels of service rankings are similar to the academic ranking system where an ‘A’ represents
little control delay and an ‘F’ represents extensive delay. A level of service ‘D’ and higher is
desirable for a signalized intersection, although in urban areas, specific movements often operate
at a level of service ‘E’ or ‘F’. [Adopted 1/19/10]
The following tables summarize the relationship between control delay and level of service:
[Adopted 1/19/10]
Table 1A - Level of Service Criteria for Signalized Intersections
Level of Service Control Delay per Vehicle (sec)
A Up to 10.0
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 106
B 10.1 to 20.0
C 20.1 to 35.0
D 35.1 to 55.0
E 55.1 to 80.0
F Greater than 80.0
Table 1B - Level of Service Criteria for Unsignalized Intersections
Level of Service Control Delay per Vehicle (sec)
A Up to 10.0
B 10.1 to 15.0
C 15.1 to 25.0
D 25.1 to 35.0
E 35.1 to 50.0
F Greater than 50.0
If any such intersection is functioning at a Level of Service E or lower prior to the development, the
project must not reduce the current level of service. This requirement may be waived by the
Planning Board if the project is located within a growth area designated in the Comprehensive Plan
and the Board determines that the project will not have an unnecessary adverse impact on traffic
flow or safety.
A development not meeting this requirement may be approved if the applicant demonstrates that:
A public agency has committed funds to construct the improvements necessary to bring the level of
access to this standard, or
The applicant will assume financial responsibility for the improvements necessary to bring the level
of service to this standard and will assure the completion of the improvements with a financial
guarantee acceptable to the municipality.
2. Access into the Site - Vehicular access to and from the development must be safe and
convenient.
a. Any driveway or proposed street must be designed so as to provide the minimum sight
distance according to the Maine Department of Transportation standards, to the maximum
extent possible and per the following requirements:
(i) Minimum sight distance requirements for all subdivision accesses connecting to external
streets shall be contingent on the posted speed of the external street connecting to the
subdivision access. On roads that are designated by the Maine Department of
Transportation as Mobility or Retrograde Arterials, the third column in Table 1C shall
apply:
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 107
Table 1C – Required Access Safe Sight Distances
Posted Speed
(MPH)
Sight Distance
(Feet)
Mobility Site Distance1
(Feet)
20 155 225
25 200 300
30 250 380
35 305 480
40 360 580
45 425 710
50 495 840
55 & over 570 990
1 Mobility or Retrograde Arterials are critical travel corridors identified by MDOT. In Gray,
the only such designated corridor is Route 26 from Cumberland through to New Gloucester.
(ii) The measurement of sight line distances shall be from a point at a distance of ten (10)
feet from the edge of the travel way at a height of three and one half (3.5) feet above the
level of the surface of the travel way to the top of an object four and one quarter (4.25)
feet above the surface of the travel way in the center of the approach lane.
(iii) Where sight line distances cannot be met at proposed new intersections, portions of the
right of way as well as portions of abutting lots under the control of the applicant may be
cleared of all growth (except isolated trees) and obstructions to achieve required sight
distances. The applicant shall provide documentation that areas cleared to improve sight
distances will be maintained in that condition. If approved by the Town Engineer and
Public Works Director, the grade of the approach road may be modified to achieve
improved visibility.
b. Points of access and egress must be located to avoid hazardous conflicts with existing turning
movements and traffic flows.
c. The grade of any proposed drive or street must be not more than ±3% for a minimum of two
(2) car lengths, or forty (40) feet, from the intersection.
d. The intersection of any access/egress drive or proposed street must function: (a) at a Level of
Service of D following development if the project will generate one thousand (1,000) or
more vehicle trips per twenty-four (24) hour period; or (b) at a level which will allow safe
access into and out of the project if less than one thousand (1,000) trips are generated.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 108
e. Where a lot has frontage on two (2) or more streets, the primary access to and egress from
the lot must be provided from the street where there is less potential for traffic congestion
and for traffic and pedestrians hazards. Access from other streets may be allowed if it is safe
and does not promote shortcutting through the site.
f. Where it is necessary to safeguard against hazards to traffic and pedestrians and/or to avoid
traffic congestion, the applicant shall be responsible for providing turning lanes, traffic
directional islands, and traffic controls within public streets.
g. Accessways must be designed and have sufficient capacity to avoid queuing of entering
vehicles on any public street.
h. The following criteria must be used to limit the number of driveways serving a proposed
project:
(i) No use which generates less than one hundred (100) peak hour vehicle trips shall have
more than a single two-way driveway onto a single roadway. Such driveway must be no
greater than thirty (30) feet wide.
(ii) No use which generates one hundred (100) or more peak hour vehicle trips shall have
more than two points of entry from and two points of egress to a single roadway. The
combined width of all accessways must not exceed sixty (60) feet.
3. Accessway Width - Accessways must meet the following width standards:
a. The dimensions of driveways shall be designed to accommodate adequately the volume and
character of vehicles anticipated to be attracted daily to the development for which a site plan
is prepared. The required minimum dimensions for driveways are indicated below. Driveway
entrances and exits serving traffic of over fifteen percent (15%) truck traffic shall be
designed with adequate width to avoid a turning vehicle from tracking into the opposing
travel lane. [Adopted 6/21/11]
TABLE 1D – REQUIRED MINIMUM ACCESS DRIVE WIDTHS
One-Way Operation
Driveways *
Width (feet)
Two-Way Operation
Driveways*
Width (feet)
3 to 10 dwelling units 10 18
10 dwelling units or over 12 20
Commercial, Industrial, and
Institutional 16 24
*All driveways shall be five (5) feet wider at the curbline, and this additional width shall be
maintained for a distance of twenty (20) feet into the site.
4. Accessway Construction Standards: [Adopted 6/21/11]
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 109
a. Apart from the traffic access provisions of Sections 402.10.11 B.1 to 4. above, all access
roads and drives for commercial, industrial, institutional, and multi-family development shall
meet the standards of the Subdivision Ordinance for stormwater design (Section 401.13.16
B.3), closed drainage systems (Section 401.13.16 B.4), curbing (Section 401.13.16 B.5),
construction Section 401.13.16 C), and sidewalks Section 401.13.16 E),
b. Internal roads for commercial, industrial, institutional, and multi-family development are not
required to have a defined right of way if the project is a condominium and/or has no
individual lots that require street frontage on the access drive.
5. Accessway Location and Spacing - Accessways must meet the following standards:
a. Private entrances/exits must be located at least fifty (50) feet from the closest unsignalized
intersection and one hundred fifty (150) feet from the closest signalized intersection, as
measured from the point of tangency for the corner to the point of tangency for the
accessway. This requirement may be reduced if the shape of the site does not allow
conformance with this standard.
b. Private accessways in or out of a development must be separated by a minimum of seventyfive
(75) feet where possible.
6. Internal Vehicular Circulation - The layout of the site must provide for the safe movement of
passenger, service, and emergency vehicles through the site.
a. Nonresidential projects that will be served by delivery vehicles must provide a clear route for
such vehicles with appropriate geometric design to allow turning and backing for a minimum
of WB-40 vehicles.
b. Clear routes of access must be provided and maintained for emergency vehicles to and
around buildings and must be posted with appropriate signage (fire lane - no parking).
c. The layout and design of parking areas must provide for safe and convenient circulation of
vehicles throughout the lot.
d. All roadways must be designed to harmonize with the topographic and natural features of the
site insofar as practical by minimizing filling, grading, excavation, or other similar activities
which result in unstable soil conditions and soil erosion, by fitting the development to the
natural contour of the land and avoiding substantial areas of excessive grade and tree
removal, and by retaining existing vegetation during construction. The road network must
provide for vehicular, pedestrian, and cyclist safety, all season emergency access, snow
storage, and delivery and collection services.
7. Parking Layout and Design - The goals of the parking standards are to provide safe and adequate
parking while avoiding construction of excess parking that is expensive to build and maintain.
Applicants are encouraged to consider shared parking arrangements (Subsection 7. a below), offsite
parking (Subsection 7. b), and reserve parking areas (Subsection 7.e) in meeting these goals.
Off-street parking must conform to the following standards:
a. Parking areas with more than two parking spaces must be arranged so that it is not necessary
for vehicles to back into the street.
b. All parking spaces, access drives, and impervious surfaces must be located at least five (5 ft.)
feet from any side or rear lot line, except where standards for buffer yards require a greater
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 110
distance. No parking spaces or asphalt type surface shall be located within the required front
setback unless a visual barrier to screen views of vehicle tire wells is approved by the
Planning Board. Parking lots on adjoining lots may be connected by accessways not
exceeding twenty-four (24 ft.) feet in width.
c. Parking stalls and aisle layout must conform to the following standards:
Table 2 – Minimum Parking Space & Aisle Standards
Parking Angle Stall Width Skew Width Stall Depth Aisle Width
90 degrees 9'-0" 18'-0" 24'-0" two way
60 degrees 8'-6" 10'-6" 18'-0" 16'-0" one way
45 degrees 8'-6" 12'-9" 17'-6" 12'-0" one way
30 degrees 8'-6" 17'-0" 17'-0" 12'-0" one way
d. In lots utilizing diagonal parking, the direction of proper traffic flow must be indicated by
signs, pavement markings or other permanent indications and maintained as necessary.
e. Parking areas for nonresidential uses must be designed to permit each motor vehicle to
proceed to and from the parking space provided for it without requiring the moving of any
other motor vehicles. Double stack parking may be permitted for resident parking in
conjunction with residential uses if both spaces in the stack are assigned to the occupants of
the same dwelling unit and in non-residential uses for designated employee parking.
f. Provisions must be made to restrict the "overhang" of parked vehicles when it might restrict
traffic flow on adjacent through roads, restrict pedestrian or bicycle movement on adjacent
walkways, or damage landscape materials.
g. Except as provided in Subsection 7.b. below, off-street parking spaces shall be provided on
the same lot occupied by the use. [Adopted 1/19/10]
h. The closest boundary of the parking area shall be within 300 ft. of the principle use for which
the spaces are required. [Adopted 1/19/10]
8. Calculation of Required Number of Parking Spaces [Adopted 1/19/10]
a. All areas pertinent to the use, except those listed in Subsection 6. b. below shall be included
in the calculation of gross floor area.
b. Floor area of rooms occupied by mechanical, electrical, communications, and security
equipment shall be deducted from the floor area for the purpose of calculating parking
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 111
requirements.
TABLE 3 – MINIMUM NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
Residential
Dwelling: Single Family, Duplex 2 per dwelling unit
Multifamily:
Studio 1.25 per dwelling unit
One Bedroom 1.5 per dwelling unit
Two or More Bedrooms 2 per dwelling unit
Accessory/In-Law Dwelling Unit 1 per dwelling unit
Hotel/Motel 1.25 per guest room, plus
10 per 1000 sq. ft. restaurant/lounge, plus
30 per 1000 sq. ft. meeting/banquet room.
Senior Citizen Housing, Independent Living 0.6 per dwelling unit
Senior Citizen Housing, Assisted Living 0.4 per dwelling unit
Boarding Homes for Sheltered Care and Nursing
Homes 1 per room
Rooming House:
Single-Occupancy Unit 1 per dwelling unit
Double-Occupancy Unit 2 per dwelling unit
Employees 1 per employee
Visitors As needed
Day Care, Facility (any type) .35 per client of licensed capacity plus staff
Hospital/Medical Center 0.4 per employee, plus
1 per 3 beds, plus
1 per 5 average daily outpatient visits, plus
1 per 4 medical staff, plus
1 per student/faculty/staff
Retail/Service
Retail Sales (not in shopping center) 3.5 per 1000 sq. ft. of gross floor area (GFA)
Supermarket (Freestanding) 4.5 per 1000 sq. ft. of GFA
Discount Superstore/Clubs 3.5 per 1000 sq. ft. of GFA
Home Improvement Superstore 2.5 per 1000 sq. ft. of GFA
Other Heavy/Hard Goods (Furniture, Appliances,
Buildings Materials, etc.) 3.0 per 1000 sq. ft. of GFA
Shopping Centers 4.0 per 1000 sq. ft. of GFA,
Service Business, Personal
Beauty Shops/Barber Shops 2 per treatment station, but not less than
4.3 per 1000 sq. ft. customer service area.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 112
Coin-Operated Laundry/Dry Cleaning Services 3.5 per 1000 sq. ft. of GFA
Other 3.5 per 1000 sq. ft. of GFA
Fitness Center/Health Club 1 per 3 persons of permitted capacity
Retail Sales, Automobile Sales 2.7 per 1000 sq. ft. of interior sales area GFA,
plus 1.5 per 1000 sq. ft. of interior area
Automobile Repair Services, Major or Minor 4 per service bay
Convenience Store .25 per pump plus 1 per employee plus 4 per 1000 sq. ft.
Food and Beverage
Restaurant 1 per 3 seats
Office and Business Services
Business and Professional Office 4.5 per 1000 sq. ft. of GFA
Service Business, Commercial 4 per 1000 sq. ft. of GFA
Medical Office Building 5.5 per 1000 sq. ft. of GFA
Bank 5.5 per 1000 sq. ft. of GFA
Industry, Heavy 2 per 1000 sq. ft. of GFA
Industry, Light 1.5 per 1000 sq. ft.
Warehouse 0.7 per 1000 sq. ft. of GFA
Other Retail, Commercial or Business 4 per 1000 sq. ft. of GFA
Education
Preschool/Nursery Schools .35 per student plus 1 per employee
Elementary and Middle Schools Per parking study specific to institution
High Schools Per parking study specific to institution
College and University Per parking study specific to institution
Cultural/Recreational/Entertainment
Convention Center 0.25 per person of permitted capacity
Library 4.5 per 1000 sq. ft. of GFA
Place of Worship 1 for every 3 seats
Theater 1 for every 3 seats
9. Special Parking Conditions [Adopted 1/19/10]
a. Shared Parking. Where multiple uses occur on a single site, the required number of off-street
parking spaces shall be provided for each use. The Planning Board or Staff Review
Committee may reduce the required number of parking spaces where the applicant can show,
through a parking study performed by a Maine Licensed Professional Engineer, that the peak
period parking demand of the uses is non-conflicting.
b. Off-Site Parking. Parking spaces may be located off-site if the spaces will adequately serve
the principal use for which the spaces are required. In making this determination the Planning
Board, Staff Review Committee, or Code Enforcement Officer, as applicable, shall consider
the following factors:
(i) Proximity of the off-street parking,
(ii) Ease of pedestrian access to the off-site parking,
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 113
(iii) Provision of sidewalks or paths between the off-site parking and the principle use,
(iv) The applicant has sufficient legal interest in the land on which the off-site parking is
provided to establish control as long as the use exists.
(v) Adequate lighting shall be installed to provide for safe pedestrian movement.
c. Storage of Automobiles. The minimum off-street parking space requirements of Subsection
6. above do not apply to the storage of automobiles for repair or sale where the operator of
the use has control over the movement of all stored vehicles on the property.
(i) The applicant shall demonstrate that adequate area is provided for the storage of all
automobiles on the property within any applicable yard setbacks.
(ii) The aisle width requirements in Table 2 above shall apply to the storage of automobiles.
(iii) The applicable parking requirements in Table 3 apply to all other cars on the property
(e.g. customers and employees).
d. Similar Uses. For any structure or use not specifically provided for, the Planning Board shall
base the required number of parking spaces by selecting the use(s) most similar in the
ordinance or by requiring a parking study to determine the appropriate number to be provided
based on projected use.
e. Waiver of Parking and Loading Requirements. If any applicant can clearly demonstrate to
the Planning Board that, because of the nature of the operation or use, the parking and/or
loading and unloading requirements of this ordinance are unnecessary or excessive, the
Planning Board shall have the power to approve a site plan showing less paved parking or
unloading area than is required by this section; provided, however, that a landscaped area of
sufficient size to meet the deficiency shall be set aside and reserved for the purpose of
meeting future off-street parking or unloading requirements in the event that a change of use
of the premises shall make such additional off-street facilities necessary.
f. Handicapped Accessible Spaces. All parking shall be designed in compliance with the
requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act and shall provide for accessible spaces
in accordance with Table 4 below:
TABLE 4 – ACCESSIBLE PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Total Parking in Area/Lot or Structure Required Minimum Number of Accessible Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 114
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1000 2 percent of total
1001 and over 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1000
In addition, one in every eight accessible parking spaces (but not less than one) must be served by an access
aisle at least 96 inches wide and must be designated "van accessible."
10. Off-Street Loading. [Adopted 1/19/10]
a. The minimum off-street loading standards of Table 5 in this Subsection shall be met:
TABLE 5 – REQUIRED OFF-STREET LOADING BAYS
Gross Floor Area in Thousands of Square Feet
Type of Use 12-24 25-100 101-250 Each 250+
Retail or Industrial 2 3 4 1
Business and Professional
Offices, Hotels 1 1 3 1
Distribution Facilities, Warehousing 15 bays per 100,000 s.f. of gross floor area
b. Size of loading areas.
c. Each loading bay shall be between 12 and 14 feet wide depending on conditions of ingress
and egress.
d. Access to the bay shall include a minimum maneuvering area of 125 feet in length, or more
where required.
e. The bay area shall be long enough to accommodate standing trucks so as to remove them
from the flow of traffic.
f. Areas shall be provided for trucks to park when waiting for loading activities.
g. All loading bays and waiting areas shall be screened.
C. Pedestrian Access
The site plan must provide for a system of pedestrian ways within the development appropriate to
the type and scale of development. This system must connect the major building entrances/exits with
parking areas and with existing sidewalks, if they exist or are planned in the vicinity of the project.
The pedestrian network may be located either in the street right-of-way or outside of the right-ofway
in open space or recreation areas. The system must be designed to link the project with
residential, recreational, and commercial facilities, schools, bus stops, and existing sidewalks in the
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 115
neighborhood or, when appropriate, to connect with amenities such as parks or open space on or
adjacent to the site.
D. Stormwater Management
Adequate provisions must be made for the collection and disposal of all stormwater that runs off
proposed streets, parking areas, roofs, and other surfaces, through a stormwater drainage system and
maintenance plan, which must not have adverse impacts on abutting or downstream properties.
1. To the extent possible, the plan must retain stormwater on the site using the natural features of
the site.
2. The applicant must demonstrate that on- and off-site downstream channel or system capacity is
sufficient to carry the flow without adverse effects, including but not limited to, flooding and
erosion of shoreland areas, or that he/she will be responsible for whatever improvements are
needed to provide the required increase in capacity and/or mitigation.
3. All natural drainage ways must be preserved at their natural gradients and must not be filled or
converted to a closed system unless approved as part of the site plan review.
4. The design of the stormwater drainage system must provide for the disposal of stormwater
without damage to streets, adjacent properties, downstream properties, soils, and vegetation.
5. The design of the storm drainage systems must be fully cognizant of upstream runoff which must
pass over or through the site to be developed and provide for this movement.
6. The biological and chemical properties of the receiving waters must not be degraded by the
stormwater runoff from the development site. The use of oil and grease traps in manholes, the
use of on-site vegetated waterways, and vegetated buffer strips along waterways and drainage
swales, and the reduction in use of deicing salts and fertilizers may be required, especially where
the development stormwater discharges into a gravel aquifer area or other water supply source,
or a great pond.
7. Except in Wellhead Districts and Business Transitional-2, submission of a MDEP stormwater
permit shall constitute prima facie evidence of compliance with the stormwater standards of this
Ordinance. The Board may, however, require additional documentation to address any existing
or potential concerns for flooding problems.
8. Surficial or subsurface stormwater control and/or treatment infrastructure shall be located in
appropriate locations on the project site. Stormwater measures shall not adversely affect required
buffering and screening. In the event that buffering/screening will be materially compromised
due to the placement of surficial infiltration areas, the Planning Board shall have the authority to
require alternative measures including subsurface infrastructure for the purpose of ensuring the
integrity of applicable buffering and screening.
E. Erosion Control
All building, site, and roadway designs and layouts must harmonize with existing topography and
conserve desirable natural surroundings to the fullest extent possible, such that filling, excavation
and earth moving activity must be kept to a minimum. Parking lots on sloped sites must be terraced
to avoid undue cut and fill, and/or the need for retaining walls. Natural vegetation must be preserved
and protected wherever possible.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 116
Soil erosion and sedimentation of watercourses and water bodies must be minimized by an active
program meeting the requirements of the Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for
Construction: Best Management Practices, dated March 1991 or the latest version.
F. Water Supply Provisions
The development must be provided with a system of water supply that provides each use with an
adequate supply of water.
If the project is to be served by the Gray Water District, the applicant must secure and submit a
written statement from the supplier that the proposed water supply system conforms with its design
and construction standards, will not result in an undue burden on the source or distribution system,
and will be installed in a manner adequate to provide needed domestic and fire protection flows.
G. Sewage Disposal Provisions
The development must be provided with a method of disposing of sewage which is in compliance
with the Maine State Plumbing Code.
When two or more lots or buildings in different ownership share the use of a common subsurface
disposal system, the system must be owned and maintained in common by an owners' association.
Covenants in the deeds for each lot must require mandatory membership in the association and
provide for adequate funding of the association to assure proper maintenance of the system.
Cluster septic systems shall be constructed with dual filtration beds to provide for continuing
operation while service or rejuvenation is being conducted. Cluster systems shall also be provided
with an area for expansion and/or replacement of the system.
H. Utilities
The development must be provided with electrical, telephone, and telecommunication service
adequate to meet the anticipated use of the project. New utility lines and facilities must be screened
from view to the extent feasible. If the service in the street or on adjoining lots is underground, the
new service must be placed underground.
I. Natural Features
The landscape must be preserved in its natural state insofar as practical by minimizing tree removal,
disturbance and compaction of soil, and by retaining existing vegetation insofar as practical during
construction. Extensive grading and filling must be avoided as far as possible.
J. Groundwater Protection
The proposed site development and use must not adversely impact either the quality or quantity of
groundwater available to abutting properties or to public water supply systems. Applicants whose
projects involve on-site water supply or sewage disposal systems with a capacity of two thousand
(2,000) gallons per day or greater must demonstrate that the groundwater at the property line will
comply, following development, with the standards for safe drinking water as established by the
State of Maine.
K. Water Quality Protection
All aspects of the project must be designed so that:
1. No person shall locate, store, discharge, or permit the discharge of any treated, untreated, or
inadequately treated liquid, gaseous, or solid materials of such nature, quantity, obnoxiousness,
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 117
toxicity, or temperature that may run off, seep, percolate, or wash into surface or groundwaters
so as to contaminate, pollute, or harm such waters or cause nuisances, such as objectionable
shore deposits, floating or submerged debris, oil or scum, color, odor, taste, or unsightliness or
be harmful to human, animal, plant, or aquatic life.
2. All storage facilities for fuel, chemicals, chemical or industrial wastes, and biodegradable raw
materials, must meet the standards of the Maine Department of Environmental Protection and the
State Fire Marshall's Office.
3. If the project is located within the direct watershed of a ‘body of water most at risk from
development’ or ‘a sensitive or threatened region or watershed’ as identified by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), and is of such magnitude as to require a
stormwater permit from the DEP, the project must comply with the standards of the DEP with
respect to the export of total suspended solids and/or phosphorous. If the project does not require
a stormwater permit from the DEP, it must be designed to minimize the export of phosphorous
from the site to the extent reasonable with the proposed use and the characteristics of the site.
L. Hazardous, Special, and Radioactive Materials
The handling, storage, and use of all materials identified by the standards of a federal or state agency
as hazardous, special or radioactive must be done in accordance with the standards of these agencies.
No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in bulk above ground unless they
are located at least seventy-five (75) feet from any lot line, or forty (40) feet in the case of
underground storage. All materials must be stored in a manner and location which is in compliance
with appropriate rules and regulations of the Maine Department of Public Safety and other
appropriate federal, state, and local regulations.
M. Technical and Financial Capacity of the Applicant
The applicant must demonstrate that he/she has the financial and technical capacity to carry out the
project in accordance with this ordinance and the approved plan.
N. Solid Waste Management
The proposed development must provide for adequate disposal of solid wastes. All solid waste must
be disposed of at a licensed disposal facility having adequate capacity to accept the project’s wastes.
O. Historic and Archaeological Resources
If any portion of the site has been identified as containing historic or archaeological resources, the
development must include appropriate measures for protecting these resources, including but not
limited to, modification of the proposed design of the site, timing of construction, and limiting the
extent of excavation.
P. Critical Areas Program
For all uses requiring Town site plan approval, the CEO or Planner will submit, where applicable,
the site plan to the State’s Critical Areas Program for review. Comments from the State regarding
Critical Areas Program shall be submitted to the Planning Board for their consideration.
Q. Floodplain Management
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 118
If any portion of the site is located within a special flood hazard area as identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, all use and development of that portion of the site must be
consistent with the Town’s Floodplain management provisions.
402.10.12 Good Neighbor Standards for Site Plan Review
A. Exterior Lighting
The proposed development must have adequate exterior lighting to provide for its safe use during
periods of darkness when the site is utilized.
1. Lighting may be used which serves security, safety and operational needs but which does not
directly or indirectly produce deleterious effects on abutting properties or which would impair
the vision of a vehicle operator on adjacent roadways. Lighting fixtures must be shielded or
hooded so that the lighting elements are not exposed to normal view by motorists, pedestrians, or
from adjacent dwellings and so that they do not unnecessarily light the night sky. Direct or
indirect illumination must not exceed 0.5 footcandles at the lot line or upon abutting residential
properties.
2. All exterior lighting, except security lighting, must be turned off between 11 P.M. and 6 A.M.
unless located on the site of a commercial or industrial use which is open for business during that
period with Planning Board approval.
3. Wiring to light poles and standards must be underground.
B. Buffering of Adjacent Uses
The development must provide for the buffering of adjacent uses where there is a transition from one
type of use to another use and for screening of mechanical equipment and service and storage areas.
1. Buffering must be designed to provide a year-round visual screen in order to minimize adverse
impacts. It may consist of fencing, evergreens, berms, rocks, boulders, mounds, or a combination
thereof.
2. A development must provide sufficient buffering when topographical or other barriers do not
provide reasonable screening and where there is a need to:
a. Shield neighboring properties from any adverse external effects of the development, or
b. Shield the development from the negative impacts of adjacent uses.
3. The width of the buffer may vary depending on the treatment of the area. Within densely built-up
areas, a buffer with dense plantings, fencing, or changes in grade may be as little as five (5) feet
in width. A buffer with moderate levels of planting should be ten (10) feet to fifteen (15) feet in
width. In suburban and rural settings, the width of the vegetated buffer should be increased to a
minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. Areas adjacent to service, loading, or storage areas should be
screened by dense planting, berms, fencing, or a combination thereof with a width of a minimum
of five (5) feet.
C. Noise
1. The maximum permissible sound pressure level of any continuous, regular or frequent or
intermittent source of sound produced by any activity on the site shall be limited by the time
period and by the abutting land use as listed below. Sound levels shall be measured at least four
(4) feet above ground at the property boundary of the source.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 119
2. Noise shall be measured by a meter set on the A-weighted response scale, fast response. The
meter shall meet the American National Standards Institute (ANSI S1 4- 1961) ‘American
Standards Specification for General Purpose Sound Level Meters.’
3. No person shall engage in construction activities, on a site abutting any residential use between
the hours of 10 p.m. and 6 a.m.
D. Storage of Materials
1. Exposed nonresidential storage areas, exposed machinery, and areas used for the storage or
collection of discarded automobiles, auto parts, metals or other articles of salvage or refuse must
have sufficient setbacks and screening (such as a stockade fence or a dense evergreen hedge) to
provide a visual buffer sufficient to minimize their impact on abutting residential uses and users
of public streets.
2. All dumpsters or similar large collection receptacles for trash or other wastes must be located on
level surfaces which are paved or graveled. Where the dumpster or receptacle is located in a yard
which abuts a residential or institutional use or a public street, it must be screened by fencing or
landscaping.
3. Where a potential safety hazard to children is likely to arise, physical screening sufficient to
deter small children from entering the premises must be provided and maintained in good
condition.
402.10.13 Site Design Standards for Site Plan Review
A. Landscaping
Landscaping must be provided as part of site design. The landscape plan for the entire site must use
landscape materials to integrate the various elements on site, preserve and enhance the particular
identity of the site, and create a pleasing site character. The landscaping should define street edges,
break up parking areas, soften the appearance of the development, and protect abutting properties.
Landscaping may include plant materials such as trees, shrubs, groundcovers, perennials, and
annuals, and other materials such as rocks, water, sculpture, art, walls, fences, paving materials, and
street furniture.
B. Building Placement
1. The site design should avoid creating a building surrounded by a parking lot. In built-up areas
and in villages, buildings should be placed close to the street, in conformance with existing,
adjacent setbacks. Parking should be to the side or preferably in the back.
2. In rural, uncongested areas buildings should be set well back from the road so as to conform to
the rural character of the area. If the parking is in front, a generous, landscaped buffer between
road and parking lot is to be provided. Unused areas should be kept natural, as field, forest,
wetland, etc.
3. Where two or more buildings are proposed, the buildings should be grouped and linked with
sidewalks; tree planting should be used to provide shade and break up the scale of the site.
4. Parking areas should be separated from the building by a minimum of five (5) to ten (10) feet.
Plantings should be provided along the building edge, particularly where building facades consist
of long or unbroken walls.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 120
C. Building Illumination
1. Building facades may be illuminated with soft lighting of low intensity that does not draw
inordinate attention to the building. The light source for the building facade illumination must be
concealed.
2. Building entrances may be illuminated using recessed lighting in overhangs and soffits, or by use
of spotlighting focused on the building entrances with the light source concealed (e.g., in
landscaped areas). Direct lighting of limited exterior building areas is permitted when necessary
for security purposes.
D. Building Entrances
1. The main entrance to the building should be oriented to the street unless the parking layout or the
grouping of the buildings justifies another approach, and should be clearly identified as such
through building and site design, landscaping, and/or signage.
2. At building entrance areas and drop-off areas, site furnishings such as benches and sitting walls
and, if appropriate, bicycle racks shall be encouraged. Additional plantings may be desirable at
these points to identify the building entrance and to complement the pedestrian activity at this
point.
E. Setback and Alignment of Buildings
Where there is a reasonably uniform relationship between the front walls of buildings and the street,
new buildings must be placed on a lot in conformance with the established relationship. For
buildings on corner lots, the setback relationship of both streets should be maintained. The creation
of ‘empty corners’ should be avoided through the placement of the building and other site features.
F. Sidewalks
Where an existing or planned public sidewalk is interrupted by a proposed project driveway, the
sidewalk material must continue to be maintained across the driveway, or the driveway must be
painted to distinguish it as a sidewalk. Further, if street trees exist on an adjacent property, street
trees must be planted, in a like manner, on the new site.
G. Location of Off-Street Parking
1. Within built-up areas, parking lots should be located to the side or rear of the building. Parking
should not be located between the building and the street. The use of shared parking, shared
driveways and the cross-connection of parking lots is encouraged.
2. In suburban and rural areas, smaller uses that may need public visibility from the street should be
sited as close to the street as possible. In this case, not more than one row of parking shall be
allowed between the building and the street, with the balance of the parking located at the side
and/or rear of the building. Larger scale uses and uses which do not require visibility from the
road may be located further from the road with a landscaped buffer between the building and the
street.
H. Landscaped Roadside Buffers
Whenever the area between the street and the front of the building is used for parking or vehicle
movement, a vegetated buffer strip must be established along the edge of the road right-of-way. This
buffer strip must soften the appearance of the site from the road and must create defined points of
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 121
access to and egress from the site. The width of the buffer strip must increase with the setback of the
building as follows:
Table 5 – Required Off-Street Loading Bays
Gross Floor Area in Thousands of Square Feet
Type of Use
12-24 25-100 101-250 Each 250
add.
Retail or Industrial 2 3 4 1
Business and Professional Offices, Hotels 1 1 3 1
Distribution Facilities, Warehousing 15 bays per 100,000 s.f. of gross floor area
I. Landscaping of Parking Lots
Landscaping around and within parking lots shades hot surfaces and visually "softens" the hard
surface look of parking areas. Parking areas must be designed and landscaped to create a pedestrianfriendly
environment. A landscaped border must be created around parking lots. Any parking lot
containing twenty (20) or more parking spaces must include one or more landscaped islands within
the interior of the lot. There must be at least one island for every forty (40) spaces. Landscaping
must screen the parking area from adjacent residential uses and from the street.
J. Building Orientation
New buildings within a built-up area should be compatible with the neighborhood such that they
reflect the overall building bulk, square footage, dimensions, placement of the building on the lot,
and rhythm of buildings and spaces along the street edge and minimize the visual impact on the
neighborhood. The visual impact of a building shall be measured by its relationship to other
buildings on the lot, design of the front of the building, and the rhythm of buildings and open spaces
along the street.
K. Building Scale
When large new buildings or structures are proposed in built-up areas where their scale (size) and
other features may be significantly different from that which already exists in the immediate
neighborhood, care must be taken to design the new building or structure so that it is compatible
with its neighbors. This may include making the building appear smaller, using additions and/or
vertical and horizontal building extensions, traditional materials, styles and/or proportions.
L. Design of Drive-Through Facilities
Any use that provides drive-through service must be located and designed to minimize the impact on
neighboring properties and traffic circulation. No drive-through facility shall be located in the area
of the site adjacent to a residential use or residential zone. Communication systems must not be
audible on adjacent properties in residential use. Vehicular access to the drive-through shall be
through a separate lane that prevents vehicle queuing within normal parking areas. Adequate
queuing space must be provided to prevent any vehicles from having to wait on a public street,
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 122
within the entry from the street, or within designated parking areas. The drive-through must not
interfere with any sidewalk or bicycle path. Only one drive-through is permitted per building,
although banks can have multiple lanes.
402.10.14 Standards for Multi-Family Housing
In addition to the prior provisions of Section 10 for Site Plan Review, multi-family housing in all
Districts shall meet the following standards:
A. Perimeter Buffer Strip
A buffer strip of at least fifty (50) feet in width shall be required around the perimeter of the land
area for which the multi-family project is proposed. The required buffer strip shall consist of
undisturbed vegetation provided that the existing vegetation consists of mature trees and acts as an
effective screen. If existing vegetation provides a poor visual screen, a mix of new landscaping
including trees, shrubs and grasses shall be planted.
B. Driveways and Parking
The scale and surface area of parking areas, driveways and paved areas shall be compatible with
adjacent structures, must be properly screened and must provide for parking in accordance with the
requirements of Section 402.10.11. B.
C. Internal Road Access to all Units
Access to all housing units within the multi-family development shall be located on the new interior
road system constructed as part of the development.
D. Orientation and Scale of Buildings
Buildings shall be oriented with respect to scenic vistas, natural landscape features, topography and
natural drainage areas, in accordance with an overall plan for site development. Buildings shall be
compatible in terms of physical size, visual impact, intensity of use, proximity to other structures and
density of development with other permitted uses within the District. In addition:
1. Individual lots, buildings, streets and parking areas shall be designed and situated:
a. To minimize alterations of the natural site;
b. To avoid the adverse effects of shadows, noise and traffic on the residents of the site;
c. To relate to surrounding properties, to improve the view from and of a building;
d. So that all dwelling units may take advantage of points of solar access.
2. Diversity and originality in lot layout and individual building, street, parking and lot layout shall
be encouraged.
E. Number of Units per Building
The maximum number of attached dwelling units per structure shall be six (6) and the average
number of attached dwelling units per structure shall be four (4). The distance between the
foundations of any two principal structures shall be no less than the height of the taller of the two
buildings, but in no event shall a building separation of less than thirty (30) feet be permitted.
F. Utilities
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 123
All dwelling units in the development shall be connected to a common water supply and distribution
system (either public or private) in accordance with any policies of the Gray Water District, unless
the developer shall clearly demonstrate to the Planning Board that such a system is not feasible and,
in addition:
1. That the costs of providing a common water supply and distribution system are prohibitive;
2. That adequate ground water is available at all locations proposed for individual water systems;
3. That the ground water source(s) proposed for individual water systems is safe from both on-site
contamination; and
4. That the source proposed is adequate for installation of life-safety sprinkler systems for the entire
development.
402.10.15 Planning Board Waivers of Site Plan Review Performance
Standards
A. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, the Planning Board may grant waivers from the performance
standards contained in this Article 10, Sections 402.10.11 through 402.10.14. In granting any
waivers, the Planning Board shall make findings that:
1. The need for a waiver is based on unique circumstances relating to the specific site and
development application and that these conditions would not be expected to be encountered
elsewhere;
2. The application of the standards is not requisite to public health, safety, and general welfare;
3. The waiver would not qualify for relief granted by the Board of Appeals under Article 9.
4. The granting of the waiver in other situations would not have the effect of amending the
ordinance requirements; and,
5. Appropriate conditions are applied.
402.10.16 Negotiated Exactions
A. Purpose: Negotiated Exactions are intended to serve the following purposes:
1. Ensure that publically owned facilities and infrastructure are not adversely affected by new
residential and/or commercial development
2. Provide the administrative steps to establish a process to quantify the cumulative effects of a
development proposal
3. Establish mechanisms to minimize and ideally eliminate the necessity to expend public funds to
address implications of private development on public infrastructure
4. Ensure that new private development provided the same level of service available to existing
development
5. Establish a fair process to ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new growth
and development
6. Provide new growth and development that bears a proportional share of the cost new public
facilities needed to serve them
7. Accommodate orderly growth and development in a safe and fair manner
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 124
8. Protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Gray and those who utilize public
infrastructure in the Town
B. Authority:
1. In accordance with 30-A, M.R.S.A. Section 4352 (Zoning), 30-A, M.R.S.A. Sections 1911 to
1916 (Home Rule), and 30-A M.R.S.A. 4354 (Fees), the Town of Gray Planning Board shall
have the authority to administer and require Negotiated Exactions as established in this Section
402.10.16 of the Town's Zoning Ordinance.
2. The Planning Board shall have the authority to require the owner or applicant of a development
proposal meeting one or more of the thresholds established in Section 402.10.16.D to complete
one or more of the following as part and/or all of the Negotiated Exaction:
a. Roadway and/or intersection improvements to maintain existing capacity and/or retain the
current level of service
b. In order to maintain existing capacity and/or retain the current level of service, make
necessary improvements to public infrastructure or provide the necessary surety for such
improvements to occur
c. Donate land to the Town of Gray and/or State of Maine as necessary to complete public
infrastructure such as currently proposed and/or future road widening, intersection
improvements, or similar improvements
d. Acquire and/or purchase land or easement rights to be transferred to the Town of Gray and/or
State of Maine necessary to complete public infrastructure
e. Posting a bond, cash, or other financial sureties as established in this Section 402.10.16.
3. As established in Section 402.10.16.G.1, the fair value of any land area donated, acquired, or
purchased shall be duly considered by the Planning Board, Town Council and the Town as an
integral component in determining the Negotiated Exaction.
C. Administrative Procedure:
1. As an integral part of the Planning Board's review of a development proposal, prior to final
approval, the Board shall have the authority to require the applicant to submit a written summary
of the cumulative anticipated implications of the proposed development upon public
infrastructure as established in this Section 402.10.16.D and F. The purpose of providing this
summary for the Board's review is to ensure that the Planning Board has sufficient information
upon which to make an informed decision to require a full assessment as detailed in Section
402.10.16.F below.
2. The Planning Board shall review the summary and determine if any aspects warrant obtaining
further information and/or if elements need to be verified by a duly qualified independent third
party chosen by the Board with input from Town Staff at the applicant's expense.
3. After the summary and necessary information is received, the Planning Board shall have the
authority to determine if a full assessment will be required.
4. In the event that the Planning Board determines that a full assessment is warranted based on the
standards in this Section 402.10.16, the applicant shall compile and submit this for the Board's
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 125
consideration using the requirements detailed in Section 402.10.16.F below and in accordance
with professionally accepted practices.
5. Once the Town Planner has determined that the assessment is sufficiently complete, the Planning
Board shall review the assessment and determine if further information and/or if elements need
to be verified by a duly qualified independent third party chosen by the Board with input from
Town Staff at the applicant's expense.
6. With input as necessary from duly qualified professionals to quantify the implications of the
proposed development, the Planning Board shall determine the cumulative responsibilities of the
applicant/developer in accordance with the options established in Section 402.10.16.G below.
7. Upon establishing a negotiated exactions agreement for an infrastructure improvement project,
the Planning Board shall describe an improvement benefit area(s) within which subsequent
development is likely to benefit from the required improvements. The proposed benefit area(s)
and the methodology to be used in assessing future allocation cost sharing and carrying cost
reallocation shall then be referred to the Town Council for enactment. Benefit area(s) enacted by
the Town Council shall be effective for the agreed upon period, not to exceed three (3) years
from the date of enactment.
8. Within each negotiated exactions benefit area enacted by the Town Council, all subsequent
development applications for site plan and/or subdivision approval shall be required to
participate in cost sharing and/or carrying costs for the infrastructure improvement project unless
the Planning Board determines that no benefit has been derived from the prior improvement
project.
9. If the improvement is not completed within the agreed upon period, the fee, plus interest, must
be returned to the applicant. If the improvement is made at a cost less than was anticipated, the
remaining portion shall be returned to the applicant(s) at amounts equal to their fair share of the
improvement.
10. The Town shall segregate the funds received from exaction agreements from the general revenue
fund and shall expend those funds solely for the purpose that was intended.
11. Prior to final approval for the project, the Planning Board and/or Town Staff shall solicit input
from the Town's Counsel to ensure that the necessary legal assurances have been established and
formally executed to ensure the completion of the improvements, payments, etc. as finally
determined by the Planning Board in accordance with this Section 402.10.16.
D. Applicability: Except as specifically exempted in Section 402.10.16.E, development proposals that
adversely effects existing public infrastructure by creating demand(s) upon, or the need for, public
facilities causing one or more of the following, as determined by the Planning Board, are required to
comply with this Section 402.10.16:
1. Project(s) that lower the level of service (LOS) nearby intersection(s) including but not limited to
the following:
a. Adjusting signal timing and/or upgraded signals
b. Adding turn lane(s)
c. Widening portions of the intersection
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 126
d. Constructing roadway portions adjacent to intersections for proper alignment i.e. taper lanes,
etc.
e. Adding length to existing turn lane(s)
2. Project(s) that reduce the capacity of a roadway segment
3. Project(s) that place additional demand upon publically owned stormwater facilities
4. Project(s) that create additional stormwater that adversely affects publically owned land or
facilities
5. Project(s) that require extending, upgrading, or increasing the water main size of a public water
supply
6. Project(s) that add additional wastewater to a publically owned and/or operated treatment facility
7. Project(s) that place special demands upon the Gray Public Safety Department such as a
requirement for special equipment to serve the project
8. Project(s) that increase the workload on the Gray Public Works Department excepting winter
maintenance as established in the Gray Street Ordinance (Chapter 400)
9. Project(s) that increase the demand for police or law enforcement
10. Project(s) that place additional demands on publically owned recreational facilities
11. Project(s) that place demands on publically owned bicycle and/or pedestrian infrastructure
specifically including sidewalks and bicycle lanes
12. Project(s) that involve a new use, change of use, or expansion of an existing use
E. Exemptions: The following developments are specifically exempt from this Section 402.10.16:
1. Existing, proposed, or expanded public facility(ies) owned by the Town of Gray
2. Reconstruction of a building or structure located on property which was damaged or destroyed
by fire or other casualty or which was voluntarily demolished during the past year provided that
all of the following are met:
a. No additional dwelling unit(s) are created.
b. The use is not changed.
c. The use is not expanded.
3. Alteration, remodeling rehabilitation, and/or reconstruction of any existing legal nonresidential
structure where none of the following are associated with the proposed development:
a. No net increase in square footage of the structure
b. The use is not changed
c. There is not an expansion of an existing use
d. No new use(s) are proposed
F. Conducting the Assessment:
1. The Planning Board may require the applicant to participate in municipally or state-owned, offsite
capital improvements. In accordance with 402.10.16.D where it appears that the proposed
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 127
development will result in a negative impact or decline in the level of service of any existing offsite
capital improvement, the Planning Board shall assess and establish the applicant’s level of
participation in the off-site capital improvement.
2. In conducting the assessment, the Planning Board shall consider the following:
a. The status of the system and service as a result of the analysis and any potential relationship
to items noted and scheduled in the comprehensive plan and capital improvement program.
b. The net effect of the proposed development on the capacity of the capital improvement,
indicating the percentage share caused by the development.
c. A cost estimate for this capital improvement so as to meet the increased demand, a
breakdown of the applicant’s share of that cost, and an estimate of the remaining capacity
and post improvement capacity available to developments other than the applicant.
G. Improvement Responsibilities:
1. The fair value of any land area donated, acquired, or purchased by the owner/applicant shall be
duly considered by the Planning Board, Town Council and the Town as an integral component in
determining the Negotiated Exaction.
2. Once the applicant’s share of capital improvement impact has been established by the Planning
Board, the Board shall select the method in which the applicant must participate in the capital
improvement. The following alternatives are available:
a. The applicant makes the improvement:
(i) The applicant must agree to make the necessary infrastructure improvements, providing
all initial financial carrying costs, establish a construction schedule, and post a
performance guarantee to cover all associated costs. The applicant may recover the
improvement costs (including engineering and design, construction, and financing
expenses) within ten (10) years after improvements are made and in accordance with a
specified level of service range associated with the improvement.
(ii) For the applicant to recover these costs, subsequent developments must realize a benefit
by using the infrastructure improvements financed by the applicant. Cost reimbursement
for the applicant shall be established as subsequent developments go through the
subdivision or site plan review process.
(iii) Calculations shall include adjustments for time-price differentials using the coupon issue
yield equivalent of 52-week United States Treasury Bills (1-year Treasury Rate) as an
index. Payments shall be made prior to the release of the signed final plan for recording
purposes or the building permit where no recording mylar is involved.
b. Cost Sharing for Subsequent Development:
(i) Allocation Cost Sharing for Subsequent Development(s). In arriving at the appropriate
cost share for subsequent development, applicants shall use the same methodology as that
utilized by the initial applicant. In applying the methodology, subsequent applicants shall
establish their cost based on the percentage utilization of the improvements in terms of
post-construction level of service.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 128
(ii) Reallocation of Carrying Costs. At the request of the developer and at the discretion of
the Planning Board, the Town may also require subsequent developments to share in the
initial financial carrying costs of the necessary infrastructure improvements. If so
determined, the carrying costs shall be shared between the initial and subsequent
development(s) in direct proportion to their relative impact on the capital improvement.
Once apportioned, the initial and subsequent development(s) are eligible for cost
reimbursement from subsequent development(s) as described above.
c. Town makes improvements: The Town may agree to complete the improvements. The
applicant shall pay the required share of the cost to the Town prior to the release of the
signed final plan or building permit, said payment to be held in a reserve fund until the
improvement is completed. Subsequent developments that realize a benefit by using the
infrastructure improvements financed by the Town shall also pay a fair share contribution.
d. Cost Sharing agreement between Applicant and/or Town and/or MDOT to complete
infrastructure improvements and/or partial contribution toward future Town infrastructure
Improvement related to development application and/or land acquisition.
402.10.17 Post Site Plan Approval Activities
A. Time Limit on Approval
Substantial construction of the improvements covered by any site plan approval must be
substantially commenced within twelve (12) months and substantially completed within twenty-four
(24) months of the date upon which the approval was granted. If construction has not been
substantially commenced within the specified period, the approval shall be null and void. If
construction has not been substantially commenced within the specified period substantially
completed the project shall be in violation of the Ordinance.
The applicant may request an extension of the approval deadline prior to the expiration of the period.
Such request must be in writing and must be made to the Planning Board. The Planning Board may
grant up to two, one-year extensions to the periods if the approved plan conforms to the ordinances
in effect at the time the extension is granted and any and all federal and state approvals and permits
are current.
B. Improvement Guarantees
1. The Planning Board may require the posting of an improvement guarantee in such amount and
form as specified in subsection C below as is reasonably necessary to ensure the proper
installation of all off-site improvements required as conditions of approval. The nature and
duration of the guarantee shall be structured to achieve this goal without adding unnecessary
costs to the applicant.
2. Upon substantial completion of all required improvements, the developer must notify the Planner
and Code Enforcement Officer of the completion or substantial completion of improvements.
The staff shall inspect or seek qualified professionals to conduct inspections to verify the proper
construction of all required improvements and shall file a report indicating approval, partial
approval, or rejection of such improvements with a statement of reasons for any rejection.
3. If the improvements are approved, the guarantee shall be released. Where partial approval is
granted, the developer shall be released from liability only for that portion of the improvements
approved.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 129
C. Form of Guarantee
Performance guarantees may be provided by a variety of means including, but not limited to, the
following which must be approved as to form and enforceability by the Town Attorney:
1. Security Bond. The applicant may obtain a security bond from a surety bonding company
authorized to do business in the state. The bond must be issued in the name of the developer
receiving site plan approval and not any contractors working for the developer.
2. Letter of Credit. The applicant may provide an irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other
reputable lending institution.
3. Escrow Account. The applicant may deposit cash or other instruments readily convertible into
cash at face value, either with the Town, or in escrow in the name of the Town with a bank. A
written agreement will be entered between the developer and the Town indicating the release of
funds as work is completed and the return of all remaining funds with any interest accrued to the
developer upon successful completion of the project.
D. Submission of As-Built Plans
Any project involving the construction of more than twenty thousand (20,000 sq. ft.) square feet of
gross floor area or fifty thousand (50,000 sq. ft.) square feet of impervious surface, must provide the
Code Enforcement Officer with a set of construction plans showing the building(s) and site
improvements as actually constructed on the site. These "as-built" plans must be submitted prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project or occupancy of the building.
E. Minor Changes to Approved Plans
Minor changes in approved plans necessary to address field conditions may be approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer provided that any such change does not affect compliance with the standards or
alter the essential nature of the proposal. Any such change must be endorsed in writing on the
approved plan by the Planner.
F. Other Changes to Approved Plans
Approvals of site plans are dependent upon and limited to the proposals and plans contained in the
application and supporting documents submitted and affirmed to by the applicant. Any variation
from the plans, proposals, and supporting documents, except minor changes that do not affect
approval standards, is subject to review and approval by the Planning Board or Staff Review
Committee.
G. Appeals
1. Appeal of any actions taken by the Staff Review Committee shall be taken to the Planning Board
in accordance with the provisions of Section 402.10.7 D.
2. Any party may take an appeal within thirty (30) days of the vote on the original decision, to
Superior Court from any order, relief or denial in accordance with Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure, Article 80B. This time period may be extended by the court upon motion for good
cause shown. The hearing before the Superior Court must be without a jury.
3. The Planning Board may reconsider any decision reached under this section within thirty (30)
days of its prior decision. The Board may conduct additional hearings and receive additional
evidence and testimony as provided in this subsection.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 130
ARTICLE 11 – GRAVEL PITS AND QUARRIES
Revision of Article 11 adopted by Town Council on: February 5th 2013
402.11.1 Purpose
The purpose of the standards in this Article 11are the following:
A. Regulate in an environmentally sound manner the extraction, removal, processing, and storage of
topsoil, loam, rock, sand, gravel, clay, and other similar non-metallic earth materials in order to
create an excavation for the purpose of obtaining gravel, rock, sand, fill, or clay.
B. Protect the quantity and quality of the groundwater and other water bodies.
C. Prevent a lowering of the average water table.
D. Control erosion.
E. Regulate access to excavations to and from public and private streets or roads.
F. Provide for the safety of the public.
402.11.2 Applicability
A. After the effective date of this revision of this Ordinance, March 7th 2013, all excavations within the
Town of Gray shall be operated and maintained in accordance with the requirements of this Article
11 and this Ordinance except for those excavations with previously issued valid permits that
specifically allow otherwise. Examples of exceptions include, but are not limited to, previously
issued site location of development permits or other arrangements that have been approved by the
State of Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
B. Definitions: Terms for standards included in and associated with this Article 11 are located in
Article 2 (Definitions) of this Ordinance. Terminology utilized by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection for the purposes of regulating Gravel Pits, Quarries, and Extractive
Operations shall be applicable for the purposes of standards in this Article 11.
C. Reclamation Requirements: Any area that has not been disturbed or modified since July 4, 1985 is
not subject to reclamation requirements specified in Excavation Regulations in this Article (Section
402.11.7) of this Ordinance.
D. This Ordinance does not apply to the following types of excavations or activities (formerly identified
as Class C excavations):
1. Any excavation with the sole purpose to determine the nature or extent of mineral resources
accomplished by hand sampling, test boring, or other methods which create minimal disturbance
with test holes filled in immediately after use.
2. The removal of less than two hundred (200) cubic yards of material (except topsoil) in any one
(1) year, provided that such removal does not disturb more than one (1) acre of land. The
removal of any amount of topsoil or loam from a site is not an exempt activity unless it is
undertaken as part of an approved construction project, is part of normal farm operations, or the
topsoil or loam is being moved to a contiguous site having the same ownership.
3. Any excavation or grading which is undertaken as part of and subordinate to an approved
construction project such as a subdivision, permitted structure, or road.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 131
4. Any excavation that has not expanded the limits of extraction beyond those that existed on the
site prior to the initial adoption of this Ordinance on July 4, 1985.
402.11.3 Permitted Zoning Districts
A. Excavation and earth-moving activities requiring a permit in accordance with this Ordinance shall be
considered allowed uses in the RRA, BD-1, BD-2, MD, C, LD, and MH Zoning Districts.
B. Excavation and earth-moving activities which require a permit but which were not in operation as of
July 4, 1985 shall be prohibited in the, WH-1, WH-2 and BT-2 Zoning Districts.
C. Excavation and earth-moving activities in RP, SP and LR Zoning Districts are covered separately
under the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
402.11.4 Permit Requirements
A. Regulations for permits distinguish between seven classifications as specified below in Section
402.11.5 (Classification). In addition to standards required for the respective classification, all
operations shall comply with the standards in Permit Requirements in this Article (Section 402.11.4).
B. For all classifications that require a Town permit, the owner or operator shall pay a fee to the Town
of Gray as set forth in the Schedule of Fees adopted by the Town Council upon filing an application
for an excavation under this Ordinance.
C. For classifications that do not require a Town permit, the standards established in this Ordinance,
including Administrative Requirements (Section 402.11.8) and Excavation Regulations (Section
402.11.7) in this Article are applicable unless specifically exempted.
D. The reviewing authority’s scope of review is limited to the permit requirements for the respective
classifications. The applicant shall be responsible for ensuring that necessary provisions have been
established to meet and maintain Excavation Regulations specified in Excavation Regulations
(Section 402.11.7) and Administrative Requirements (Section 402.11.8) of this Article including but
not limited to reclamation standards, an acceptable form of surety for reclamation when applicable,
expansions of non-conforming uses, inspections, annual reports, and change in owner/operator.
E. Renewal of an excavation permit shall not be required while the operation of an excavation remains
within the boundaries of the existing permit, provided that the owner or operator complies with all
the requirements of this Ordinance.
402.11.5 Classification
There shall be seven (7) classifications of excavations:
A. New Class A Excavations. Class A excavations are those of five (5) acres or more in area that are
required to have a permit from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection. See 402.11.6.A
below.
B. Expansion of a Class A excavation beyond the permitted excavation area and within the perimeter of
the property which includes the proposed expansion without any change in access. See 402.11.6.B
below.
C. Expansion of a Class A excavation beyond the permitted excavation area and within the perimeter of
the property which includes the proposed expansion, with a proposed change in access. See
402.11.6.C below.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 132
D. Expansion of a Class A excavation beyond the permitted excavation area and beyond the perimeter
of the property which includes the existing excavation without any change in access. See 402.11.6.D
below.
E. Expansion of a Class A excavation beyond the permitted excavation area and beyond the perimeter
of the property which includes the existing excavation and which also includes a change in access.
See 402.11.6.E below.
F. New Class B excavations and expansions of Class B excavations beyond the permitted excavation
area that will have a proposed total working excavation area of less than five (5) acres. Class B
excavations are those of less than five (5) acres in area that are not required to have a permit from
the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, but are required to have a permit from the Town
of Gray. See 402.11.6.F below.
G. Expansion of a Class B excavation that will have a proposed total working excavation area of five
(5) acres or more. See 402.11.6.G below.
402.11.6 Requirements for Classifications
In addition to Permit Requirements specified in 402.11.4 above, the following standards are applicable
for the respective type of classification:
A. New Class A excavations
1. Any proposed new Class A excavation that is entirely within the Town of Gray is required to
obtain a permit from the Town of Gray in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
For any proposed new Class A excavation that crosses municipal boundaries, this requirement
for a permit applies only to that portion that lies within the Town of Gray.
2. The applicant is required to file a notice of intent to comply with the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection and to file an application for a new excavation permit with the Town
of Gray.
3. Planning Board approval is required before a permit is issued by the Town of Gray. A public
hearing shall be held by the Planning Board within thirty (30) days of the date that the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that an application is complete.
4. An application for a proposed new Class A excavation permit shall be submitted to the Code
Enforcement Officer. The following information shall be included with the application for a new
permit:
a. Name, address, telephone number, fax, and email address of current owner of the property.
b. Name, address, telephone number, fax, and email address of operator if different from owner.
c. If the applicant for an excavation has received a Maine Department of Environmental
Protection permit or any other State or Federal permits that may be required, then copies of
those permits shall be included with the application.
d. Assessor’s Tax Map and lot number(s), a copy of the most recently recorded deed for the
parcel and, if the applicant is not the owner, verification of right, title, or interest in the
property by purchase and sales agreement, option to purchase the property, or some other
proof of interest.
e. A site plan that includes the following information:
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 133
(i) A boundary survey of the parcel proposed for excavation, or if a portion of the parcel
is proposed for excavation, a survey of the portion of property proposed for
excavation shall be submitted.
(ii) Date, North arrow, legend, and scale.
(iii) Owner of record name and address.
(iv) All consultants working on the project.
(v) Location of structures, wells, streams, springs, intermittent streams, wetlands, and test
borings on the parcel or within one hundred (100) feet of the parcel.
(vi) Contours of the parcel around the area of proposed excavation and within one
hundred (100) feet of the parcel at five (5) foot intervals.
(vii) Existing and proposed buffering of the parcel or the excavation site from surrounding
properties.
(viii) Location of any proposed material storage sites including proximity to abutters.
(ix) Location of all proposed accesses to and from public or private streets with plans for
controlling access to the excavation site such as fencing, gates, or signs.
(x) Rehabilitation plans for closing out the site.
(xi) If a site plan has been accepted by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection, then a copy of that site plan shall be included with the application.
f. The depth to groundwater at the site of the proposed excavation as determined by test boring
to substantiate that the groundwater will not be disturbed.
g. A description of any existing or planned security provisions which might include warning
signs, fencing, and lighting.
h. A narrative description of the operations including methods of extraction, uses of on-site
processing equipment, type and location of any structures, stockpiled materials, disposition
of stumps, brush, or other materials, and on-site storage of any hazardous materials.
i. Present uses of abutting and nearby properties.
j. A statement clearly specifying any known easements that could potentially affect the
property to be excavated or the rights of the owners of the easements. If no such easements
exist, a statement to this effect shall be submitted.
k. Sufficient information for the Planning Board to make a determination that the standards
contained in Section 402.11.6.A.7 below will be met and maintained.
l. A signed statement attesting that, to the best of the knowledge of the applicant for an
excavation, the information contained in the application is true, accurate, and complete.
5. When the Code Enforcement Officer has verified that the application is complete, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall notify the Planning Board that an application for a new Class A
excavation has been received and that the Planning Board is required to hold a Public hearing
within thirty (30) days.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 134
6. No permit shall be issued for any new Class A excavation until the abutting property owners
have been notified as specified in this Section.
a. Within seven (7) days of the receipt of an application for a new excavation permit, the Code
Enforcement Officer, or designee, shall notify in writing by First Class Mail all owners of
abutting property that an application for an excavation permit has been received.
b. For purposes of this section, abutting property owners shall be owners of property within five
hundred (500) feet of the nearest boundary of the property which includes the proposed
excavation.
c. For purposes of this section, the owners of abutting property shall be considered to be the
parties listed by the tax assessor for the Town of Gray as those against whom taxes are
assessed.
d. Failure of any property owner to receive a notice of public hearing shall not necessitate
another hearing or invalidate any action of the Planning Board.
e. The letter notifying the abutting property owners shall state that an application has been
received, where/how to view additional information, the specifics of the next step in the
Town’s review of the application (date, place, time), and the options available to ask
questions, raise concerns, and provide input to the Town’s review process.
7. The Planning Board shall have jurisdiction over the following matters that may have effects
outside of the perimeter of the property and shall determine that adverse impacts to the public are
minimized:
a. Provisions to deal with any noise, dust, runoff, or other environmental considerations that
may affect the public.
b. Appropriate mitigation measures to minimize negative impacts of the project on surrounding
or nearby properties or public facilities including, but not limited to public roads.
c. Appropriate security provisions which might include warning signs, fencing, and lighting.
d. Safe entrances and exits in accordance with the provisions of the Traffic Access and Parking
section of Site Development Standards for Site Plan Review of this Ordinance.
e. Appropriate buffer strips in accordance with the requirements of the Excavation Regulations
of this Ordinance.
f. Proximity of proposed material storage sites to abutters.
B. Expansion of a Class A excavation beyond the permitted excavation area and within the perimeter of
the property which includes the proposed expansion without any change in access.
1. The applicant is required to file the appropriate documents with the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection and to supply two (2) complete copies of those documents to the Code
Enforcement Officer of the Town of Gray.
C. Expansion of a Class A excavation beyond the permitted excavation area and within the perimeter of
the property which includes the proposed expansion, with a proposed change in access
1. The applicant is required to file the appropriate documents with the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection and to include copies of those documents with an application for an
expansion of an excavation permit with the Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of Gray
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 135
2. Planning Board approval is required before a permit is issued by the Town of Gray. The
Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within thirty (30) days of the date that the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that the application is complete.
3. The following information shall be included with the application for a permit:
a. Name, address, telephone number, fax, and email address of current owner of the new
property.
b. Name, address, telephone number, fax, and email address of operator if different from owner
of the new property.
c. A sketch of the area proposed for expansion of an excavation. The sketch shall include, at a
minimum:
(i) Date, North arrow, legend, and scale.
(ii) Owner of record name and address.
(iii) All consultants working on the project.
(iv) Locations of structures, wells, streams, springs, intermittent streams, wetlands, and
test borings on the area proposed for expansion or within one hundred (100) feet of
the area proposed for expansion.
(v) Existing and proposed buffering of the area proposed for expansion from surrounding
properties.
(vi) Any proposed material storage sites, including proximity to abutters, in the area
proposed for expansion.
(vii) Detailed drawings of the proposed change in access including contours.
d. A description of any existing or planned security provisions which might include warning
signs, fencing, and lighting.
e. A narrative description of the operations including methods of extraction, uses of on-site
processing equipment, type and location of any structures, stockpiled materials, disposition
of stumps, brush, or other materials, and on-site storage of any hazardous materials.
f. Present uses of abutting and nearby properties.
g. A statement clearly specifying any known easements that could potentially affect an
excavation. If no such easements exist, a statement to this effect shall be submitted.
h. Sufficient information for the Planning Board to make a determination that the standards
contained in Section 402.11.6.C.6 below will be met and maintained.
i. A signed statement attesting that, to the best of the knowledge of the applicant for an
expansion of an excavation, the information contained in the application is true, accurate, and
complete.
4. When the Code Enforcement Officer has verified that the application is complete, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall notify the Planning Board that an application for an expansion of an
excavation with a change of access has been received and a Public hearing is required to be held
within thirty (30) days.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 136
5. No permit shall be issued for expansion of a Class A excavation that includes a change in access
until the property owners abutting the property which includes the expansion have been notified
as specified in this Section that an application for an expansion of an excavation with a change of
access has been received.
a. Within seven (7) days of the receipt of an application for a permit for the expansion of the
excavation, the Code Enforcement Officer, or designee, shall notify in writing by First Class
Mail all owners of abutting property that an application for an expansion of an excavation
permit has been submitted.
b. For purposes of this section, abutting property owners shall be owner(s) of property within
five hundred (500) feet of the nearest boundary of the area to be permitted for the proposed
expansion of an excavation.
c. Owners of abutting property shall be those listed in the most recent tax records of the Town
of Gray.
d. Failure of any property owner to receive a notice of public hearing shall not necessitate
another hearing or invalidate any action of the Board.
e. The letter notifying the abutting property owners shall state that an application for an
expansion of an excavation beyond the permitted excavation area, but within the perimeter of
the property which includes the proposed expansion, with a proposed change in access has
been received, where/how to view additional information, the specifics of the next step in the
Town’s review of the application (date, place, time), and the options available to ask
questions, raise concerns, and provide input to the Town’s review process.
6. The Planning Board shall have jurisdiction over the following matters that may have effects
outside of the perimeter of the property and shall determine that adverse impacts to the public are
minimized:
a. Provisions to deal with any noise, dust, runoff, or other environmental considerations that
may affect the public.
b. Appropriate mitigation measures to minimize negative impacts of the project on surrounding
or nearby properties or public facilities including, but not limited to public roads.
c. Safe entrances and exits in accordance with the provisions of the Traffic Access and Parking
section of Site Development Standards for Site Plan Review of this Ordinance.
7. All requirements of the existing permit shall remain in effect unless specifically altered in the
permit for an expansion.
D. Expansion of a Class A excavation beyond the permitted excavation area and beyond the perimeter
of the property which includes the existing excavation without any change in access.
1. The applicant is required to file the appropriate documents with the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection and to include copies of those documents with an application for an
expansion of an excavation permit with the Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of Gray.
2. The following information shall be included with the application for a permit:
a. Name, address, telephone number, fax, and email address of current owner of the new
property.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 137
b. Name, address, telephone number, fax, and email address of operator if different from owner
of the new property.
c. A sketch of the area proposed for expansion of an excavation. The sketch shall include, at a
minimum:
(i) Date, North arrow, legend, and scale.
(ii) Owner of record name and address.
(iii) All consultants working on the project.
(iv) Location of structures, wells, streams, springs, intermittent streams, wetlands, and test
borings on the area proposed for expansion or within one hundred (100) feet of the
area proposed for expansion.
(v) Existing and proposed buffering of the area proposed for expansion from surrounding
properties.
(vi) Any proposed material storage sites, including proximity to abutters, in the area
proposed for expansion
d. A description of any existing or planned security provisions which might include warning
signs, fencing, and lighting.
e. A narrative description of the operations including methods of extraction, uses of on-site
processing equipment, type and location of any structures, stockpiled materials, disposition
of stumps, brush, or other materials, and on-site storage of any hazardous materials.
f. Present uses of abutting and nearby properties.
g. A statement clearly specifying any known easements that could potentially affect the
property to be excavated or the rights of the owners of the easements. If no such easements
exist, a statement to this effect shall be submitted.
h. A signed statement attesting that, to the best of the knowledge of the applicant for an
expansion of an excavation, the information contained in the application is true, accurate, and
complete.
3. When the Code Enforcement Officer has verified that the application is complete, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit for the expansion.
4. Within seven (7) days of the verification by the Code Enforcement Officer that the application is
complete, the Code Enforcement Officer, or designee, shall notify in writing by First Class Mail
the abutting property owners of the new property which includes the expansion that a permit for
an expansion of an excavation without any change in access has been issued.
a. For purposes of this section, abutting property owners shall be owner(s) of property within
five hundred (500) feet of the nearest boundary of the area to be permitted for the proposed
expansion of an excavation.
b. Owners of abutting property shall be those listed in the most recent tax records of the Town
of Gray.
c. Failure of any property owner to receive a notice shall not necessitate any review or
invalidate any action of the Code Enforcement Officer.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 138
d. The letter notifying the abutting property owners shall state that a permit for an expansion of
an excavation that proposes to extend beyond the perimeter of the property which includes
the existing excavation without any change in access has been received, where/how to view
additional information, and the options available to ask questions, and raise concerns
regarding applicable standards.
5. All requirements of the existing permit shall remain in effect unless specifically altered in the
permit for an expansion.
E. Expansion of a Class A excavation beyond the permitted excavation area and beyond the perimeter
of the property which includes the existing excavation and which also includes a change in access
1. The applicant is required to file the appropriate documents with the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection and to include two (2) complete copies of those documents with an
application for an expansion of an excavation permit with the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Town of Gray.
2. Planning Board approval is required before a permit is issued by the Town of Gray. The
Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within thirty (30) days of the date that the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that the application is complete.
3. The following information shall be included with the application for a permit:
a. Name, address, telephone number, fax, and email address of current owner of the new
property.
b. Name, address, telephone number, fax, and email address of operator if different from owner
of the new property.
c. A sketch of the area proposed for expansion of the excavation. The sketch shall include, at a
minimum:
(i) Date, North arrow, legend, and scale.
(ii) Owner of record name and address.
(iii) All consultants working on the project.
(iv) Locations of structures, wells, streams, springs, intermittent streams, wetlands, and
test borings on the area proposed for expansion or within one hundred (100) feet of
the area proposed for expansion.
(v) Existing and proposed buffering of the area proposed for expansion from surrounding
properties.
(vi) Any proposed material storage sites including proximity to abutters.
(vii) Detailed drawings of the proposed change in access including contours.
d. The depth to groundwater at the site of the proposed expansion of the excavation as
determined by test boring to substantiate that the groundwater will not be disturbed.
e. A narrative description of the operations including methods of extraction, uses of on-site
processing equipment, type and location of any structures, stockpiled materials, disposition
of stumps, brush, or other materials, and on-site storage of any hazardous materials.
f. Present uses of abutting and nearby properties.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 139
g. A statement clearly specifying any known easements that could potentially affect the
property to be excavated or the rights of the owners of the easements. If no such easements
exist, a statement to this effect shall be submitted.
h. Sufficient information for the Planning Board to made a determination that the standards is
Sections 402.11.6.E.6 and 7 below will be met and maintained.
i. A signed statement attesting that, to the best of the knowledge of the applicant for an
expansion of an excavation, the information contained in the application is true, accurate, and
complete.
4. When the Code Enforcement Officer has verified that the application is complete, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall notify the Planning Board that an application for an expansion of an
excavation with a change of access has been received and a Public hearing is required to be held
within thirty (30) days.
5. No permit shall be issued for expansion of a Class A excavation that includes a change in access
until the property owners abutting the property which includes the expansion have been notified
as specified in this Section.
a. Within seven (7) days of the receipt of an application for a permit for the expansion of the
excavation, the Code Enforcement Officer, or designee, shall notify in writing by First Class
Mail all owners of abutting property that an application for a permit for an expansion of an
excavation with a change of access has been received.
b. For purposes of this section, abutting property owners shall be owner(s) of property within
five hundred (500) feet of the nearest boundary of the area to be permitted for the proposed
expansion of an excavation.
c. Owners of abutting property shall be those listed in the most recent tax records of the Town
of Gray.
d. Failure of any property owner to receive a notice of public hearing shall not necessitate
another hearing or invalidate any action of the Board.
e. The letter notifying the abutting property owners shall state that an application for an
expansion of an excavation that proposes to extend beyond the perimeter of the property
which includes the existing excavation and also includes a change in access has been
received, where/how to view additional information, the specifics of the next step in the
Town’s review of the application (date, place, time), and the options available to ask
questions, raise concerns, and provide input to the Town’s review process.
6. The Planning Board shall have jurisdiction over the following matters that may have effects
outside of the perimeter of the property and shall determine that adverse impacts to the public are
minimized:
a. Provisions to deal with any noise, dust, runoff, or other environmental considerations that
may affect the public.
b. Appropriate mitigation measures to minimize negative impacts of the project on surrounding
or nearby properties or public facilities including, but not limited to public roads.
c. Safe entrances and exits in accordance with the provisions of the Traffic Access and Parking
section of Site Development Standards for Site Plan Review of this Ordinance.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 140
d. Appropriate buffer strips in accordance with the requirements of the Excavation Regulations
of this Ordinance.
e. Proximity of proposed material storage sites to abutters.
7. The Planning Board shall determine that the following issues are met that are not more than fifty
(50) feet inside of the perimeter of the property which includes the proposed expansion:
a. Appropriate buffer strips in accordance with the requirements of the Excavation Regulations
of this Ordinance.
b. Proximity of proposed material storage sites to abutters.
8. All requirements of the existing permit shall remain in effect unless specifically altered in the
permit for an expansion.
F. New Class B Excavations and Expansion of a Class B Excavation.
1. Any proposed new Class B excavation or expansion of a Class B excavation that is entirely
within the Town of Gray is required to obtain a permit from the Town of Gray in accordance
with the requirements of this Ordinance. For any proposed new Class B excavation or expansion
of a Class B excavation that crosses municipal boundaries, this requirement for a permit applies
only to that portion that lies within the Town of Gray.
2. The Planning Board shall have jurisdiction over all permitting matters related to the excavation.
3. Planning Board approval is required before a permit is issued by the Town of Gray. A public
hearing shall be held by the Planning Board within thirty (30) days of the date that the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that an application is complete.
4. For a proposed new Class B excavation or expansion of a Class B excavation, the applicant is
required to file an application for an excavation permit with Gray’s Code Enforcement Officer.
The following information shall be included with the application for a permit:
a. Name, address, telephone number, fax, and email address of current owner of the property.
b. Name, address, telephone number, fax, and email address of operator if different from owner.
c. For a Class B excavation, if the applicant for an excavation has received a Maine Department
of Environmental Protection permit or any other State or Federal permits that may be
required, then copies of those permits shall be included with the application.
d. Assessor’s Tax Map and lot number(s), a copy of the most recently recorded deed for the
parcel and, if the applicant is not the owner, verification of right, title, or interest in the
property by purchase and sales agreement, option to purchase the property, or some other
proof of interest.
e. A site plan that includes the following information:
(i) A boundary survey of the parcel proposed for excavation, or if a portion of the parcel
is proposed for excavation, a survey of the portion of property proposed for
excavation shall be submitted.
(ii) Date, North arrow, legend, and scale.
(iii) Owner of record name and address.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 141
(iv) All consultants working on the project.
(v) Location of structures, wells, streams, springs, intermittent streams, wetlands, and test
borings on the parcel or within one hundred (100) feet of the parcel.
(vi) Contours of the parcel around the area of proposed excavation and within one
hundred (100) feet of the parcel at five (5) foot intervals.
(vii) Existing and proposed buffering of the parcel or the excavation site from surrounding
properties.
(viii) Location of any proposed material storage sites including proximity to abutters.
(ix) Location of all proposed accesses to and from public or private streets with plans for
controlling access to the excavation site such as fencing, gates, or signs.
(x) Rehabilitation plans for closing out the site.
f. The depth to groundwater at the site of the proposed excavation as determined by test boring
to substantiate that the groundwater will not be disturbed.
g. A description of any existing or planned security provisions which might include warning
signs, fencing, and lighting.
h. A narrative description of the operations including methods of extraction, uses of on-site
processing equipment, type and location of any structures, stockpiled materials, disposition
of stumps, brush, or other materials, and on-site storage of any hazardous materials.
i. Present uses of abutting and nearby properties.
j. A statement clearly specifying any known easements that could potentially affect an
excavation. If no such easements exist, a statement to this effect shall be submitted.
k. Sufficient information for the Planning Board to make a determination that the standards in
Section 402.11.6.F.7 below will be met and maintained.
l. A signed statement attesting that, to the best of the knowledge of the applicant for an
excavation, the information contained in the application is true, accurate, and complete.
5. When the Code Enforcement Officer has verified that the application is complete, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall notify the Planning Board that an application for a new Class B
excavation or expansion of a Class B excavation has been received and that a Public hearing is
required to be held within thirty (30) days.
6. No permit shall be issued for any new Class B excavations or expansion of a Class B excavation
until the abutting property owners have been notified as specified in this Section.
a. Within seven (7) days of the receipt of an application for an excavation permit, the Code
Enforcement Officer, or designee, shall notify in writing by First Class Mail all owners of
abutting property that an application for an excavation permit has been received.
b. For purposes of this section, abutting property owners shall be owners of property within five
hundred (500) feet of the nearest boundary of the property which includes the proposed
excavation.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 142
c. For purposes of this section, the owners of abutting property shall be considered to be the
parties listed by the tax assessor for the Town of Gray as those against whom taxes are
assessed.
d. Failure of any property owner to receive a notice of public hearing shall not necessitate
another hearing or invalidate any action of the Board.
e. The letter notifying the abutting property owners shall state that an application has been
received, where/how to view additional information, the specifics of the next step in the
Town’s review of the application (date, place, time), and the options available to ask
questions, raise concerns, and provide input to the Town’s review process.
7. The Planning Board shall determine that the following issues that may affect the public are met
by the proposed Class B excavation operation:
a. Provisions to deal with any noise, dust, runoff, or other environmental considerations
associated with the excavation operation.
b. Appropriate mitigation measures to minimize negative impacts of the project on surrounding
or nearby properties or public facilities including, but not limited to public roads.
c. Appropriate security provisions which might include warning signs, fencing, and lighting.
d. Safe entrances and exits in accordance with the provisions of the Traffic Access and Parking
section of Site Development Standards for Site Plan Review of this Ordinance.
e. Appropriate buffer strips in accordance with the requirements of the Excavation Regulations
of this Ordinance.
f. Proximity of proposed material storage sites to abutters.
8. For applications involving expansions, all requirements of the existing permit shall remain in
effect unless specifically altered in the permit for an expansion.
G. Expansion of a Class B excavation that will have a proposed total working excavation area of five
(5) acres or more will be subject to the requirements for expansion of Class A excavations.
402.11.7 Excavation Regulations
A. In addition to Maine Department of Environmental Protection regulations, the standards in these
Excavation Regulations (Section 402.11.7) are applicable for all operations in the Town of Gray.
B. All excavation operations shall be in accordance with the excavation and reclamation requirements
of the most current version of the Maine Department of Environmental Protection 38 MRSA
Sections 490-D Performance Standards, 38 MRSA Sections 490-Z Performance Standards for
Quarries, or excavations that have a Site Location of Development permit issued under 38 MRSA
Section 481, and the requirements of the applicable Sections of this Ordinance except that any areas
that have not been disturbed or modified since July 4, 1985 are not subject to reclamation
requirements.
C. Stockpiles: A minimum distance of one-hundred (100) feet shall be maintained between product
stockpiles and any residence on an abutting property.
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 143
D. Buffers: If the owner or operator has permission from an abutter to reduce the width of a buffer in
accordance with DEP regulations, then the written permission must be recorded in association with
the deed of the affected abutting property at the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds.
E. Reclamation:
1. In addition to performing reclamation in accordance with DEP regulations, at the option of the
owner reclamation may include, but is not limited to:
a. Stabilization of slopes.
b. Creation of safety benches.
c. Planting of forests.
d. Seeding of grasses and legumes.
e. Seeding for grazing purposes.
f. Planting of crops for harvest.
g. Enhancement of wildlife and aquatic habitat.
h. Enhancement of aquatic resources.
i. Enhancement of recreational resources.
2. An owner or operator may apply to the Maine Department of Environmental Protection for
approval of plans for alternative forms of reclamation provided that any such activity is in
accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Gray.
3. When applicable, the site must be returned to its pre-construction natural condition as much as
may be feasible. All above ground structures, equipment, foundations, utilities, and access roads
or driveways shall be removed unless specifically designated for new or continuing use by the
owner in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer.
F. Surety for Reclamation
The Town may require an acceptable form of surety to cover the estimated cost to complete the
reclamation of excavations with a working pit larger than ten (10) acres in size, excluding any
reclaimed areas, unless the operator demonstrates that a bond or similar financial assurance has been
secured for the Maine Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to 38 MRSA Section 490-D
or 490-Z. The estimated cost to complete the reclamation shall be determined on the basis of usual,
customary, and reasonable costs for similar reclamation and shall be calculated by the same rules as
used by DEP. The applicant for excavation shall provide surety in the form of cash, certified bank
checks, insurance bonds, or irrevocable letters of credit all payable to the Town of Gray. Any such
surety shall be satisfactory to the Town Council and to the Town Attorney as to sufficiency, manner
of execution, and amount.
G. Expansions of Non-Conforming Excavations
No nonconforming mineral exploration, excavation, or removal of lands for the purpose of creating a
sand, fill, or gravel pit shall be extended to other land or parts of land unless the other land or parts
of land were designated for such use prior to July 4, 1985. On any land or parts of land that were not
designated for such use prior to July 4, 1985, excavation shall be permitted only upon the submittal
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 144
and approval of an entirely new and separate application in accordance with the requirements of this
Ordinance.
402.11.8 Administrative Requirements
A. Inspections
1. Inspections are required for all Class A and Class B excavations. The purpose of inspections is to
determine or reaffirm that the excavation is in full compliance with the Excavation Regulations
of this Ordinance.
2. Inspections of Class A excavations by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection shall
be deemed sufficient provided that the owner or operator forwards a copy of the inspection
report to the Code Enforcement Officer within thirty (30) days of receipt with payment of a fee
as set forth in the Schedule of Fees adopted by the Town Council.
3. Annual inspections of Class B excavations shall be performed by persons who are qualified to
determine the degree of compliance of the excavation with the requirements of this Ordinance.
By submitting an application for a permit, or by submitting an Annual Report, the applicant for
excavation agrees to authorize a properly escorted designated representative of the Town to enter
the property including buildings, structures, or conveyances on the property at reasonable hours
to determine compliance with the terms and conditions of a permit for a Class B excavation.
a. As set forth in the Schedule of Fees adopted by the Town Council, a fee for the inspection
shall be paid by the owner or operator of the excavation.
b. The person performing the inspection shall be provided with an escort in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the Federal Mining Safety and Health Administration (MSHA).
Upon appropriate notice, the operator or a designee shall be the escort for inspection of the
excavation.
c. The person performing the inspection shall determine the extent of the compliance of the
excavation with the requirements of this Ordinance. If there are any instances of noncompliance,
those instances shall be noted on the inspection form in accordance with
subsection B. 4 of this Section.
d. The person performing the inspection shall complete the proper inspection form “Annual
Inspection for Class B excavations”, with any appropriate comments, and deliver the
completed form to the owner or operator.
e. The owner or operator shall forward a copy of the completed inspection report to the Code
Enforcement Officer within thirty (30) days of receipt with payment of a fee as set forth in
the Schedule of Fees adopted by the Town Council for the recording of the report.
4. If any additional inspection reports related to an excavation are received from any State or
Federal Agency, the owner or operator shall forward a copy of the inspection report to the Code
Enforcement Officer within thirty (30) days of receipt with payment of a fee of twenty-five (25)
dollars for the recording of the report.
B. Annual Report required
The owner or operator of each Class A or Class B excavation shall submit a report for each
separately permitted excavation to the Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of Gray no later than
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 145
March 15 of each year on a form specified by the Town of Gray. The report shall include the
following information:
1. Name, address, telephone number, fax, and email address of owner.
2. Name, address, telephone number, fax, and email address of operator if different from owner.
3. Location of excavation with street address or directions to the excavation and Town of Gray Lot
and Map designation.
4. Area in acres of working excavation.
5. Total area in acres that is currently permitted for excavation.
6. Total area in acres that is “grandfathered” in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
7. Total area in acres that has been excavated.
8. Total area in acres that has been reclaimed.
9. An estimate of when the total area that is expected to be excavated will reach the limits of the
area that has been permitted for excavation.
10. A statement of whether or not the Department of Environmental Protection has conducted an onsite
inspection since the last report.
11. A signed statement attesting that the information submitted in the report is truthful, accurate, and
correct to the best of the knowledge of the owner or operator and reaffirming that the excavation
is in full compliance with the permit issued under this Ordinance.
12. A fee as set forth in the Schedule of Fees adopted by the Town Council shall be paid.
C. Change of Owner or Operator
Notice of a change of owner or operator shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Town of Gray in accordance with the following requirements:
1. For Class A excavations, the new owner or operator shall submit evidence to the Town that the
excavation has either a valid Site Location of Development License or a valid borrow pit or rock
quarry registration from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
2. For Class B excavations, the new owner or operator shall submit a notice of intent to comply
with the requirements of this ordinance and any existing valid permit.
3. Where there is a change in ownership of an excavation operation for which a surety has been
provided, the new owner shall be responsible for providing a new surety in accordance with the
requirements of this Ordinance. Such surety shall be provided before the Town releases the
original surety.
402.11.9 Waivers of Provisions
The Town of Gray shall accept waivers or variances granted by the Department of Environmental
Protection as provided in the most current version of DEP Rules Chapter 378 Variance Criteria for the
Excavation of Rock, Borrow, Topsoil, Clay or Silt and Performance Standards for the Storage of
Petroleum Products provided that such waivers or variances are in accordance with the provisions of the
Town of Gray Zoning Ordinance and provided that the operator submits copies of the waivers or
Chapter 402 Gray Zoning Ordinance
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 402 ZONING\CHAPTER 402 ZONING ORDINANCE 7-18-2019.DOCX 146
variances to the Code Enforcement Officer prior to commencing activities requiring the waivers or
variances.
402.11.10 Enforcement
Failure to comply with any of the terms of the excavation permit granted under this Ordinance shall
constitute sufficient cause for the Town of Gray to terminate that permit or to undertake any other
appropriate enforcement action or penalties.
If the Gray Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) becomes aware of an apparent violation of a Maine
Department of Environmental Protection (Maine DEP) regulation(s), the CEO shall ensure that the
Town’s file contains sufficient documentation and shall notify the appropriate person(s) at Maine DEP.
In the event that the CEO determines that Maine DEP’s response is unreasonable, such as untimely
action(s) or not sufficiently thorough, the CEO shall have the authority, but not the obligation, to enforce
Maine DEP regulations regarding excavation operations and associated adverse impacts.
Failure to comply with any approval granted under this Ordinance or any other requirement of this
Ordinance shall be considered a violation, which may be subject to enforcement under the provisions of
30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
Failure to file the required Annual Report with payment of the required Annual Fee by March 15 of each
year shall instigate a penalty fee as set forth in the schedule of fees adopted by the Town Council.
CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted Dec. 3, 1991
Effective Jan. 3, 1992
Amended Apr. 17, 1992
Amended Jan. 20, 1994
Amended July 4, 1996
Amended Oct. 31, 1996
Amended August 7, 1998
Amended Sept 17, 1998
Amended Nov 10, 1998
Amended August 31, 2000
Amended September 5, 2000
Amended July 7, 2009
Amended January 19, 2010
Amended February 15, 2016 / Effective April 14, 2016
Amended March 20, 2018 / Effective January 16, 2018
Amended January 22, 2019 / Effective March 1, 2019
CONTENTS
Section 1 – Purposes ................................................................................................................................... 4
Section 2 – Authority .................................................................................................................................. 4
Section 3 – Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 4
Section 4 – Effective Date .......................................................................................................................... 4
Section 5 – Availability .............................................................................................................................. 5
Section 6 – Severability .............................................................................................................................. 5
Section 7 – Conflicts with Other Ordinances ............................................................................................. 5
Section 8 – Amendments ............................................................................................................................ 5
Section 9 – Districts and Zoning Map ........................................................................................................ 5
A. OFFICIAL SHORELAND ZONING MAP ..............................................................................................................5
B. SCALE OF MAP ................................................................................................................................................5
C. CERTIFICATION OF OFFICIAL SHORELAND ZONING MAP ...............................................................................5
D. CHANGES TO THE OFFICIAL SHORELAND ZONING MAP ................................................................................5
Section 10 – Interpretation of District Boundaries ..................................................................................... 6
Section 11 – Land Use Requirements ......................................................................................................... 6
Section 12 – Non-Conformance.................................................................................................................. 6
A. PURPOSE .........................................................................................................................................................6
B. GENERAL .........................................................................................................................................................6
C. NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES ..................................................................................................................6
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 2
D. NON-CONFORMING USES ..............................................................................................................................8
E. NON-CONFORMING LOTS...............................................................................................................................9
Section 13 – Establishment of Districts ...................................................................................................... 9
A. RESOURCE PROTECTION DISTRICT .................................................................................................................9
B. LIMITED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT .................................................................................................................. 10
C. STREAM PROTECTION DISTRICT .................................................................................................................. 10
D. LIMITED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT................................................................................................................. 10
Section 14 – Table of Land Uses .............................................................................................................. 11
Section 15 – Land Use Standards ............................................................................................................. 15
A. SPACE STANDARD ........................................................................................................................................ 15
B. PRINCIPAL AND ACCESSORY STRUCTURES .................................................................................................. 16
C. PIERS, DOCKS, WHARVES, BRIDGES AND OTHER STRUCTURES AND USES EXTENDING OVER OR BEYOND
THE NORMAL HIGH WATER LINE OF A WATER BODY OR WITHIN A ................................................................... 18
D. CAMPGROUNDS .......................................................................................................................................... 18
E. INDIVIDUAL PRIVATE CAMPSITES ................................................................................................................ 19
F. PARKING AREAS ........................................................................................................................................... 19
G. ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS ............................................................................................................................. 19
H. SIGNS ........................................................................................................................................................... 21
I. STORM WATER RUNOFF .............................................................................................................................. 21
J. SEPTIC WASTE DISPOSAL ............................................................................................................................. 22
K. ESSENTIAL SERVICES .................................................................................................................................... 22
L. MINERAL EXPLORATION AND EXTRACTION ................................................................................................ 22
M. AGRICULTURE .......................................................................................................................................... 23
N. TIMBER HARVESTING .................................................................................................................................. 24
O. CLEARING OF VEGETATION FOR DEVELOPMENT ........................................................................................ 26
P. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL ................................................................................................. 28
Q. SOILS ............................................................................................................................................................ 29
R. WATER QUALITY .......................................................................................................................................... 29
S. ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES .............................................................................................................................. 29
T. MARINE REFUELING FACILITIES ................................................................................................................... 29
U. TEMPORARY STRUCTURES .......................................................................................................................... 30
V. COMMERCIAL & INDUSTRIAL USES PROHIBITED ........................................................................................ 30
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 3
Section 16 – Administration ..................................................................................................................... 31
A. ADMINISTERING BODIES AND AGENTS ....................................................................................................... 31
B. PERMITS REQUIRED ..................................................................................................................................... 31
C. PERMIT APPLICATION .................................................................................................................................. 32
D. PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTERING PERMITS............................................................................................... 32
E. SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS FOR SINGLE FAMILY CONSTRUCTION IN THE RESOURCE PROTECTION DISTRICT .... 33
F. EXPIRATION OF PERMIT .............................................................................................................................. 34
G. INSTALLATION OF PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICE................................................................................................. 34
H. APPEALS ....................................................................................................................................................... 34
I. ENFORCEMENT ............................................................................................................................................ 38
Section 17 – Definitions............................................................................................................................ 39
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 4
SECTION 1 – PURPOSES
The purposes of this Ordinance are to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; to
prevent and control water pollution; to protect fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird and other
wildlife habitat; to protect buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion; to protect
archaeological and historic resources; to protect freshwater wetlands; to control building sites,
placement of structures and land uses; to conserve shore cover, and visual as well as actual points of
access to inland waters; to conserve natural beauty and open space; and to anticipate and respond to the
impacts of development in shoreland areas.
SECTION 2 – AUTHORITY
This Ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 38 Sections 435-449 of the
Maine Revised Statutes Annotated (M.R.S.A.).
SECTION 3 – APPLICABILITY
This Ordinance applies to all land areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water
line of any great pond or river; within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a freshwater
wetland; and within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream; and to all
land areas within non-forested freshwater wetlands, as defined herein.
This Ordinance also applies to any structure built on, over or abutting a dock, wharf or pier, or other
structure extending or located below the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland.
SECTION 4 – EFFECTIVE DATE
A. This Ordinance, which was passed by the Town Council on July 7, 2009 shall not be effective unless
approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection. A certified copy of
the Ordinance, attested and signed by the Town Clerk, shall be forwarded to the Commissioner for
approval. If the Commissioner fails to act on this Ordinance within forty-five (45) days of his
receipt of the Ordinance, it shall be deemed approved. Upon approval, the shoreland zoning
ordinance previously adopted, and as amended from time to time, is repealed retroactively to the
date otherwise applicable under the Town Charter; provided, notwithstanding any provisions of
Maine law to the contrary, including but not limited to 1 M.R.S.A. Section 302, any application for
a shoreland zoning permit submitted to the Town or any of its officers, boards or employees after
August 7, 2009 shall be governed the terms hereof if the ordinance secures such approval by the
Commissioner.
B. Repeal of Timber Harvesting Regulation. The regulation of timber harvesting activities in this
ordinance is repealed on the statutory date established under 38 M.R.S.A. section 438-A(5), at which
time the State of Maine Department of Conservation’s Bureau of Forestry shall administer timber
harvesting standards in the shoreland zone. On the date established under 38 M.R.S.A section 438-
A(5), the following provisions of this Ordinance are repealed:
C. Section 14 Table of Land Uses, Row 3 (Forest management activities except for timber harvesting)
and Row 4 (Timber harvesting);
D. Section 15 N in its entirety; and
E. Section 17 Definitions, the definitions of “forest management activities” and “residual basal area”.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 5
SECTION 5 – AVAILABILITY
A certified copy of this Ordinance shall be filed with the Town Clerk and shall be accessible to any
member of the public. Copies shall be made available to the public at reasonable cost at the expense of
the person making the request. Notice of availability of this Ordinance shall be posted.
SECTION 6 – SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision
shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the Ordinance.
SECTION 7 – CONFLICTS WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision of this
Ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute, the more restrictive provision shall control.
SECTION 8 – AMENDMENTS
This Ordinance may be amended by majority vote of the Town Council. Copies of amendments,
attested and signed by the Town Clerk, shall be submitted to the Department of Environmental
Protection following adoption by the Town Council and shall not be effective unless approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection. If the Department of Environmental Protection fails to act on
any amendment within forty-five (45) days of the Department's receipt of the amendment, the
amendment is automatically approved. Any application for a permit submitted to the town within the
forty-five (45) day period shall be governed by the terms of the amendment, if such amendment is
approved by the Department of Environmental Protection.
SECTION 9 – DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
A. OFFICIAL SHORELAND ZONING MAP
The areas to which this Ordinance is applicable are hereby divided into the following districts as
shown on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map which is made a part of this Ordinance:
1. Resource Protection
2. Limited Residential
3. Stream Protection
4. Limited Commercial
B. SCALE OF MAP
The Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be drawn at a scale of not less than: 1 inch = 2000 feet.
District boundaries shall be clearly delineated and a legend indicating the symbols for each district
shall be placed on the map.
C. CERTIFICATION OF OFFICIAL SHORELAND ZONING MAP
The Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be certified by the attested signature of the Town Clerk
and shall be located in the town office.
D. CHANGES TO THE OFFICIAL SHORELAND ZONING MAP
If amendments, in accordance with Section 8, are made in the district boundaries or other matter
portrayed on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map, such changes shall be made on the official
Shoreland Zoning Map within thirty (30) days after the amendment has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 6
SECTION 10 – INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
Unless otherwise set forth on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map, district boundary lines are property
lines, the centerlines of streets, roads and rights of way, and the boundaries of the shoreland area as
defined herein. Where uncertainty exists as to the exact location of district boundary lines, the Board of
Appeals shall be the final authority as to location.
SECTION 11 – LAND USE REQUIREMENTS
Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no
building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, expanded, moved, or altered
and no new lot shall be created except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the
district in which it is located, unless a variance is granted.
SECTION 12 – NON-CONFORMANCE
A. PURPOSE
It is the intent of this Ordinance to promote land use conformities, except that non-conforming
conditions that existed before the effective date of this Ordinance shall be allowed to continue,
subject to the requirements set forth in this section. Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance,
a non-conforming condition shall not be permitted to become more non-conforming.
B. GENERAL
1. Transfer of Ownership: Non-conforming structures, lots, and uses may be transferred, and the
new owner may continue the non-conforming use or continue to use the non-conforming
structure or lot, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. Repair and Maintenance: This Ordinance allows, without a permit, the normal upkeep and
maintenance of non-conforming uses and structures including repairs or renovations which do
not involve expansion of the non-conforming use or structure, and such other changes in a nonconforming
use or structure as federal, state, or local building and safety codes may require.
NOTE: See Section 17 for the definitions of non-conforming structures, non-conforming uses and
non-conforming lots.
C. NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES
1. Expansions: A non-conforming structure may be added to or expanded after obtaining a permit
from the same permitting authority as that for a new structure, if such addition or expansion does
not increase the non-conformity of the structure.
Further Limitations:
a. After January 1, 1989 if any portion of a structure is less than the required setback from the
normal high water line of a water body or tributary stream or the upland edge of a wetland,
that portion of the structure shall not be expanded in floor area or volume, by 30% or more,
during the lifetime of the structure. If a replacement structure conforms with the
requirements of Section 12(C)(3), and is less than the required setback from a water body,
tributary stream or wetland, the replacement structure may not be expanded if the original
structure existing on January 1, 1989 had been expanded by 30% in floor area and volume
since that date.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 7
b. Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is constructed under a non-conforming
structure, the structure and new foundation must be placed such that the setback requirement
is met to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board or its designee,
basing its decision on the criteria specified in Section 12(C)(2) Relocation, below. If the
completed foundation does not extend beyond the exterior dimensions of the structure,
except for expansion in conformity with Section 12(C)(1)(a) above, and the foundation does
not cause the structure to be elevated by more than three (3) additional feet, as measured
from the uphill side of the structure (from original ground level to the bottom of the first
floor sill), it shall not be considered to be an expansion of the structure.
c. No structure which is less than the required setback from the normal high-water line of a
water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland shall be expanded toward the water
body, tributary stream, or wetland.
2. Relocation: A non-conforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries of the parcel on
which the structure is located provided that the site of relocation conforms to all setback
requirements to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, and
provided that the applicant demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage disposal system
meets the requirements of State law and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
Rules (Rules), or that a new system can be installed in compliance with the law and said Rules.
In no case shall a structure be relocated in a manner that causes the structure to be more nonconforming.
In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback to the greatest practical extent,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of the land, the
potential for soil erosion, the location of other structures on the property and on adjacent
properties, the location of the septic system and other onsite soils suitable for septic systems, and
the type and amount of vegetation to be removed to accomplish the relocation. When it is
necessary to remove vegetation within the water or wetland setback area in order to relocate a
structure, the Planning Board shall require replanting of native vegetation to compensate for the
destroyed vegetation. In addition, the area from which the relocated structure was removed must
be replanted with vegetation. Replanting shall be required as follows:
a. Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted with at least one native tree,
three (3) feet in height, for every tree removed. If more than five trees are planted, no one
species of tree shall make up more than 50% of the number of trees planted. Replaced trees
must be planted no further from the water or wetland than the trees that were removed.
Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and ground cover, that are removed or destroyed in
order to relocate a structure must be re-established. An area at least the same size as the area
where vegetation and/or ground cover was disturbed, damaged, or removed must be
reestablished within the setback area. The vegetation and/or ground cover must consist of
similar native vegetation and/or ground cover that was disturbed, destroyed or removed.
b. Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel the original location of the structure
shall be replanted with vegetation which may consist of grasses, shrubs, trees, or a
combination thereof.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 8
3. Reconstruction or Replacement: Any non-conforming structure which is located less than the
required setback from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland
edge of a wetland and which is removed, or damaged or destroyed by more than 50% of the
market value of the structure before such damage, destruction or removal, may be reconstructed
or replaced provided that a permit is obtained within eighteen (18) months of the date of said
damage, destruction, or removal, and provided that such reconstruction or replacement is in
compliance with the water body, tributary stream or wetland setback requirement to the greatest
practical extent as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with the purposes
of this Ordinance. In no case shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its
non-conformity.
If the reconstructed or replacement structure is less than the required setback it shall not be any
larger than the original structure, except as allowed pursuant to Section 12(C)(1) above, as
determined by the non-conforming floor area and volume of the reconstructed or replaced
structure at its new location. If the total amount of floor area and volume of the original
structure can be relocated or reconstructed beyond the required setback area, no portion of the
relocated or reconstructed structure shall be replaced or constructed at less than the setback
requirement for a new structure. When it is necessary to remove vegetation in order to replace or
reconstruct a structure, vegetation shall be replanted in accordance with Section 12(C)(2) above.
Any non-conforming structure which is located less than the required setback from a water body,
tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed by 50% or less of the market value, or
damaged or destroyed by 50% or less of the market value of the structure, excluding normal
maintenance and repair, may be reconstructed in place with a permit, from the Code
Enforcement Officer within one year of such damage, destruction, or removal.
In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the water setback to the
greatest practical extent the Code Enforcement Officer shall consider in addition to the criteria in
paragraph 2 above, the physical condition and type of foundation present, if any.
4. Change of Use of a Non-conforming Structure
The use of a non-conforming structure may not be changed to another use unless the Planning
Board after receiving a written application determines that the new use will have no greater
adverse impact on the water body, tributary stream or wetland or on the subject or adjacent
properties and resources than the existing use.
In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, the Planning Board shall require
written documentation from the applicant, regarding the probable effects on public health and
safety, erosion and sedimentation, water quality, fish and wildlife habitat, vegetative cover,
visual and actual points of public access to waters, natural beauty, flood plain management,
archaeological and historic resources, and commercial fishing and maritime activities, and other
functionally water-dependent uses.
D. NON-CONFORMING USES
1. Expansions: Expansions of non-conforming uses are prohibited, except that non-conforming
residential uses may, after obtaining a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, be expanded
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 9
within existing residential structures or within expansions of such structures as permitted in
Section 12(C)(1)(a) above.
2. Resumption Prohibited: A lot, building or structure in or on which a non-conforming use is
discontinued for a period exceeding one year, or which is superseded by a conforming use, may
not again be devoted to a non-conforming use except that the Planning Board may, for good
cause shown by the applicant, grant up to a one year extension to that time period. This
provision shall not apply to the resumption of a use of a residential structure provided that the
structure has been used or maintained for residential purposes during the preceding five (5) year
period.
3. Change of Use: An existing non-conforming use may be changed to another non-conforming
use provided that the proposed use has no greater adverse impact on the subject and adjacent
properties and resources, than the former use, as determined by the Planning Board. The
determination of no greater adverse impact shall be made according to criteria listed in Section
12(C) (4) above.
E. NON-CONFORMING LOTS
1. Non-conforming Lots: A non-conforming lot of record as of the effective date of this Ordinance
or amendment thereto may be built upon, without the need for a variance, provided that such lot
is in separate ownership and not contiguous with any other lot in the same ownership, and that all
provisions of this Ordinance except lot size, lot width and shore frontage can be met. Variances
relating to setback or other requirements not involving lot size or frontage shall be obtained by
action of the Board of Appeals.
2. Contiguous Built Lots: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in a single or joint
ownership of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, if all or part of the lots do not
meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, and if a principal use or structure exists on
each lot, the non-conforming lots may be conveyed separately or together, provided that the State
Minimum Lot Size Law (12 M.R.S.A. sections 4807-A through 4807-D) and Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules are complied with.
If two or more principal uses or structures existed on a single lot of record on the effective date
of this ordinance, each may be sold on a separate lot provided that the above referenced law and
rules are complied with. When such lots are divided each lot thus created must be as conforming
as possible to the dimensional requirements of this ordinance.
3. Contiguous Lots -- Vacant or Partially Built: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in
single or joint ownership of record at the time of or since adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance, if any of these lots do not individually meet the dimensional requirements of this
Ordinance or subsequent amendments, and if one or more of the lots are vacant or contain no
principal structure the lots shall be combined to the extent necessary to meet the dimensional
requirements.
SECTION 13 – ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
A. RESOURCE PROTECTION DISTRICT
The Resource Protection District includes areas in which development would adversely affect water
quality, productive habitat, biological ecosystems, or scenic and natural values. This district shall
include the following areas when they occur within the limits of the shoreland zone, exclusive of the
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 10
Stream Protection District except that areas which are currently developed and areas which meet the
criteria for the Limited Commercial District need not be included within the Resource Protection
District.
1. Areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of freshwater wetlands, and
wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers, which are rated "moderate" or "high" value
waterfowl and wading bird habitat, including nesting and feeding areas, by the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (MDIF&W) that are depicted on a Geographic
Information System (GIS) data layer maintained by either MDIF&W or the Department as of
May 1, 2006. For the purposes of this paragraph “wetlands associated with great ponds and
rivers” shall mean areas characterized by non-forested wetland vegetation and hydric soils that
are contiguous with a great pond or river, and have a surface elevation at or below the water
level of the great pond or river during the period of normal high water. “Wetlands associated
with great ponds or rivers” are considered to be part of that great pond or river.
2. Flood plains along rivers and flood plains along artificially formed great ponds along rivers,
defined by the 100 year flood plain as designated on the Federal Emergency Management
Agency's (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood of
record, or in the absence of these, by soil types identified as recent flood plain soils.
3. Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of 20% or greater.
4. Areas of two (2) or more contiguous acres supporting wetland vegetation and hydric soils, which
are not part of a freshwater or coastal wetland as defined, and which are not surficially connected
to a water body during normal spring high water.
5. Land areas along rivers subject to severe bank erosion, undercutting, or river bed movement.
6. All land areas within non-forested freshwater wetlands, as defined herein.
B. LIMITED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
The Limited Residential District includes those areas suitable for residential and recreational
development. It includes areas other than those in the Resource Protection District or Stream
Protection District.
C. STREAM PROTECTION DISTRICT
The Stream Protection District includes all land areas within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream, exclusive of those areas within two-hundred and
fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond, river or saltwater
body, or within two hundred and fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a
freshwater wetland. Where a stream and its associated shoreland area is located within two-hundred
and fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the above water bodies or wetlands, that land area shall
be regulated under the terms of the shoreland district associated with that water body or wetland.
D. LIMITED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
Limited Commercial District. The Limited Commercial District includes areas of mixed, light
commercial and residential uses, exclusive of the Stream Protection District, which should not be
developed as intensively as the General Development Districts. This district includes areas of two or
more contiguous acres in size devoted to a mix of residential and low intensity business and
commercial uses. Industrial uses are prohibited.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 11
SECTION 14 – TABLE OF LAND USES
All land use activities, as indicated in Table 1, Land Uses in the Shoreland Zone, shall conform with all
of the applicable land use standards in Section 15. The district designation for a particular site shall be
determined from the Official Shoreland Zoning Map.
Key to Table 1
Yes Allowed (no permit required but the use must comply with all applicable
land use standards.)
No Prohibited
PB Requires permit issued by the Planning Board
CEO Requires permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
LPI Requires permit issued by the Local Plumbing Inspector
Abbreviations
RP Resource Protection
LR Limited Residential
SP Stream Protection
LC Limited Commercial
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 12
LAND USES SP RP LR LC
1. Non-intensive recreational uses not requiring structures such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
yes
yes
yes
yes
2. Motorized vehicular traffic on existing roads and trails yes yes yes yes
3. Forest management activities except for timber harvesting & land
management roads yes yes yes yes
4. Timber harvesting yes CEO yes yes
5. Clearing or removal of vegetation for activities other than timber
harvesting CEO CEO1 CEO yes
6. Fire prevention activities yes yes yes yes
7. Wildlife management practices yes yes yes yes
8. Soil and water conservation practices yes yes yes yes
9. Mineral exploration no yes2 yes2 yes2
10. Mineral extraction including sand and gravel extraction no PB3 PB PB
11. Surveying and resource analysis yes yes yes yes
12. Emergency operations yes yes yes yes
13. Agriculture yes PB yes yes
14. Aquaculture PB PB PB yes
15. Principal structures and uses
A. One and two family residential, including driveways
PB4
PB5
CEO
CEO
B. Multi-unit residential no no no PB
C. Commercial no no6 no6 PB
D. Industrial no no no no
E. Governmental and institutional no no PB PB
F. Small non-residential facilities for educational, scientific, or nature
interpretation purposes
PB4 PB CEO CEO
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 13
LAND USES SP RP LR LC
16. Structures accessory to allowed uses PB4 PB CEO CEO
17. Piers, docks, wharfs, bridges and other structures and uses
extending over or below the normal high-water line or within a
wetland
a. Temporary
b. Permanent
CEO7
PB
CEO7
PB
CEO7
PB
CEO7
PB
18. Conversions of seasonal residences to year-round residences LPI LPI LPI LPI
19. Home occupations PB PB PB CEO
20. Private sewage disposal systems for allowed uses LPI LPI LPI LPI
21. Essential services6
A. Roadside distribution lines (34.5kV and lower) CEO CEO yes8 yes8
B. Non-roadside or cross-country distribution lines involving ten
poles or less in the shoreland zone
PB PB CEO CEO
C. Non-roadside or cross-country distribution lines involving eleven
or more poles in the shoreland zone
PB PB PB PB
D. Other essential services PB PB PB PB
22. Service drops, as defined, to allowed uses yes yes yes yes
23. Public and private recreational areas involving minimal structural
development
PB PB PB CEO
24. Individual, private campsites CEO CEO CEO CEO
25. Campgrounds no no9 PB PB
26. Road construction PB no10 PB PB
27. Land management roads yes PB yes yes
28. Parking facilities no no9 PB PB
29. Filling and earth moving of <10 cubic yards CEO CEO yes yes
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 14
30. Filling and earth moving of >10 cubic yards PB PB CEO CEO
LAND USES SP RP LR LC
31. Signs CEO CEO CEO CEO
32. Uses similar to allowed uses CEO CEO CEO CEO
33. Uses similar to uses requiring a CEO permit CEO CEO CEO CEO
34. Uses similar to uses requiring a PB permit PB PB PB PB
35. Farm stand no no CEO* CEO*
36. Mobile vendor no no CEO+ CEO+
37. Marine refueling stations no no PB no
38. Temporary structures CEO CEO CEO CEO
39. Retail marijuana establishments as principal or accessory use 11 no no no no
40. Marijuana Food Establishment no no no No
41. Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility12 No No No No
42. Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary 12 No No No No
43. Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary Cultivation Facilities12 No No No No
44. Medical Marijuana Testing Facility12 No No No No
45. Registered Caregiver12 No No No No
46. Caregiver Retail Store No No No No
1 In RP, not permitted within 75 feet horizontal distance of the normal high-water line of great ponds, except to remove safety
hazards.
2 Requires permit from the Code Enforcement Officer if more than 100 square feet of surface area, in total, is disturbed.
3 In RP not permitted in areas so designated because of wildlife value.
4 Provided that a variance from the setback requirement is obtained from the Board of Appeals.
5 Single family residential structures may be allowed by special exception only according to the provisions of Section 16 E,
Special Exceptions. Two-family residences are prohibited.
6 Except for commercial uses otherwise listed in this Table, such as campgrounds, that are allowed in the respective district.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 15
7 Excluding bridges and other crossings not involving earthwork, in which cases no permits are required.
8 Permit not required but must file a written “notice of intent to construct” with CEO.
9 Except when area is zoned for resource protection due to flood plain criteria in which case a permit is required from the PB.
10 Except to provide access to permitted uses within the district, or where no reasonable alternative route or location is
available outside the RP area, in which case a permit is required from the PB.
* Subject to the provisions of Article 7, Section 402.7.15 of the Zoning Ordinance.
+ Subject to the provisions of Chapter 212.
11 This shall be construed to limit the use, possession, transport, cultivation, transfer or purchase of Adult Use Marijuana to
the greatest extent permitted by the Marijuana Legalization Act (28-B M.R.S.A. §§ 102 – 1504, as may be amended and
successor provisions thereof). Further, this ordinance shall be deemed to prohibit, and does hereby prohibit, attempts to
circumvent its restriction on selling adult use marijuana by persons or transferring or furnishing marijuana or marijuana
concentrate without remuneration, in connection in any way with any lawful transaction under the guise of being a gift or an
enhanced consideration for same.
12 This shall be construed to prohibit Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facilities, Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensaries,
Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary Cultivation Facilities, Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities, Medical Marijuana
Manufacturing Facilities, Marijuana Food Establishment, Registered Caregivers and Registered Caregiver Retail Stores in the
Shoreland Zone, but shall not be construed to prohibit any other lawful use, possession or conduct pursuant to the Maine
Medical Use of Marijuana Act (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 2421 – 2430-B, as may be amended from time to time).
NOTE: A person performing any of the following activities shall require a permit from the Department
of Environmental Protection, pursuant to Title 38 M.R.S.A., Section 480 C, if the activity occurs in, on,
over or adjacent to any freshwater wetlands, great pond, river, stream or brook and operates in such a
manner that material or soil may be washed into them:
A. Dredging, bulldozing, removing or displacing soil, sand vegetation or other materials.
B. Draining or otherwise dewatering;
C. Filling, including adding sand or other material to a sand dune; or
D. Any construction or alteration of any permanent structure.
SECTION 15 – LAND USE STANDARDS
All land use activities within the shoreland zone shall conform with the following provisions, if
applicable.
A. SPACE STANDARDS
1. Minimum Lot Size: 80,000 sq. ft.
2. Minimum Land Area Per Dwelling Unit: 80,000 sq. ft.
3. Minimum Shore Frontage: 200 ft.
4. Minimum Road Frontage: 200 ft.
5. Maximum Building Height: 35 ft.
6. Minimum Setbacks:
a. Waterbodies
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 16
b. 100 ft. horizontal distance from normal high water line great ponds & rivers
c. 75 ft. horizontal distance from normal high water line streams, upland edge of wetlands, &
other water bodies
d. Front Property Line: 25 ft. (from edge of road way on property)
e. Side Property Line: 10 ft.
f. Rear Property Line: 10 ft.
7. Maximum Lot Coverage with Impervious Surface: 20%
8. Land below the normal high water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and land
beneath roads serving more than two (2) lots shall not be included toward calculating minimum
lot area.
9. Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall be considered each a separate tract
or parcel of land unless such road was established by the owner of land on both sides thereof
after September 22, 1971.
10. The minimum width of any portion of any lot within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance,
of the normal high water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland shall be equal to or
greater than the shore frontage requirement for a lot with the proposed use.
11. If more than one residential dwelling unit, principal governmental, institutional, commercial or
industrial structure or use, or combination thereof, is constructed or established on a single
parcel, all dimensional requirements shall be met for each additional dwelling unit, principal
structure, or use.
B. PRINCIPAL AND ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
1. All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet
horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of great ponds classified GPA and rivers,
and seventy-five (75) feet horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of other water
bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland. In addition, all new principal and
accessory structures shall be setback at least ten (10) feet from each side property,(10) feet from
the rear property line and except as otherwise required by this ordinance, at least twenty-five (25)
feet from the front property line or from the edge of a road travel way that crosses the property.
In the Resource Protection District the setback requirement shall be 250 feet, horizontal distance,
except for structures, roads, parking spaces or other regulated objects specifically allowed in that
district in which case the setback requirements specified above shall apply.
a. The water body or wetland setback provision shall neither apply to structures which require
direct access to the water as an operational necessity, such as piers, docks and retaining
walls, nor to other functionally water dependent uses.
b. On a non-conforming lot of record on which only a residential structure exists, and it is not
possible to place an accessory structure meeting the required water body, tributary stream or
wetland setbacks, the code enforcement officer may issue a permit to place a single accessory
structure, with no utilities, for the storage of yard tools and similar equipment. Such
accessory structure shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet in area nor eight (8) feet in
height, and shall be located as far from the shoreline or tributary stream as practical and shall
meet all other applicable standards, including lot coverage and vegetation clearing
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 17
limitations. In no case shall the structure be located closer to the shoreline or tributary
stream than the principal structure.
2. Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing structures which are permitted in the
Resource Protection, Limited Residential, and Stream Protection Districts, shall not exceed thirty
five (35) feet in height. This provision shall not apply to structures such as transmission towers,
windmills, antennas, and similar structures having no floor area.
3. The lowest floor elevation or openings of all buildings and structures including basements shall
be elevated at least one foot above the elevation of the 100 year flood, the flood of record, or in
the absence of these, the flood as defined by soil types identified as recent flood plain soils.
Accessory structures may be placed in accordance with the standards of the Floodplain
Management Ordinance and need not meet the elevation requirements of this paragraph.
4. The total area of all structures, parking lots and other non-vegetated surfaces, within the
shoreland zone shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot or a portion there of, located
within the shoreland zone, including land area previously developed.
5. Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or similar structures may be allowed
with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, to provide shoreline access in areas of steep
slopes or unstable soils provided; that the structure is limited to a maximum of four (4) feet in
width; that the structure does not extend below or over the normal high water line of a water
body or upland edge of a wetland, (unless permitted by the Department of Environmental
Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, Title 38, Section 480 C); and that
the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative exists on the property. This
shall not constitute a grandfathered setback.
6. Retaining walls that are not necessary for erosion control shall meet the structure setback
requirement, except for low retaining walls and associated fill provided all of the following
conditions are met:
a. The site has been previously altered and an effective vegetated buffer does not exist;
b. The wall(s) is(are) at least 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a
water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland;
c. The site where the retaining wall will be constructed is legally existing lawn or is a site
eroding from lack of naturally occurring vegetation, and which cannot be stabilized with
vegetative plantings;
d. The total height of the wall(s), in the aggregate, are no more than 24 inches;
e. Retaining walls are located outside of the 100-year floodplain on rivers, streams, and
tributary streams, as designated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA)
Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in the
absence of these, by soil types identified as recent flood plain soils.
f. The area behind the wall is re-vegetated with grass, shrubs, trees, or a combination thereof,
and no further structural development will occur within the setback area, including patios and
decks; and
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 18
g. A vegetated buffer area is established within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland when a natural
buffer
C. PIERS, DOCKS, WHARVES, BRIDGES AND OTHER STRUCTURES AND USES EXTENDING
OVER OR BEYOND THE NORMAL HIGH WATER LINE OF A WATER BODY OR WITHIN A
WETLAND.
1. Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such use and constructed so as to
control erosion.
2. The location shall not interfere with existing developed or natural beach areas.
3. The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects on fisheries.
4. The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to carry on the activity and be
consistent with existing conditions, use, and character of the area. A temporary pier, dock or
wharf shall not be wider than six (6) feet for non-commercial uses.
5. No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structure
extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland unless the
structure requires direct access to the water as an operational necessity.
6. No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock, wharf or other structure extending
beyond the normal high water line of a water body or within a wetland shall be converted to
residential dwelling units in any district.
7. New permanent piers and docks shall not be permitted unless it is clearly demonstrated to the
Planning Board that a temporary pier or dock is not feasible, and a permit has been obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection
Act.
8. Structures built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structure extending beyond the
normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in
height above the pier, wharf, dock or other structure.
NOTE: Permanent structures projecting into or over water bodies shall require a permit from the
Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, Title
38 M.R.S.A., Section 480-C.
D. CAMPGROUNDS
Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under State licensing procedures
and the following:
1. Campgrounds shall contain a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet of land, not
including roads and driveways, for each site. Land supporting wetland vegetation, and land
below the normal high-water line of a water body shall not be included in calculating land area
per site.
2. The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or shelter, and utility and service
buildings shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the normal high-water line
of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and seventyX:\
ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 19
five (75) feet from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the
upland edge of a wetland.
E. INDIVIDUAL PRIVATE CAMPSITES
Individual, private campsites not associated with campgrounds are permitted provided the following
conditions are met:
1. One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, or thirty thousand (30,000)
square feet of lot area within the shoreland zone, whichever is less, may be permitted.
2. Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a recreational vehicle or tent
platform, shall be set back one hundred (100) feet from the normal high-water line of a great
pond classified GPA or river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and seventy-five (75) feet
from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a
wetland.
3. Recreational vehicles shall not be located on any type of permanent foundation except for a
gravel pad, and no structure(s) except canopies shall be attached to the recreational vehicle.
Only a single recreational vehicle shall be permitted on an individual private campsite.
4. The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter in a
5. A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and location of sewage disposal
shall be required for each campsite and shall be approved by the Local Plumbing Inspector.
Where disposal is off-site, written authorization from the receiving facility or land owner is
required.
6. When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed on-site for more than one hundred
and twenty (120) days per year, all requirements for residential structures shall be met, including
the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system in compliance with the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules unless served by public sewage facilities.
F. PARKING AREAS
1. Parking areas shall meet the setback requirements for structures for the district in which such
areas are located. The setback requirement for parking areas serving public boat launching
facilities may be reduced to no less than fifty (50) feet horizontal distance from the normal highwater
line of the shore or tributary stream or from the upland edge of a wetland if the Planning
Board finds that no other reasonable alternative exists further from the shoreline, wetland or
tributary stream.
2. Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed use and shall be designed to prevent
stormwater runoff from flowing directly into a water body, and where feasible, to retain all
3. In determining the appropriate size of proposed parking facilities, the following shall apply:
a. Typical parking space: Approximately ten (10) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long, except
that parking spaces for a vehicle and boat trailer shall be forty (40) feet long.
b. Internal travel aisles: Approximately twenty (20) feet wide.
G. ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS
The following standards shall apply to the construction of roads and/or driveways and drainage
systems, culverts and other related features.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 20
1. Roads and driveways shall be set back at least one-hundred (100) feet from the normal highwater
line of a great pond classified GPA or a river that flows to a great pond classified GPA,
and seventy-five (75) feet from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary
streams, or the upland edge of a wetland unless no reasonable alternative exists as determined by
the Code Enforcement Officer. If no other reasonable alternative exists, the Code Enforcement
Officer may reduce the road and/or driveway setback requirement to no less than fifty (50) feet
upon clear showing by the applicant that appropriate techniques will be used to prevent
sedimentation of the water body. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, the
installation of settling basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and
turnouts placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland.
On slopes of greater than twenty (20) percent the road and/or driveway setback shall be
increased by ten (10) feet for each five (5) percent increase in slope above twenty (20) percent.
This paragraph shall neither apply to approaches to water crossings nor to roads or driveways
that provide access to permitted structures, and facilities located nearer to the shoreline due to an
operational necessity excluding temporary docks for recreational uses. Roads and driveways
providing access to permitted structures within the setback area shall comply fully with the
requirements of this sub-section except for that portion of the road or driveway necessary for
direct access to the structure.
2. Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right-of-way regardless of its
setback from a water body.
3. New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection District except to provide
access to permitted uses within the district, or as approved by the Planning Board upon a finding
that no reasonable alternative route or location is available outside the district, in which case the
road and/or driveway shall be set back as far as practicable from the normal high-water line of a
water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland.
4. Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two (2) horizontal to one (1)
vertical, and shall be graded and stabilized in accordance with the provisions for erosion and
sedimentation control contained in subsection P.
5. Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than ten (10) percent except for short segments of
less than two hundred (200) feet.
6. In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from directly entering water bodies,
roads and driveways shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to empty onto an unscarified
buffer strip at least (50) feet plus two times the average slope, in width between the outflow point
of the ditch or culvert and the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland
edge of a wetland. Surface drainage which is directed to an unscarified buffer strip shall be
diffused or spread out to promote infiltration of the runoff and to minimize channelized flow of
the drainage through the buffer strip.
7. Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnouts shall be installed in a
manner effective in directing drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before the flow in the road
or ditches gains sufficient volume or head to erode the road, driveway or ditch. To accomplish
this, the following shall apply:
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 21
a. Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water turnouts shall be spaced along the
road or driveway at intervals no greater than indicated in the following table:
Grade (Percent)
0-2
3-5
6-10
11-15
16-20
21+
Spacing (Feet)
250
200-135
100-80
80-60
60-45
40
b. Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only where the grade is ten (10)
percent or less.
c. On sections having slopes greater than ten (10) percent, ditch relief culverts shall be placed at
approximately a thirty (30) degree angle downslope from a line perpendicular to the
centerline of the road or driveway.
d. Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly installed in order to allow for
effective functioning and their inlet and outlet ends shall be stabilized with appropriate
materials.
8. Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other storm water runoff control installations
associated with roads and driveways shall be maintained on a regular basis to assure effective
functioning.
H. SIGNS
The following provisions shall govern the use of signs in the Resource Protection, Stream Protection
and Limited Residential Districts:
1. Signs and billboards relating to goods and services sold on the premises shall be permitted,
provided that such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area and shall not exceed one (1)
sign per premises. Billboards and signs relating to goods or services not sold or rendered on the
premises shall be prohibited.
2. Name signs shall be permitted, provided such signs shall not exceed one (1) sign per premise.
3. Residential users may display a single sign not over three (3) square feet in area relating to the
sale, rental, or lease of the premises.
4. Signs relating to trespassing and hunting shall be permitted without restriction as to number
provided that no such sign shall exceed two (2) square feet in area.
5. Signs relating to public safety shall be permitted without restriction.
6. No sign shall extend higher than eight (8) feet above the ground to the highest point of the sign.
7. Signs may be illuminated only by shielded, non-flashing lights.
I. STORM WATER RUNOFF
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 22
1. All new construction and development shall be designed to minimize storm water runoff from
the site in excess of the natural predevelopment conditions. Where possible, existing natural
runoff control features, such as berms, swales, terraces and wooded areas shall be retained in
order to reduce runoff and encourage infiltration of storm waters.
2. Storm water runoff control systems shall be maintained as necessary to ensure proper
functioning.
J. SEPTIC WASTE DISPOSAL
1. All new and replacement subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in conformance
with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules (Rules) and the following:
a. Clearing or removal of woody vegetation necessary to site a new system and any associated
fill extensions, shall not extend closer than seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from
the normal high-water line of a water body or the upland edge of a wetland and
b. A holding tank is not allowed for a first-time residential use in the shoreland zone.
K. ESSENTIAL SERVICES
1. Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited to existing public ways and
existing service corridors.
2. The installation of essential services is not permitted in a Resource Protection or Stream
Protection District, except to provide services to a permitted use within said district, or except
where the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable alternative exists. Where permitted, such
structures and facilities shall be located so as to minimize any adverse impacts on surrounding
uses and resources, including visual impacts.
3. Damaged or destroyed public utility transmission and distribution lines, towers and related
equipment may be replaced or reconstructed without a permit.
L. MINERAL EXPLORATION AND EXTRACTION
Mineral exploration to determine the nature or extent of mineral resources shall be accomplished by
hand sampling, test boring, or other methods which create minimal disturbance of less than one
hundred (100) square feet of ground surface. A permit from the Code Enforcement Officer shall be
required for mineral exploration which exceeds the above limitation. All excavations, including test
pits and holes shall be immediately capped, filled or secured by other equally effective measures, so
as to restore disturbed areas and to protect the public health and safety.
Mineral extraction may be permitted under the following conditions:
1. A reclamation plan shall be filed with, and approved by the Planning Board before a permit is
granted. Such plan shall describe in detail procedures to be undertaken to fulfill the requirements
of paragraph 4 below.
2. Unless authorized pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, Title 38, M.R.S.A, Section
480-C no part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff control features shall be
permitted within one hundred (100) feet of the normal high-water line of a great pond classified
GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and within seventy-five (75) feet of the
normal high-water line of any other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 23
wetland. Extraction operations shall not be permitted within seventy-five (75) feet of any
property line, without written permission of the owner of such adjacent property.
3. Within twelve (12) months following the completion of extraction operations at any extraction
site, which operations shall be deemed complete when less than one hundred (100) cubic yards
of materials are removed in any consecutive twelve (12) month period, ground levels and grades
shall be established in accordance with the following:
a. All debris, stumps, and similar material shall be removed for disposal in an approved
location, or shall be buried on-site. Only materials generated on-site may be buried or
covered on-site.
b. The final graded slope shall be two and one-half to one (2 1/2:1) slope or flatter.
c. Top soil or loam shall be retained to cover all disturbed land areas, which shall be reseeded
and stabilized with vegetation native to the area. Additional topsoil or loam shall be obtained
from offsite sources if necessary to complete the stabilization project.
4. In keeping with the purposes of this Ordinance, the Planning Board may impose such conditions
as are necessary to minimize the adverse impacts associated with mineral extraction operations
on surrounding uses and resources.
M. AGRICULTURE
1. All spreading of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with the Manure Utilization
Guidelines published by the Maine Department of Agriculture on November 1, 2001, and the
Nutrient Management Law (7 M.R.S.A. sections 4201-4209).
2. Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled in an unprotected manner so as to produce runoff within
one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of a great pond classified GPA or a river or stream
flowing to a great pond, classified GPA, or within seventy five (75) feet horizontal distance, of
other water bodies, tributary streams, or wetlands, except not more than sixty (60) cubic feet of
manure may be temporarily stored or stockpiled for a period not to exceed sixty (60) consecutive
days. Within five (5) years of the effective date of this ordinance all manure storage areas within
the shoreland zone must be constructed or modified such that the facility produces no discharge
of effluent or contaminated storm water. Existing facilities which do not meet the setback
requirement may remain, but must meet the no discharge provision within the above five (5) year
period.
3. Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than forty thousand (40,000) square feet in
surface area, or the spreading, disposal or storage of manure within the shoreland zone shall
require a Soil and Water Conservation Plan to be filed with the Planning Board. Once such a
plan has been recorded, such plan may be transferred to a new owner provided such agricultural
activity continues to be in conformance with the Plan. Non-conformance with the provisions of
said plan shall be considered to be a violation of this Ordinance.
NOTE: Assistance in preparing a soil and water conservation plan may be available through the
local Soil and Water Conservation District office.
4. There shall be no new tilling of soil within one-hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA; within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal
distance, from other water bodies; nor within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, of
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 24
tributary streams, and wetlands. Operations in existence on the effective date of this ordinance
and not in conformance with this provision may be maintained but shall require a Soil and Water
Conservation plan to be filed with the Planning Board. Once a Soil and Water Conservation
Plan for the tilling of soil has been recorded with the Planning Board, the rights and privileges of
such plan may be transferred to a new owner provided the tilling practice continues to be in
conformance with the plan.
5. After the effective date of this Ordinance, newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be
permitted within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a
great pond classified GPA; within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance of other water
bodies, nor; within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, of tributary streams, and wetlands.
Livestock grazing associated with ongoing farm activities, and which are not in conformance
with the above setback provisions may continue, provided that such grazing is conducted in
accordance with a Soil and Water Conservation Plan. Once a Soil and Water Conservation Plan
for livestock grazing has been recorded with the Planning Board, the rights and privileges of
such plan may be transferred to a new owner provided the livestock grazing practices continues
to be in conformance with the plan.
N. TIMBER HARVESTING
1. In a shoreland area zoned for the resource protection abutting a great pond, timber harvesting
shall be limited to the following:
a. Within the strip of land extending seventy five (75) feet horizontal distance inland from the
normal high-water line timber harvesting may be conducted when the following conditions
are met:
(i) The ground is frozen;
(ii) There is no resultant soil disturbance;
(iii) The removal of trees is accomplished using a cable or boom and there is no entry of
tracked or wheeled vehicles into the 75-foot strip of land;
(iv) There is no cutting of trees less than 6 inches in diameter; no more than 30% of the trees
6 inches or more in diameter, measured at 4 ½ feet above ground level, are cut in any 10-
year period; and a well-distributed stand of trees and other natural vegetation remains;
and
(v) A licensed professional forester has marked the trees to be harvested prior to a permit
being issued by the municipality.
b. Beyond the seventy five (75) foot buffer strip referred to in paragraph a. above, timber
harvesting is permitted in accordance with paragraph 2 below except that in no case shall the
average residual basal area of trees over four (4) inches in diameter measured at four and one
half (4 1/2) feet above ground level be reduced to less than thirty (30) square feet per acre.
2. Except in areas as described in Paragraph 1 above, timber harvesting shall conform with the
following provisions:
a. Selective cutting of no more than forty (40) percent of the total volume of trees four (4)
inches or more in diameter measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level on any lot in any ten
(10) year period is permitted. In addition:
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 25
(i) Within one-hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance of the normal high-water line of a
great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and within
seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of other water
bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland, there shall be no clear-cut
openings and a well-distributed stand of trees and other vegetation, including existing
ground cover, shall be maintained.
(ii) At distances greater than one-hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of a great pond
classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and greater than
seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of other water
bodies or the upland edge of a wetland, harvesting operations shall not create single
clear-cut openings greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in the forest canopy.
Where such openings exceed five-thousand (5,000) square feet they shall be at least one
hundred (100) feet apart. Such clear-cut openings shall be included in the calculation of
total volume removal. For the purposes of these standards volume may be considered to
be equivalent to basal area.
b. Timber harvesting operations exceeding the 40% limitation in sub-section a. above, may be
allowed by the planning board upon a clear showing, including a forest management plan
signed by a Maine licensed professional forester, that such an exception is necessary for good
forest management and will be carried out in accordance with the purposes of this Ordinance.
The planning board shall notify the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental
Protection of each exception allowed, within fourteen (14) days of the planning board's
decision.
c. No accumulation of slash shall be left within fifty (50) feet of the normal high-water line of a
water body. In all other areas slash shall either be removed or disposed of in such a manner
that it lies on the ground and no part thereof extends more than four (4) feet above the
ground. Any debris that falls below the normal high-water line of a water body shall be
removed.
d. Timber harvesting equipment shall not use stream channels as travel routes except when:
(i) Surface waters are frozen; and
(ii) The activity will not result in any ground disturbance.
e. All crossings of flowing water shall require a bridge or culvert, except in areas with low
banks and channel beds which are composed of gravel, rock or similar hard surface which
would not be eroded or otherwise damaged.
f. Skid trail approaches to water crossings shall be located and designed so as to prevent water
runoff from directly entering the water body or tributary stream. Upon completion of timber
harvesting, temporary bridges and culverts shall be removed and areas of exposed soil revegetated.
g. Except for water crossings, skid trails and other sites where the operation of machinery used
in timber harvesting results in the exposure of mineral soil shall be located such that an
unscarified strip of vegetation of at least seventy-five (75) feet in width for slopes up to ten
(10) percent shall be retained between the exposed mineral soil and the normal high-water
line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland. For each ten (10) percent increase in slope,
the unscarified strip shall be increased by twenty (20) feet. The provisions of this paragraph
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 26
apply only to a face sloping toward the water body or wetland, provided, however, that no
portion of such exposed mineral soil on a back face shall be closer than twenty five (25) feet
from the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland.
O. CLEARING OF VEGETATION FOR DEVELOPMENT
1. Within a shoreland area zoned for Resource Protection abutting a great pond, there shall be no
cutting of vegetation within the strip of land extending 75 feet, horizontal distance, inland from
the normal high water line, except to remove safety hazards.
Elsewhere, in any Resource Protection District the clearing of vegetation shall be limited to that
which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that district.
2. Except in areas as described in Paragraph 1, above, and except to allow for the development of
permitted uses, within a strip of land extending one-hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance,
inland from the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or a river, and seventyfive
(75) feet, horizontal distance, from any other water body, tributary stream, or the upland
edge of a wetland, a buffer strip of vegetation shall be preserved as follows:
a. There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet in the forest canopy as
measured from the outer limits of the tree crown. However, a footpath not to exceed six (6)
feet in width as measured between tree trunks is permitted provided that a cleared line of
sight to the water through the buffer strip is not created.
b. Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is permitted provided that a well distributed
stand of trees and other vegetation is maintained. For the purposes of this section a "welldistributed
stand of trees and other vegetation" adjacent to a great pond classified GPA or a
river or stream flowing to a great pond classified GPA, shall be defined as maintaining a
rating score of 12 or more in any 25-foot by 25-foot square (625 square feet) area as
determined by the following rating system.
Diameter of Tree at 4-1/2 feet
Above Ground Level (inches)
Points
2-4 in. 1
>4-12 in. 2
>12 in. 4
Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands, a "well distributed stand of
trees and other vegetation" is defined as maintaining a minimum rating score of 8 per 25 foot
square area.
Note: As an example, adjacent to a great pond, if a 25-foot x 25-foot plot contains three (3)
trees between 2 and 4 inches in diameter, three trees between 4 and 12 inches in diameter,
and three trees over 12 inches in diameter, the rating score is: (3 x l) + (3 x 2) + (3 x 4) = 21
points
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 27
Thus, the 25-foot by 25-foot plot contains trees worth 21 points. Trees totaling 9 points (21
12 = 9) may be removed from the plot provided that no cleared openings are created.
The following shall govern in applying this point system:
The 25-foot by 25-foot rectangular plots must be established where the landowner or lessee
proposes clearing within the required buffer;
(i) Each successive plot must be adjacent to, but not overlap a previous plot;
(ii) Any plot not containing the required points must have no vegetation removed except as
otherwise allowed by this Ordinance;
(iii) Any plot containing the required points may have vegetation removed down to the
minimum points required or as otherwise allowed by is Ordinance;
(iv) Where conditions permit, no more than 50% of the points on any 25-foot by 25-foot
rectangular area may consist of trees greater than 12 inches in diameter.
For the purposes of this sub-section, “other natural vegetation” that must be retained in
addition to trees meeting the point system requirements is defined as retaining existing
vegetation under three (3) feet in height and other ground cover and retaining at least
three (3) saplings less than two (2) inches in diameter at four and one-half (4 ½) feet
above ground level for each 25-foot by 25-foot rectangular area. If three (3) saplings do
not exist, no woody stems less than two (2) inches in diameter can be removed until 3
saplings have been recruited into the plot.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than 40% of the total volume of trees
four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level may be
removed in any ten (10) year period.
c. In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing vegetation under three (3) feet
in height and other ground cover, including leaf litter and the forest duff layer, shall not be
cut, covered or removed, except to provide for a footpath or other permitted uses as described
in Section 15 O. paragraphs 2 and 2a. above.
d. Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is permitted.
e. In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the removal of storm-damaged,
diseased, unsafe, or dead trees results in the creation of cleared openings, these openings
shall be replanted with native tree species unless existing new tree growth is present.
The provisions contained in paragraph 2 above shall not apply to those portions of public
recreational facilities adjacent to public swimming areas. Cleared areas, however, shall be
limited to the minimum area necessary.
3. At distances greater than one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, from a great pond
classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of any other water body, tributary stream, or
the upland edge of a wetland, except to allow for the development of permitted uses, there shall
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 28
be permitted on any lot, in any ten (10) year period, selective cutting of not more than forty (40)
percent of the volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured 4 1/2 feet above
ground level. Tree removal in conjunction with the development of permitted uses shall be
included in the forty (40) percent calculation. For the purposes of these standards volume may
be considered to be equivalent to basal area.
In no event shall cleared openings for development, including but not limited to, principal and
accessory structures, driveways and sewage disposal areas, exceed in the aggregate, 25% of the
lot area or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is greater, including land previously
developed.
4. Cleared openings legally in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance may be maintained,
but shall not be enlarged, except as permitted by this Ordinance.
5. Fields which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees, or other woody vegetation shall be
regulated under the provisions of this section.
P. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
1. All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or other similar activities which result in
un-stabilized soil conditions and which require a permit shall require a written soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan. The plan shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer for
approval and shall include, where applicable, provisions for:
a. Mulching and re-vegetation of disturbed soil.
b. Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt fencing or diversion ditches.
c. Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or riprap.
2. In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall be designed to fit with the
topography and soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be required
shall be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours shall be followed as closely as possible.
3. Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed project
involving land disturbance, and shall be in operation during all stages of the activity. The
amount of exposed soil at every phase of construction shall be minimized to reduce the potential
for erosion.
4. Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently stabilized within one (1) week
from the time it was last actively worked, by use of riprap, sod, seed, and mulch, or other
effective measures. In all cases permanent stabilization shall occur within nine (9) months of the
initial date of exposure. In addition:
a. Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one (1) bale per five hundred
(500) square feet and shall be maintained until a catch of vegetation is established.
b. Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable method may be required to
maintain the mulch cover.
c. Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to avoid siltation into the water.
Such measures may include the use of staked hay bales and/or silt fences.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 29
5. Natural and man-made drainage ways and drainage outlets shall be protected from erosion from
water flowing through them. Drainageways shall be designed and constructed in order to carry
water from a twenty five (25) year storm or greater, and shall be stabilized with vegetation or
lined with riprap.
Q. SOILS
All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or structures can be
established or maintained without causing adverse environmental impacts, including severe erosion,
mass soil movement, improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during or after construction.
Proposed uses requiring subsurface waste disposal shall require a soils report based on an on-site
investigation and be prepared by state-certified professionals. Certified persons may include Maine
Certified Soil Scientists, Maine Registered Professional Engineers, Maine State Certified Geologists
and other persons who have training and experience in the recognition and evaluation of soil
properties. The report shall be based upon the analysis of the characteristics of the soil and
surrounding land and water areas, maximum ground water elevation, presence of ledge, drainage
conditions, and other pertinent data which the evaluator deems appropriate. The soils report shall
include recommendations for a proposed use to counteract soil limitations where they exist.
R. WATER QUALITY
No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or discharge to the waters of the State any pollutant
that, by itself or in combination with other activities or substances will impair designated uses or the
water classification of the water body.
S. ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES
Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil disturbance on or adjacent
to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places, as determined by
the Planning Board shall be submitted by the applicant to the Maine Historic Preservation
Commission for review and comment, at least twenty (20) days prior to action being taken by the
Planning Board. The Planning Board shall consider comments received from the Commission prior
to rendering a decision on the application.
T. MARINE REFUELING FACILITIES
Marine Refueling facilities shall be allowed in the Limited Residential District for boats and other
water related craft primarily operated on the surface of the water. Refueling for seaplanes is not
allowed.
Marine Refueling facilities shall comply with the following performance standards:
1. Space Standards – In addition to the space standards of the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance, marine
refueling facilities shall comply with the following standards:
a. A minimum of three hundred feet (300') of lake frontage;
b. A setback of one hundred feet (100') from all property lines for the product delivery line;
c. All applicable space standards of the State Fire Marshall’s Office.
2. State and Federal regulations -- In addition to the regulations of the Shoreland Zoning
Ordinance, refueling facilities shall comply with all applicable standards of the following:
a. The Maine Department of Environmental Protection;
b. The Maine Forestry Service;
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 30
c. The Maine Department of Wildlife and Inland Fisheries;
d. The State Fire Marshall’s Office and the Town of Gray Fire Department;
e. Federal Spill Prevention Containment Control;
f. The Natural Resources Protection Act;
g. All other applicable Local, State and Federal regulations.
3. A copy of all Certificates of Inspections shall be filed with the Town of Gray Code Enforcement
Officer.
4. Period of operation, noise control, lighting standards, and sureties shall be as determined by the
Planning Board.
U. TEMPORARY STRUCTURES
1. Temporary structures including temporary living quarters used in conjunction with disasters such
as fire, flood, lightning, hurricanes, and ice or snowstorms and other forces of nature shall be
permitted only during the period that restoration work is in progress.
2. Restoration work includes the repairing, rebuilding, and altering of a premise, land, or structure
to a former, normal, or unimpaired state or condition including but not limited to the cleaning
and removal of debris, trash, and waste.
3. Temporary structures shall not encroach any further upon the setback requirements of the
structure destroyed. Any deviation from those setbacks must be approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
4. Temporary living quarters shall be connected to the existing septic system or to an alternate
system which, in either case, must comply with the Plumbing Code and be approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
5. Permits for temporary structures shall be issued for a six- (6) month period and may be renewed
by the Code Enforcement Officer for a maximum of one extension provided a duly authorized
building and plumbing permit has been issued for a permanent structure.
V. COMMERCIAL & INDUSTRIAL USES PROHIBITED
The following new commercial and industrial uses are prohibited within the shoreland zone adjacent
to great ponds classified GPA, and rivers and streams which flow to great ponds classified GPA:
1. Auto washing facilities
2. Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations, including body shops
3. Chemical and bacteriological laboratories
4. Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers, other than amounts normally
associated with individual households or farms
5. Commercial painting, wood preserving, and furniture stripping
6. Dry cleaning establishments
7. Electronic circuit assembly
8. Laundromats, unless connected to a sanitary sewer
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 31
9. Metal plating, finishing, or polishing
10. Petroleum or petroleum product storage and/or sale except storage on same property as use
occurs and except for storage and sales associated with marinas
11. Photographic processing
12. Printing
W. ADULT USE MARIJUANA
Home cultivation of personal Adult Use Marijuana is permitted within the Town of Gray in all zones
subject to the following restrictions:
(1) Persons cultivating Adult Use Marijuana must be 21 years of age or older;
(2) Cultivation of Adult Use Marijuana shall be limited to a total number of three (3) mature
marijuana plants and twelve (12) immature marijuana plants on any one parcel or tract of land
within the Town;
(3) Cultivation is only permitted on a parcel or tract of land within the Town on which the
person cultivating Adult Use Marijuana is domiciled;
(4) Cultivation that occurs outdoors shall be sufficiently screened to ensure that plants are not
visible from an abutting property or a public or private road or right of way; and
(5) Cultivation that occurs outdoors must meet all applicable setbacks required for structures
under this Ordinance, and in no event shall outdoor cultivation be less than ten (10) feet from any
lot line.
The limitations in this section shall apply per person domiciled on a parcel or tract of land and shall
not apply to seedlings.
SECTION 16 – ADMINISTRATION
A. ADMINISTERING BODIES AND AGENTS
1. Code Enforcement Officer - A Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Town.
2. Board of Appeals - A Board of Appeals shall be created in accordance with the provisions of
Title 30 A Section 2691.
3. Planning Board - A Planning Board shall be created in accordance with the provisions of State
law.
B. PERMITS REQUIRED
After the effective date of this Ordinance no person shall, without first obtaining a permit, engage in
any activity or use of land or structure requiring a permit in the district in which such activity or use
would occur; or expand, change, or replace an existing use or structure; or renew a discontinued
nonconforming use. In addition, no permit shall be issued under this ordinance unless the
application complies with the requirements of Section 601.19 of the Town's Administrative Code
Ordinance.
1. A permit is not required for the replacement of an existing road culvert as long as:
a. The replacement culvert is not more than 25% longer than the culvert being replaced;
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 32
b. The replacement culvert is no longer than 75 feet; and
c. Adequate erosion control measures are taken to prevent sedimentation of the water, and the
crossing does not block fish passage in the watercourse.
2. A permit is not required for an archaeological excavation as long as the excavation is conducted
by an archaeologist listed on the State Historic Preservation Officer’s level 1 or level 2 approved
list, and unreasonable erosion and sedimentation is prevented by means of adequate and timely
temporary and permanent stabilization measures.
3. Any permit required by this Ordinance shall be in addition to any other permit required by other
law or ordinance.
C. PERMIT APPLICATION
1. Every applicant for a permit shall submit a written application, including a scaled site plan, on a
form provided by the municipality, to the appropriate official as indicated in Section 14.
2. All applications shall be signed by the owner or owners of the property or other person
authorizing the work, certifying that the information in the application is complete and correct.
If the person signing the application is not the owner or lessee of the property then that person
shall submit a letter of authorization from the owner or lessee.
3. All applications shall be dated, and the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as
appropriate, shall note upon each application the date and time of its receipt.
4. If the property is not served by a public sewer, a valid plumbing permit or a completed
application for a plumbing permit, including the site evaluation approved by the Plumbing
Inspector, shall be submitted whenever the nature of the proposed structure would require the
installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system.
D. PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTERING PERMITS
Within 35 days of the date of receiving a written application, the Planning Board or Code
Enforcement Officer, as indicated in Section 14, shall notify the applicant either that the application
is a complete application, or, if the application is incomplete, that specified additional material is
needed to make the application complete. The Planning Board or the Code Enforcement Officer, as
appropriate, shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny all permit applications in writing within
35 days of receiving a completed application. However, if the Planning Board has a waiting list of
applications, a decision on the application shall occur within 35 days after the first available date on
the Planning Board’s agenda following receipt of the completed application, or within 35 days of the
public hearing, if one is held. Permits shall be approved if the proposed use or structure is found to
be in conformance with the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance.
The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the proposed land use activity is in conformity
with the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance and that the accuracy, measurements and
documentation are in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.
After the submission of a complete application, the Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer, as
appropriate, the appropriate reviewing authority shall approve an application or approve it with
conditions if the appropriate reviewing authority makes a positive finding based on the information
presented that the proposed use:
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 33
1. Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
2. Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to surface waters;
3. Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
4. Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird or other wildlife
habitat;
5. Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points of access to inland waters;
6. Will protect archaeological and historic resources as designated in the comprehensive plan;
7. Will avoid problems associated with flood plain development and use; and
8. Is in conformance with the provisions of Section 15, Land Use Standards.
If a permit is either denied or approved with conditions, the reasons as well as conditions shall be
stated in writing. No approval shall be granted for an application involving a structure if the
structure would be located in an unapproved subdivision or would violate any other local
ordinance or regulation or any State law which the municipality is responsible for enforcing.
E. SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS FOR SINGLE FAMILY CONSTRUCTION IN THE RESOURCE
PROTECTION DISTRICT
In addition to the criteria specified in Section 16(D) above, excepting structure setback requirements,
the Planning Board may approve a permit for a single family residential structure in a Resource
Protection District provided that the applicant demonstrates that all of the following conditions are
met:
1. There is no location on the property, other than a location within the Resource Protection
District, where the structure can be built.
2. The lot on which the structure is proposed is undeveloped and was established and recorded in
the registry of deeds of the county in which the lot is located before the adoption of the Resource
Protection District.
3. All proposed buildings, sewage disposal systems and other improvements are:
a. Located on natural ground slopes of less than 20%; and
b. Located outside the floodway of the 100-year flood-plain along rivers and artificially formed
great ponds along rivers, based on detailed flood insurance studies and as delineated on the
Federal Emergency Management Agency's Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood
Insurance Rate Maps; all buildings, including basements, are elevated at least one foot above
the 100-year flood-plain elevation; and the development is otherwise in compliance with any
applicable municipal flood-plain ordinance.
If the floodway is not shown on the Federal Emergency Management Agency Maps, it is
deemed to be 1/2 the width of the 100-year flood-plain.
4. The total ground-floor area, including cantilevered or similar overhanging extensions, of all
principal and accessory structures is limited to a maximum of 1,500 square feet. This limitation
shall not be altered by variance.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 34
5. All structures, except functionally water-dependent structures, are set back from the normal highwater
line of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland to the greatest practical
extent, but not less than 75 feet, horizontal distance. In determining the greatest practical extent,
the Planning Board shall consider the depth of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil
erosion, the type and amount of vegetation to be removed, the proposed building site's elevation
in regard to the flood-plain, and its proximity to moderate-value and high-value wetlands.
F. EXPIRATION OF PERMIT
Following the issuance of a permit, if no substantial start is made in construction or in the use of the
property within one year of the date of the permit, the permit shall lapse and become void.
G. INSTALLATION OF PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICE
No public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility company of any kind may install
services to any new structure located in the shoreland zone unless written authorization attesting to
the validity and currency of all local permits required under this or any previous Ordinance, has been
issued by the appropriate municipal officials. Following installation of service, the company or
district shall forward the written authorization to the municipal officials, indicating that installation
has been completed.
H. APPEALS
1. Powers and Duties of the Board of Appeals - The Board of Appeals shall have the following
powers:
a. Administrative Appeals: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error
in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code
Enforcement Officer or Planning Board in the enforcement or administration of this
Ordinance; and to hear and decide administrative appeals on a de novo basis where it is
alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer in his or her
review of and action on a permit application or potential ordinance violation under this
Ordinance.
b. Variance Appeals: To authorize variances upon appeal, within the limitations set forth in this
Ordinance.
2. Variance Appeals
Except as provided in subsection 2-A, Variances may be permitted only under the following
conditions:
a. Variances may be granted only from dimensional requirements including but not limited to,
lot width, structure height, percent of lot coverage, and setback requirements.
b. Variances shall not be granted for establishment of any uses otherwise prohibited by this
Ordinance.
c. The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds that:
(i) The proposed structure or use would meet the provisions of Section 15 except for the
specific provision which has created the non-conformity and from which relief is sought;
and
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 35
(ii) The strict application of the terms of this Ordinance would result in undue hardship.
The term "undue hardship" shall mean:
(01) That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted;
(02) That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and
not to the general conditions in the neighborhood
(03) That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality;
and
(04) That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
d. Set-back variance for single family dwelling:
The Board may grant a variance from a set-back requirement for a single family dwelling
under this section only when the strict application of the zoning ordinance to the petitioner
and the petitioner's property would cause undue hardship. The term "undue hardship" as used
in this subsection means:
(i) The need for the variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not the
general conditions of the neighborhood;
(ii) The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the locality;
(iii) The hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or prior owner;
(iv) The granting of the variance will not substantially reduce or impair the use of abutting
property; and
(v) That the granting of the variance is based upon demonstrated need, not convenience, and
no other feasible alternative is available.
This ordinance provision is strictly limited to permitting a variance from a set-back
requirement for a single-family dwelling that is the primary year-round residence of the
petitioner. A variance under this subsection may not exceed 20% of a set-back requirement
and may not be granted if the variance would cause the area of the dwelling to exceed the
maximum permissible lot coverage. For lots lawfully existing non-conforming lots of record
recorded at the Registry of Deeds prior to January 1, 1989, a variance under this subsection
may exceed 20% of the setback requirement, except for minimum setbacks from a wetland or
water body required within shoreland zones by rules adopted pursuant to Title 38, chapter 3,
subchapter I, article 2-B, if the petitioner meets all of the above standards and the relief
requested is the least necessary to relieve the hardship.
e. The Board of Appeals shall limit any variances granted as strictly as possible in order to
insure conformance with the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance to the greatest extent
possible, and in doing so may impose such conditions to a variance as it deems necessary.
The party receiving the variance shall comply with any conditions imposed.
f. A copy of each variance request, including the application and all supporting information
supplied by the applicant, shall be forwarded by the municipal officials to the Commissioner
of the Department of Environmental Protection at least twenty (20) days prior to action by
the Board of Appeals. Any comments received from the Commissioner prior to the action by
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 36
the Board of Appeals shall be made part of the record and shall be taken into consideration
by the Board of Appeals.
3. Administrative Appeals
When the Board of Appeals reviews a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer the Board of
Appeals shall hold a “de novo” hearing. At this time the Board may receive and consider new
evidence and testimony, be it oral or written. When acting in a “de novo” capacity the Board of
Appeals shall hear and decide the matter afresh, undertaking its own independent analysis of
evidence and the law, and reaching its own decision.
When the Board of Appeals hears a decision of the Planning Board, it shall hold an appellate
hearing, and may reverse the decision of the Planning Board only upon finding that the decision
was contrary to specific provisions of the Ordinance or contrary to the facts presented to the
Planning Board. The Board of Appeals may only review the record of the proceedings before
the Planning Board. The Board Appeals shall not receive or consider any evidence which was
not presented to the Planning Board, but the Board of Appeals may receive and consider written
or oral arguments. If the Board of Appeals determines that the record of the Planning Board
proceedings is inadequate, the Board of Appeals may remand the matter to the Planning Board
for additional fact finding.
4. Disability Variance Appeals
a. Dwelling Accessibility
The Board of Appeals may grant a variance to an owner of a residential dwelling for the
purpose of making that dwelling accessible to a person with a disability who resides in or
regularly uses the dwelling. The board shall restrict any variance granted under this
subsection solely to the installation of equipment or the construction of structures necessary
for access to or egress from the dwelling by the person with the disability. The board may
impose conditions on the variance, including limiting the variance to the duration of the
disability or to the time that the person with the disability lives in the dwelling. The term
“structures necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling" shall include railing, wall or
roof systems necessary for the safety or effectiveness of the structure.
b. Vehicle Storage
(i) The Board may grant a variance to an owner-occupant who is a person with a permanent
disability for the construction of a place of storage and parking for a noncommercial
vehicle owned by that person and for no other purpose. The width and length of the
structure may not be larger than 2 times the width and length of the noncommercial
vehicle. The owner shall submit proposed plans for the structure with the request for the
variance pursuant to this paragraph to the Board.
(ii) The person with the permanent disability shall prove such status.
(iii) For purposes of this paragraph, "noncommercial vehicle" means a motor vehicle as
defined in Title 29-A, Maine Revised Statutes, section 101, subsection 42 with a gross
vehicle weight of no more than 6,000 pounds, bearing a disability registration plate (or
placard) issued pursuant to Title 29-A, section 521 and owned by the person with the
disability.
(iv) The Board may impose conditions on the variance granted pursuant to this subsection.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 37
(v) For the purposes of this subsection, "disability" has the same meaning as a physical or
mental disability under Title 5, section 4553-A.
5. Appeal Procedure
a. Making an Appeal
(i) An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an
aggrieved party from any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning
Board. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision
appealed from, and not otherwise, except that the Board, upon a showing of good cause,
may waive the thirty (30) day requirement.
(ii) Such appeal shall be made by filing with the Board of Appeals a written notice of appeal
which includes:
(01) A concise written statement indicating what relief is requested and why it should be
granted.
(02) A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of existing buildings and
structures and other physical features of the lot pertinent to the relief sought.
(iii) Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as
appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the
record of the decision appealed from.
(iv) The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within thirty-five (35)
days of its receipt of an appeal request.
b. Decision by Board of Appeals
(i) A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of deciding an appeal.
A member who abstains shall not be counted in determining whether a quorum exists.
(ii) The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board of Appeals present and
voting shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of
the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, or to decide in favor of the applicant
on any matter on which it is required to decide under this Ordinance, or to affect any
variation in the application of this Ordinance from its stated terms. The board may
reverse the decision, or failure to act, of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board
only upon a finding that the decision, or failure to act, was clearly contrary to specific
provisions of this Ordinance.
(iii) The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
(iv) The Board shall decide all appeals within thirty five (35) days after the close of the
hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all appeals.
(v) All decisions shall become a part of the record and shall include a statement of findings
and conclusions as well as the reasons or basis therefor, and the appropriate order, relief
or denial thereof. The Board shall cause written notice of its decision to be mailed or
hand-delivered to the applicant and to the Department of Environmental Protection
within seven (7) days of the Board’s decision. Copies of written decisions of the Board
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 38
of Appeals shall be given to the Planning Board, Code Enforcement Officer, and the
municipal officers.
6. Appeal to Superior Court
Any party may take an appeal, within forty five (45) days of the date of the vote on the original
decision, to Superior Court from any order, relief or denial in accordance with the Maine Rules
of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B. This time period may be extended by the court upon motion for
good cause shown. The hearing before Superior Court must be without a jury.
7. Reconsideration
In accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. section 2691(3)(F), the Board of Appeals may reconsider any
decision within forty-five (45) days of its prior decision. A request to the Board to reconsider a
decision must be filed within ten (10) days of the decision that is being reconsidered. A vote to
reconsider and the action taken on that reconsideration must occur and be completed within
forty-five (45) days of the date of the vote on the original decision. Reconsideration of a
decision shall require a positive vote of the majority of the Board members originally voting on
the decision, and proper notification to the landowner, petitioner, planning board, code
enforcement officer, and other parties of interest, including abutters and those who testified at the
original hearing(s). The Board may conduct additional hearings and receive additional evidence
and testimony.
I. ENFORCEMENT
1. Nuisances
Any violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
2. Code Enforcement Officer
a. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance. If the Code Enforcement Officer shall find that any provision of this Ordinance
is being violated, he or she shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation,
indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it, including
discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures, or work being done, removal of
illegal buildings or structures, and abatement of nuisance conditions. A copy of such notices
shall be submitted to the municipal officers and be maintained as a permanent record.
b. The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct onsite inspections to insure compliance with all
applicable laws and conditions attached to permit approvals. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall also investigate all complaints of alleged violations of this Ordinance.
c. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete record of all essential transactions of
the office, including applications submitted, permits granted or denied, variances granted or
denied, revocation actions, revocation of permits, appeals, court actions, violations
investigated, violations found, and fees collected. On an biennial basis, beginning in 1992, a
summary of this record shall be submitted by March 1 to the Director of the Bureau of Land
Quality Control within the Department of Environmental Protection.
3. Legal Actions
When the above action does not result in the correction or abatement of the violation or nuisance
condition, the Municipal Officers, upon notice from the Code Enforcement Officer, are hereby
directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, including
seeking injunctions of violations and the imposition of fines, that may be appropriate or
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 39
necessary to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance in the name of the municipality. The
municipal officers, or their authorized agent, are hereby authorized to enter into administrative
consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating violations of this Ordinance and recovering
fines without Court action. Such agreements shall not allow an illegal structure or use to
continue unless there is clear and convincing evidence that the illegal structure or use was
constructed or conducted as a direct result of erroneous advice given by an authorized municipal
official and there is no evidence that the owner acted in bad faith, or unless the removal of the
structure or use will result in a threat or hazard to public health and safety or will result in
substantial environmental damage.
4. Fines
Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner's agent or a contractor, who
orders or conducts any activity in violation of this Ordinance shall be penalized in accordance
with Title 30 A, Maine Revised Statutes Annotated, Subsection 4452.
NOTE: Current penalties include fines of not less than $100 nor more than $2500 per violation
for each day that the violation continues.
SECTION 17 – DEFINITIONS
Accessory structure or use – a use or structure which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use
or structure. Accessory uses, when aggregated shall not subordinate the principal use of the lot. A deck
or similar extension of the principal structure or a garage attached to the principal structure by a roof or
a common wall is considered part of the principal structure, but shall not include the use of any portion
of a lot for purposes related to Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensaries, Medical Marijuana
Registered Dispensary Cultivation Facilities, Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facilities, Medical
Marijuana Testing Facilities, Marijuana Food Establishments, Caregivers, Caregiver Retail Stores and
Adult Use Marijuana Establishments.
Adult Use: The acquisition, possession, cultivation, consumption, transfer or transportation of
marijuana or paraphernalia relating to the consumption of marijuana by persons 21 years of age or older.
Adult Use Marijuana: Marijuana that is cultivated, manufactured, distributed or sold by an adult use
marijuana establishment.
Adult Use Marijuana Cultivation Facility: A facility licensed under Maine law to purchase marijuana
plants and seeds from other cultivation facilities; to cultivate, prepare and package adult use marijuana;
to sell adult use marijuana to products manufacturing facilities, to marijuana stores and to other
cultivation facilities; and to sell marijuana plants and seeds to other cultivation facilities and immature
marijuana plants and seedlings to marijuana stores.
Adult Use Marijuana Establishment: An adult use marijuana cultivation facility, an adult use
marijuana products manufacturing facility, an adult use marijuana testing facility or an adult use
marijuana store licensed under Maine law.
Adult Use Marijuana Products Manufacturing Facility: A facility licensed under Maine law to
purchase adult use marijuana from a cultivation facility or another products manufacturing facility; to
manufacture, label and package adult use marijuana and adult use marijuana products; and to sell adult
use marijuana and adult use marijuana products to marijuana stores and to other products manufacturing
facilities.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 40
Adult Use Marijuana Store: A facility licensed under Maine law to purchase adult use marijuana,
immature marijuana plants and seedlings from a cultivation facility, to purchase adult use marijuana and
adult use marijuana products from a products manufacturing facility and to sell adult use marijuana,
adult use marijuana products, immature marijuana plants and seedlings to consumers.
Adult Use Marijuana Testing Facility: A facility licensed under Maine law to develop, research and
test marijuana, marijuana products and other substances.
Agriculture: the production, keeping or maintenance for use, sale or lease, of plants and/or animals,
including but not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy
products; poultry and poultry products; livestock; fruits and vegetables; and ornamental and green house
products, including the growing and harvesting of Christmas trees. Such agricultural use will remain in
existence until such time as its land use changes to another land use as allowed by the Town Zoning
Ordinance. Agriculture does not include forest management and timber harvesting activities, or
cultivation of Marijuana for Medical Use or Adult Use.
Aggrieved party – an owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly affected by the granting or
denial of a permit or variance under this Ordinance; a person whose land abuts land for which a permit
or variance has been granted; or any other person or group of persons who have suffered particularized
injury as a result of the granting or denial of such permit or variance.
Alteration – Any change, addition, or modification in construction, other than cosmetic or decorative,
or any change in the structural members of buildings such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.
Aquaculture – the growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater, estuarine, or marine plant or
animal species.
Basal Area – the area of cross-section of a tree stem at 4 1/2 feet above ground level and inclusive of
bark.
Basement – any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of 6 feet or more and having more
than 50% of its volume below the existing ground level.
Boat Launching Facility – a facility designed primarily for the launching and landing of watercraft, and
which may include an access ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for vehicles and trailers.
Campground – any area or tract of land to accommodate two (2) or more parties in temporary living
quarters, including, but not limited to tents, recreational vehicles or other shelters.
Canopy – the more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a wooded area.
Caregiver: A person or an assistant of that person that provides care for a qualifying patient to receive
Medical Marijuana pursuant to Maine law.
Caregiver Retail Store: A retail store in which a Caregiver sells harvested marijuana to qualifying
patients for the patients’ medical use.
Commercial use – the use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than a "home occupation," defined
below, the intent and result of which activity is the production of income from the buying and selling of
goods and/or services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings and/or dwelling units.
Cultivation: The planting, propagation, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming or other
processing of adult use marijuana for personal use, but not including manufacturing, testing, or
marijuana extraction.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 41
DBH – the diameter of a standing tree measured 4.5 feet from ground level.
Development – a change in land use involving alteration of the land, water or vegetation, or the addition
or alteration of structures or other construction not naturally occurring.
Dimensional requirements – numerical standards relating to spatial relationships including but not
limited to setback, lot area, shore frontage and height.
Disability – any disability, infirmity, malformation, disfigurement, congenital defect or mental
condition caused by bodily injury, accident, disease, birth defect, environmental conditions or illness;
and also includes the physical or mental condition of a person which constitutes a substantial handicap
as determined by a physician or in the case of mental handicap, by a psychiatrist or psychologist, as well
as any other health or sensory impairment which requires special education, vocational rehabilitation or
related services.
Driveway – a vehicular access-way less than five hundred (500) feet in length serving two lots or less.
Emergency operations – operations conducted for the public health, safety or general welfare, such as
protection of resources from immediate destruction or loss, law enforcement, and operations to rescue
human beings, property and livestock from the threat of destruction or injury.
Essential services – the construction, alteration or maintenance of gas, electrical or communication
facilities; steam, fuel, electric power or water transmission or distribution lines, towers and related
equipment; telephone cables or lines, poles and related equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry or other similar
pipelines; municipal sewage lines, collection or supply systems; and associated storage tanks. Such
systems may include towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarms and police
call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories, but shall not include service drops or
buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of such services.
Expansion of a structure – an increase in the floor area or volume of a structure, including all
extensions such as, but not limited to attached: decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
Expansion of use – the addition of weeks or months to a use's operating season; additional hours of
operation; or the use of more floor area or ground area devoted to a particular use.
Family – one or more persons occupying a premise and living as a single housekeeping unit.
Floodway – the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by
more than one foot in height.
Floor area – the sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by exterior walls, plus
the horizontal area of any unenclosed portions of a structure such as porches and decks.
Forest management activities – timber cruising and other forest resource evaluation activities,
pesticide or fertilizer application, management planning activities, timber stand improvement, pruning,
regeneration of forest stands, and other similar or associated activities, exclusive of timber harvesting
and the construction, creation or maintenance of roads.
Forested wetland – a freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six (6) meters tall
(approximately twenty (20) feet) or taller.
Foundation the supporting substructure of a building or other structure including but not limited to
basements, slabs, sills, posts or frostwalls.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 42
Freshwater wetland – freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, other than forested
wetlands, which are:
1. of ten or more contiguous acres; or of less than 10 contiguous acres and adjacent to a surface
water body, excluding any river, stream or brook such that in a natural state, the combined
surface area is in excess of 10 acres; and
2. Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration sufficient to
support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soils.
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not conform to the
criteria of this definition.
Frontage, Road – the road frontage shall be on the lot line that lies between the two sidelines and abuts
a road. For any lot bounded on more than one property line by a road, only one road shall be used for
the purpose of road frontage. Frontage on a cul-de-sac shall be measured at the building setback line.
Except as determined by the horizontal distance, between side lot lines, nearest to and roughly parallel to
the closest road or street.
Frontage, Shore – the horizontal distance, measured as a straight line, between the intersections of the
side lot lines with the shoreline at the normal high water mark elevation.
Functionally water – dependent uses those uses that require, for their primary purpose, location on
submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location in, inland waters and which cannot be
located away from these waters. The uses include, but are not limited to commercial and recreational
fishing and boating facilities, excluding recreational boat storage buildings, finfish and shellfish
processing, fish storage and retail and wholesale fish marketing facilities, waterfront dock and port
facilities, shipyards and boat building facilities, marinas, navigation aids, basins and channels, industrial
uses dependent upon water-borne transportation or requiring large volumes of cooling or processing
water and which cannot reasonably be located or operated at an inland site, and uses which primarily
provide general public access to marine or tidal waters.
Great pond – any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess of ten acres,
and any inland body of water artificially formed or increased which has a surface area in excess of thirty
(30) acres except for the purposes of this Ordinance, where the artificially formed or increased inland
body of water is completely surrounded by land held by a single owner.
Great pond classified GPA – any great pond classified GPA, pursuant to Title 38 Article 4-A Section
465-A. This classification includes some, but not all impoundments of rivers that are defined as great
ponds.
Ground cover – small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the partially decayed organic matter
of the forest floor.
Harvested Marijuana: The plant material harvested from a mature marijuana plant, except the stalks,
leaves and roots of the plant that are not used for a qualifying patient's medical use, including marijuana
concentrate and marijuana products.
Height of a structure: the vertical distance between the mean original grade at the downhill side of the
structure and the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys, steeples, antennas, and similar
appurtenances which have no floor area.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 43
Home occupation: an occupation or profession which is customarily conducted on or in a residential
structure or property and which is 1) clearly incidental to and compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses; and 2) which employs no more than two (2) persons other
than family members residing in the home. Home Occupations shall not include the use of any portion
of a lot for purposes related to Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensaries, Medical Marijuana
Registered Dispensary Cultivation Facilities, Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facilities, Medical
Marijuana Testing Facilities, Marijuana Food Establishments, Caregivers, Caregiver Retail Stores and
Adult Use Marijuana Establishments.
Increase in nonconformity of a structure – any change in a structure or property which causes further
deviation from the dimensional standard(s) creating the nonconformity such as, but not limited to,
reduction in water body, tributary stream or wetland setback distance, increase in lot coverage, or
increase in height of a structure. Property changes or structure expansions which either meet the
dimensional standard or which cause no further increase in the linear extent of nonconformance of the
existing structure shall not be considered to increase nonconformity. For example, there is no increase
in nonconformity with the setback requirement for water bodies, wetlands, or tributary streams if the
expansion extends no further into the required setback area than does any portion of the existing
nonconforming structure. Hence, a structure may be expanded laterally provided that the expansion
extends no closer to the water body, tributary stream, or wetland than the closest portion of the existing
structure from that water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Included in this allowance are expansions
which in-fill irregularly shaped structures.
Individual private campsite – an area of land which is not associated with a campground, but which is
developed for repeated camping by only one group not to exceed ten (10) individuals and which
involves site improvements which may include but not be limited to gravel pads, parking areas, fire
places, or tent platforms.
Industrial –the assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packaging or processing of goods, or
the extraction of minerals. Industrial uses shall not include the use of any portion of a lot for purposes
related to Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensaries, Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary
Cultivation Facilities, Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facilities, Medical Marijuana Testing
Facilities, Marijuana Food Establishments, Caregivers, Caregiver Retail Stores and Adult Use Marijuana
Establishments.
Institutional – a non-profit or quasi-public use, or institution such as a church, library, public or private
school, hospital, or municipally owned or operated building, structure or land used for public purposes.
Lot area – the area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, minus land below the normal
high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and areas beneath roads serving more than
two lots.
Marijuana: The leaves, stems, flowers and seeds of a marijuana plant, whether growing or not.
Marijuana includes marijuana concentrate, but does not include industrial hemp as defined by Maine law
or a Marijuana Product.
Marijuana concentrate - the resin extracted from any part of the plant genus cannabis and every
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation from such resin, including hashish. In
determining the weight of marijuana concentrate, the weight of any other ingredient combined with
marijuana to prepare a marijuana product may not be included.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 44
Marijuana Food Establishment: A factory, plant, warehouse or store in which food and food products
are manufactured, processed, packed, held for introduction into commerce or sold, by a Caregiver or
Registered Dispensary that prepare food containing marijuana for medical use by a qualifying patient.
Marijuana Extraction: The process of extracting marijuana concentrate from marijuana using water,
lipids, gases, solvents or other chemicals or chemical processes.
Manufacture or Manufacturing/Processing: Uses such as a textile mill, shoe factory, metal
fabrication, canning of foods, meat packing or grain mill, the preparation of finished products made
from foodstuff, fabrics, leather, wood, paper, rubber, stone, clay, glass, plastics, manmade materials and
other similar materials. Manufacturing and Processing shall not include any principal or accessory uses
related to medical marijuana cultivation facilities, medical marijuana registered dispensaries, adult use
marijuana establishments, marijuana food establishments, marijuana extraction, or the manufacturing of
marijuana concentrate or marijuana products as defined herein, unless expressly authorized herein.
Marijuana Paraphernalia - Equipment, products and materials of any kind that are used or
intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, ingesting, smoking or otherwise introducing into
the human body marijuana for medical use or recreational use as defined in this Chapter,
including, without limitation, water pipes, hashish pipes, glass pipes, bongs, vaporizers, scales
rolling papers, hydroponic equipment and grow lights and general tobacco products in so-called
smoke shops.
Marijuana Product: A product composed of marijuana, harvested marijuana or marijuana concentrate
and other ingredients that is intended for medical use or consumption for adult use, including, but not
limited to, an edible marijuana product, a marijuana ointment and a marijuana tincture, but not including
marijuana concentrate.
Marina – a business establishment having frontage on navigable water and, as its principal use,
providing for hire offshore moorings or docking facilities for boats, and which may also provide
accessory services such as boat and related sales, boat repair and construction, indoor and outdoor
storage of boats and marine equipment, boat and tackle shops and marine fuel service facilities.
Market value – the estimated price a property will bring in the open market and under prevailing
market conditions in a sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer, both conversant with the
property and with prevailing general price levels.
Medical Marijuana: Medical Marijuana means marijuana used for “medical use,” as that term is
defined herein.
Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary Cultivation Facility: A facility that is used solely for the
purpose of cultivating marijuana by a medical marijuana registered dispensary, which shall be limited to
no more than one additional location or as otherwise prescribed by Maine law.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 45
Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility: A registered tier 1 or tier 2 manufacturing facility or a
person authorized to engage in marijuana extraction under section 2423-F of Title 22 of the Maine
Revised Statutes.
Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary: An entity registered by the State of Maine under Section
2425-A of Title 22 of the Maine Revised Statutes, as amended, that acquires, possesses, cultivates,
manufactures, delivers, transfers, transports, sells, supplies or dispenses marijuana or related supplies
and educational materials to qualifying patients and caregivers of those patients. A Medical Marijuana
Registered Dispensary shall not include a caregiver retail store or an adult use marijuana establishment
as defined herein.
Medical Marijuana Testing Facility: A public or private laboratory that: a.) Is authorized in
accordance with section 2423-A, subsection 10 of Title 22 of the Maine Revised Statutes, as amended,
to analyze contaminants in and the potency and cannabinoid profile of samples; and b.) Is accredited
pursuant to standard ISO/IEC 17025 of the International Organization for Standardization by a 3rd-party
accrediting body or is certified, registered or accredited by an organization approved by the Department
of Administrative and Financial Services.
Medical Use: The acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, delivery, transfer or
transportation of marijuana or marijuana paraphernalia relating to the administration of marijuana to
treat or alleviate a qualifying patient's medical diagnosis or symptoms for which a medical provider has
provided the qualifying patient a written certification under Maine law.
Minimum lot width – the closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot. When only two lot lines
extend into the shoreland zone, both lot lines shall be considered to be side lot lines.
Mineral exploration – hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of determining the nature or extent
of mineral resources which create minimal disturbance to the land and which include reasonable
measures to restore the land to its original condition.
Mineral extraction – any operation within any twelve (12) month period which removes more than one
hundred (100) cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, rock, peat, or other like material
from its natural location and to transport the product removed, away from the extraction site.
Multi-unit residential – a residential structure containing three (3) or more residential dwelling units.
Native – indigenous to the local forests.
Non-conforming condition – non-conforming lot, structure or use which is allowed solely because it
was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendment took effect.
Non-conforming lot – a single lot of record which, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this Ordinance, does not meet the area, frontage, or width requirements of the district in which it is
located.
Non-conforming structure – a structure which does not meet any one or more of the following
dimensional requirements; setback, height, or lot coverage, but which is allowed solely because it was in
lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Non-conforming use – use of buildings, structures, premises, land or parts thereof which is not
permitted in the district in which it is situated, but which is allowed to remain solely because it was in
lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 46
Non-forested wetland – a freshwater wetland dominated by non-woody vegetation and/or woody
vegetation that is less than six (6) meters tall.
Normal high-water line – that line which is apparent from visible markings, changes in the character of
soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation, and which distinguishes between
predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial land. Areas contiguous with rivers and great ponds
that support non-forested wetland vegetation and hydric soils and that are at the same or lower elevation
as the water level of the river or great pond during the period of normal high-water are considered part
of the river or great pond.
Person – an individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality, trust, estate, partnership,
association, two or more individuals having a joint or common interest, or other legal entity.
Piers, docks, wharves, bridges and other structures and uses extending over or beyond the normal
high-water line or within a wetland –
1. Temporary: Structures which remain in or over the water for less than seven (7) months in any
period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
2. Permanent: Structures which remain in or over the water for seven (7) months or more in any
period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
Principal structure – a building other than one which is used for purposes wholly incidental or
accessory to the use of another building or use on the same premises.
Principal use – a use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory to another use on the same
premises.
Public facility – any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings, property, recreation areas, and
roads, which are owned, leased, or otherwise operated, or funded by a governmental body or public
entity.
Recent flood plain soils – the following soil series as described and identified by the National Co
operative Soil Survey:
Recreational facility – a place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time activities,
and other customary and usual recreational activities, excluding boat launching facilities.
Recreational Use of Marijuana – Recreational use of marijuana means personal use of marijuana as
permitted in 7 M.R.S.A. § 2452, as may be amended from time to time.
Recreational vehicle – a vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle designed to be towed, and designed for
temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons, and which may include a pick up camper,
travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and motor home. In order to be considered as a vehicle and not as
a structure, the unit must remain with its tires on the ground, and must be registered with the State
Division of Motor Vehicles.
Alluvial Cornish Charles
Fryeburg Hadley Limerick
Lovewell Medomak Ondawa
Podunk Rumney Saco
Suncook Sunday Winooski
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 47
Registered Caregiver: Registered caregiver means a caregiver who is registered by the Maine
Department of Administrative and Financial Services pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 2425-A, as may be
amended from time to time.
Replacement system – a system intended to replace: 1.) an existing system which is either
malfunctioning or being upgraded with no significant change of design flow or use of the structure, or
2.) any existing overboard wastewater discharge.
Retail marijuana– marijuana or marijuana concentrate that is cultivated, manufactured, distributed or
sold by a licensed retail marijuana establishment or retail marijuana social club.
Retail marijuana cultivation facility – an entity licensed to cultivate, prepare and package retail
marijuana and sell retail marijuana to retail marijuana establishments and retail marijuana social clubs.
Retail marijuana establishment – a retail marijuana store, a retail marijuana cultivation facility, a retail
marijuana products manufacturing facility or a retail marijuana testing facility.
Retail marijuana product – a marijuana product that is manufactured, processed, distributed or sold by
a licensed retail marijuana establishment or a retail marijuana social club.
Retail marijuana products manufacturing facility - an entity licensed to purchase retail marijuana;
manufacture, prepare and package retail marijuana products; and sell retail marijuana and retail
marijuana products only to other retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities, retail marijuana
stores and retail marijuana social clubs.
Retail marijuana social club – an entity licensed to sell retail marijuana and retail marijuana products
to consumers for consumption on the licensed premises.
Retail marijuana store – an entity licensed to purchase retail marijuana from a retail marijuana
cultivation facility and to purchase retail marijuana products from a retail marijuana products
manufacturing facility and to sell retail marijuana and retail marijuana products to consumers.
Retail marijuana testing facility – an entity licensed and certified to analyze and certify the safety and
potency of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products.
Residential dwelling unit – a room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use as
permanent, seasonal, or temporary living quarters for only one family at a time, and containing cooking,
sleeping and toilet facilities. The term shall include mobile homes and rental units that contain cooking,
sleeping, and toilet facilities regardless of the time-period rented. Recreational vehicles are not
residential dwelling units.
Residual Basal Area – the sum of the basal area of trees remaining on a harvested site.
Riprap – rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least six (6) inches in diameter, used for erosion control and
soil stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two (2) units horizontal to one (1) unit vertical or
less.
River – a free-flowing body of water including its associated flood plain wetlands from that point at
which it provides drainage for a watershed of twenty five (25) square miles to its mouth.
Road – a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel, asphalt, or other surfacing
material constructed for or created by the repeated passage of motorized vehicles.
Service drop – any utility line extension which does not cross or run beneath any portion of a water
body provided that:
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 48
1. in the case of electric service
a. the placement of wires and/or the installation of utility poles is located entirely upon
the premises of the customer requesting service or upon a roadway right of way; and
b. the total length of the extension is less than one thousand (1,000) feet.
2. in the case of telephone service
a. the extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation of telephone wires
to existing utility poles, or
b. the extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or placement underground
is less than one thousand (1,000) feet in length.
Setback – the nearest horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary
stream, or upland edge of a wetland to the nearest part of a structure, road, parking space or other
regulated object or area.
Shoreland zone – the land area located within two hundred and fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of
the normal high-water line of any great pond, river, or saltwater body; within 250 feet, horizontal
distance, of the upland edge of a coastal or freshwater wetland; or within seventy-five (75) feet ,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream.
Shoreline – the normal high-water line, or upland edge of a freshwater wetland.
Significant River Segments – See Title 38 MRSA Sec. 437.
Skid trail – a route repeatedly used by forwarding machinery or animal to haul or drag forest products
from the stump to the yard or landing, the construction of which requires minimal excavation.
Slash – the residue, e.g., treetops and branches, left on the ground after a timber harvest.
Stream – a free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond or the confluence of two (2)
perennial streams as depicted on the most recent edition of a United States Geological Survey 7.5
minute series topographic map, or if not available, a 15-minute series topographic map, to the point
where the body of water becomes a river or flows to another water body or wetland within a shoreland
area.
Structure – anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods or property of
any kind, together with anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground,
exclusive of fences. The term includes structures temporarily or permanently located, such as decks and
satellite dishes.
Substantial start – completion of thirty (30) percent of a permitted structure or use measured as a
percentage of estimated total cost.
Subsurface sewage disposal system – a collection of treatment tank(s), disposal area(s), holding tank(s)
and pond(s), surface spray system(s), cesspool(s), well(s), surface ditch(es), alternative toilet(s), or other
devices and associated piping designed to function as a unit for the purpose of disposing of wastes or
wastewater on or beneath the surface of the earth. The term shall not include any wastewater discharge
system licensed under 38 MRSA Section 414, any surface wastewater disposal system licensed under 38
MRSA Section 413 Subsection 1-A, or any public sewer. The term shall not include a wastewater
disposal system designed to treat wastewater which is in whole or in part hazardous waste as defined in
38 MRSA Chapter 13, subchapter 1.
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING\CHAPTER 403 SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATED 5-14-19.DOCX 49
Sustained slope – a change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is substantially maintained
or exceeded throughout the measured area.
Timber harvesting – the cutting and removal of trees from their growing site, and the attendant
operation of cutting and skidding machinery but not the construction or creation of roads. Timber
harvesting does not include the clearing of land for approved construction. The cutting or removal of
trees in the shoreland zone on a lot that has less than two (2) acres within the shoreland zone shall not be
considered timber harvesting. Such cutting or removal of trees shall be regulated pursuant to Section 15
O, Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting.
Tributary stream – a channel between defined banks created by the action of surface water, whether
intermittent or perennial, and which is characterized by the lack of upland vegetation or presence of
aquatic vegetation and by the presence of a bed devoid of topsoil containing waterborne deposits on
exposed soil, parent material or bedrock, and which flows to a water body or wetland as defined. This
definition does not include the term "stream" as defined elsewhere in this Ordinance, and only applies to
that portion of the tributary stream located within the shoreland zone of the receiving water body or
wetland. “Tributary stream” does not include rills or gullies forming because of accelerated erosion in
disturbed soils where the natural vegetation cover has been removed by human activity.
Upland edge – the boundary between upland and wetland. For purposes of a freshwater wetland, the
upland edge is formed where the soils are not saturated for a duration sufficient to support wetland
vegetation; or where the soils support the growth of wetland vegetation, but such vegetation is
dominated by woody stems that are six (6) meters (approximately twenty (20) foot) tall or taller.
Vegetation – all live trees, shrubs, ground cover, and other plants including without limitation, trees
both over and under 4 inches in diameter, measured at 4 1/2 above ground level.
Volume of a structure – the volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by roof and fixed exterior
walls as measured from the exterior faces of these walls and roof.
Water body – any great pond, river, stream or tidal area.
Water Crossing – any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a river or stream,
whether under, through, or over the water course. Such projects include but may not be limited to roads,
fords, bridges, culverts, water lines, sewer lines, and cables as well as maintenance work on these
crossings. This definition includes crossings for timber harvesting equipment and related activities.
Wetland – a freshwater wetland.
Wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers – wetlands contiguous with or adjacent to a great
pond or river, and which during normal high water, are connected buy surface water to the great pond or
river. Also included are wetlands which are separated from the great pond or river by a berm, causeway,
or similar feature less than one hundred (100) feet in width, and which have a surface elevation at or
below the normal high water line of the great pond or river. Wetlands associated with great ponds or
rivers are considered to be part of that great pond or river.
Woody Vegetation – live trees or woody, non-herbaceous shrubs.
CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted August 19, 1982
Amended January 20, 1989
Amended October 3, 2002
Replacement Adopted January 15 2013
Amended August 4, 2015 / Effective September 4, 2015
Amended September 17, 2019 / Effective October 17, 2019
CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1 – TITLE AND PURPOSE ................................................................................................. 2
406.1.1 Title ..................................................................................................................................... 2
406.1.2 Purpose ................................................................................................................................ 2
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS ............................................................................................................. 2
406.2.1 Definitions ........................................................................................................................... 2
ARTICLE 3 – DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED ...................................................................................... 5
406.3.1 Districts Established ............................................................................................................ 5
ARTICLE 4 – PERMITS AND CONFORMANCE .......................................................................... 10
406.4.1 Sign Permits ...................................................................................................................... 10
406.4.2 Maintenance and Conformance of Signs .......................................................................... 10
ARTICLE 5 – TEMPORARY SIGNS ............................................................................................... 11
406.5.1 Temporary Signs ............................................................................................................... 11
ARTICLE 6 – REGULATIONS ALL DISTRICTS .......................................................................... 12
406.6.1 Regulations Applicable to Signs in all Districts ................................................................ 12
ARTICLE 7 – SPECIFIC STANDARDS .......................................................................................... 14
406.7.1 Specific Standards ............................................................................................................. 14
ARTICLE 8 – COMPUTATIONS ..................................................................................................... 19
406.8.1 Computations .................................................................................................................... 19
ARTICLE 9 – PERMIT FEES, ADMINISTRATION, CONFLICTS ............................................... 20
406.9.1 Permit Fees ........................................................................................................................ 20
406.9.2 Administration, Enforcement, Penalty and Appeals ......................................................... 20
406.9.3 Conflict with Other Ordinances ........................................................................................ 21
ARTICLE 10 – DIAGRAMS ............................................................................................................. 22
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 2
ARTICLE 1 – TITLE AND PURPOSE
406.1.1 TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Sign Ordinance of the Town of Gray,
Maine.
406.1.2 PURPOSE
The purpose of regulating signs is to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare by
regulating existing and proposed outdoor advertising, outdoor advertising signs, and outdoor signs
of all types; to protect property values; enhance and protect the physical appearance of the
community; preserve the scenic and natural beauty and provide a more enjoyable and pleasing
community; to reduce sign or advertising distractions and obstructions that may contribute to traffic
accidents; reduce hazards that may be caused by signs overhanging or projecting over public right
of way; provide more open space, and curb the deterioration of natural beauty and community
environment.
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
406.2.1 DEFINITIONS
1. Abandoned Sign: Any sign remaining or portion thereof, derelict at a location where the
advertised goods or services are no longer being provided.
2. A-Frame: A temporary sign containing two (2) sign faces and whose framing is hinged at
the apex at an angle less than forty-five (45) degrees.
3. Animated Sign: A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of motion.
4. Awning/Awning Sign: An awning which includes words, letters, figures, designs, symbols,
graphics or pictorial art shall not be counted toward calculating the maximum number of
signs allowed on a property, but shall constitute a wall sign for all other purposes, including
the calculation of maximum aggregate sign area.
5. Billboard: An advertising sign not located at the premises that it is promoting. A billboard
is deemed not to be a sign as otherwise defined herein.
6. Business, Establishment or Religious Institutions: A business or establishment occupying
an entire building or a part of a building.
7. Canopy or Marquee Sign: A sign which is on or attached to a permanent overhang
projecting from the face of the building and supported entirely or partially by the building.
8. Community Events Banner: A temporary sign erected between poles at a location(s) as
permitted by the Town of Gray’s Banner Policy.
9. Directory Sign: A freestanding or wall affixed sign which identifies the businesses in an
integrated center such as an office campus or industrial park, in whole or in part, usually
with a listing or a graphic representation of some or all of the tenants in the center.
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 3
10. Electronic Message Display Board: A permanent message board in which one or more
illuminated characters in a display may be changed by electronic means.
11. Entrance Sign: A sign designed to identify the entrance to a residential subdivision of
commercial office or industrial park
12. Farm Stand: A roadside stand selling only farm, garden, greenhouse, nursery, or Farm
Food Products. The individual or business entity operating the Farm Stand must participate
in the harvesting and/or production of the majority of food/products offered for sale.
13. Farm Food Products: Food products of the soil not subject to State Tax including fruits,
vegetables, grain and grain products, honey, nuts, and maple products. If produced on the
same premises as the Farm Stand where sold, eggs, dairy products, meat and meat products
(including poultry) shall be considered Farm Food Products.
14. Freestanding Sign: A sign supported by one or more uprights or braces, permanently
affixed into the ground. It shall not be erected in or project over the public right-of-way.
15. Frontage, Street: As defined in the Town’s Zoning Ordinance.
16. Ground Sign: A free-standing sign, generally having a low profile where the base of the
sign structure is on the ground or a maximum of twelve inches (12) above the lowest point
of the ground adjacent to the sign such that the sign has the appearance of a solid base and
contains information on activities or businesses. It shall not be erected in or project over the
public right-of-way.
17. Home Occupation: As defined in the Town’s Zoning Ordinance.
18. Identification Sign: A sign indicating the location of, or direction to, a separate function
performed within one portion of that building. Examples of identification signs are:
"entrance", "exit", "auditorium", etc. Identification signs do not name or advertise the
activity conducted within or outside of the premises.
19. Illuminated Sign: A sign characterized by the use of artificial light.
20. Internally Illuminated: Illumination in a manner in which artificial light is projected
through the signs surface. This does not include individually pin-mounted reverse
illuminated solid-faced channel letters signs, often referred to as “halo-lit signs”.
21. Externally Illuminated: Illumination of a sign by reflecting artificial light off its surface.
22. Industrial Park: A parcel of land classified by the Town Planner as an Industrial Park at the
time of site location approval.
23. Municipal Signage: Signs erected by the Town, on municipal property, and Municipal
Banners erected promoting the Town.
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 4
24. Murals: A painting or pictorial representation applied to or incorporated into a structure or
wall, that can be viewed from public places, alleys, or rights-of-way.
25. Occupant: Business(es) located in a specific definable space that may be owned, rented, or
leased as a unit whether a stand-alone building or portion thereof separated from other
business locations by fixed walls without interior access. Multiple businesses practically
functioning from the same fixed owned/ rented/ leased unit shall be considered one
“occupant” for the purposes of this Ordinance specifically including Table 1.3.
26. Office Building: A single building of no less than 5,000 sq. ft. floor area net. As defined in
the Town’s Zoning Ordinance.
27. Office, Business or Professional: The place within and from which a person or persons
conducts a business providing, by way of example, but not limited to, a trade, professional
or service to clients or customers. Business and professional offices may include, but are not
limited to, offices for plumbing, electrical, and other construction trades, firms or
contractors; and for lawn care and building cleaning companies; and for lawyers, doctors,
accountants, engineers and other professional consultants. Personal services, as defined in
the Town’s Zoning Ordinance, are not included in this definition.
28. Office Campus: A group of three (3) or more Business or Professional Office Buildings in a
designated area served by a single main entrance.
29. Official Business Directional Sign (OBDS): Refer to the Town of Gray’s Official Business
Directional Sign Ordinance
30. Off-Premises Sign: Directs attention to a business, industry, profession or service not
conducted on the premises where the sign is displayed.
31. On-Premises Sign: Directs attention to a business, industry, profession or service conducted
on the premises where the sign is displayed.
32. Open Flag: Standard flag indicating that an establishment is “open for business.”
33. Permanent Sign: A non-temporary sign designated and intended for long-term use.
34. Person: Includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust company, or
corporation as well as an individual, but does not include a governmental unit.
35. Portable Sign: A temporary sign which is not designed to be permanently affixed into the
ground or to a structure.
36. Premises: One or more lots, tracts, plots, or parcels of land together with the building(s) and
structure(s) thereon which are in the same ownership and are contiguous.
37. Property Identification Sign: A sign designed for the purpose of identifying a residential
or commercial property by street address, primarily in the interest of public safety
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 5
38. Projecting Sign: A sign that is wall-mounted, perpendicular to the building surface. In no
event shall a projecting sign be higher than the roof of the building to which it is attached.
39. Public Notice Sign: A sign the primary purpose of which is to display information of a
civic, social, or religious nature. Such a sign may have a surface which allows the use of
removable letters.
40. Retail Trade: As defined in the Town’s Zoning Ordinance.
41. Roof Sign: A sign installed on top of, or over, the roof of a building with the principal
support on the roof structure.
42. Shopping Center: A group of retail stores and/or office having a minimum of 25,000 sq. ft.
of floor area net as defined in the Town’s Zoning Ordinance.
43. Sign: Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors, which is
used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution,
organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means including words,
letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. For the
purpose of this Ordinance any logo, and/or lettering painted on or adhered to the exterior
sheathing, wall or roof of a building shall be considered a sign. Graphics and pictorial art
work are allowed on signs and shall be considered a part of the sign and shall constitute sign
area.
44. Sign Area: The area of a sign (which is also the area of a wall sign or other sign with only
one (1) face). Sign area shall be computed by using the smallest square, rectangle, or
combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation,
emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the
background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure
against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or
decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning Ordinance
regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself (refer to Diagrams 1 and 2).
45. Subdivision: The term shall be defined as in Title 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4401, sub-§4, as
amended.
46. Temporary Sign: A sign or advertising display designed to be displayed for a limited
amount of time as defined in Article 5.
47. Town: means the Town of Gray, Maine.
48. Wall Sign: Any sign mounted parallel to or painted on the wall of a building extending not
more than six (6) inches from that surface.
ARTICLE 3 – DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
406.3.1 DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 6
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the Town of Gray‘s Shoreland Zoning, Zoning and Overlay
District(s) have been classified into three (3) Signage Districts:
1. Residential: This district is comprised of the Rural Residential & Agriculture District
(RRA), the Lake District (LD), the Medium Density District (MD), and the Mobile Home
Park Overlay District (MHP). This district also includes the following Shoreland Zoned
Districts: Limited Residential (LD), Stream Protection (SP) and Resource Protection (RP).
2. Business: This district incorporates the Business Development District (BD), the
Commercial District (C), and the Wellhead Protection Districts 1 and 2 (WH1 and WH2).
This district includes the Limited Commercial (LC) Shoreland District.
3. Village: This district includes both the Village Center District (VC) and the Village Center
Proper District (VCP).
This table defines the allowable sign types and sizes by District. ‘P’ designates a permitted
sign within a specific district. ‘N’ designates signs that are not permitted.
Table 1.1 Sign Type and Zoning
Sign Type Residential Business Village
A-Frame P P P
Animated N N N
Billboard N N N
Canopy or Marquee P P P
Directory P P P
Electronic Message Display Board* N P N
Entrance P P P
Externally Illuminated P P P
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 7
Freestanding P P P
Ground Sign P P P
Home Occupation P P P
Internally Illuminated N P N
Mural P P P
Off-Premises N N N
On-Premises P P P
Portable P P N
Projecting P P P
Property Identification P P P
Roof N P P
Wall P P P
* Municipality owned signage is exempt from district requirements.
All other sign types are prohibited.
Table 1.2 Maximum aggregate sign area by district.
Residential District Business District Village District
Maximum Aggregate
Sign Area
48 sq ft 150 sq ft 56 sq ft
* Aggregate sign area is the total sign area of all signs permitted per business or establishment,
including temporary signs, with the exception of Directory signs that conform to standards in this
Ordinance including but not limited to Table 1.3 below.
This table defines the number of signs and maximum square footage of each sign type per district.
Table 1.3 Sign requirements by district.
Residential District Business District Village District
Free Standing Signs
Number Permitted Per
Establishment
1 per Frontage 1 per Frontage or 1
per each 250 ft
Frontage
1 per establishment
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 8
Maximum Sign Area
(Square Feet)
36 sq ft per Sign
Maximum total
combined 36 s.f.
60 sq ft per Sign 24 sq ft per Sign
Maximum total
combined 24 sq ft
Maximum Height (feet) 12 ft 25 ft 12 ft
Ground Signs
Number Permitted Per
Establishment
1 per Frontage 1 per Frontage or 1
per each 250 ft
Frontage
1 per Frontage
Maximum Sign Area
(Square Feet)
36 sq ft per Sign 60 sq ft per Sign 24 sq ft per Sign
Maximum Height (feet) 8 ft 8 ft 8 ft
Wall Signs
Number Permitted Per
Establishment
1 per Occupant
1 per Occupant
2 per Occupant
Maximum Sign Area
(Square Feet)
36 sq ft per Occupant 75 sq ft per Occupant 24 sq ft per Occupant
Maximum Height (feet) N/A N/A Subject to max height
of 16 ft from grade
Projecting Signs
Number Permitted Per
Establishment
36 sq ft per Occupant 1 per Occupant
1 per Occupant
Maximum Sign Area
(Square Feet)
36 sq ft per Occupant 75 sq ft per Occupant 24 sq ft per Occupant
Roof Signs
Number Permitted Per
Establishment
1 per Occupant
1 per Occupant
1 per Occupant
Maximum Sign Area
(Square Feet)
36 sq ft per Occupant 75 sq ft per Occupant 24 sq ft per Occupant
Maximum Height (feet) Maximum height
shall be 7 ft above the
Maximum height
shall be 7 ft above the
Maximum height shall
be 7 ft above the
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 9
lowest eave. lowest eave. lowest eave. Subject
to max height of 16 ft
from grade
Temporary Public Notice
Sign
Number Permitted Per
Premises
1 Sign per street
Frontage up to 2 total
1 Sign per street
Frontage up to 2 total
1 Sign
Maximum Sign Area
(Square Feet)
6 sq ft each Sign 24 sq ft total all Signs
combined
12 sq ft total
Temporary Real Estate,
Construction Signs
Number Permitted Per
Premises
1 Sign per street
Frontage up to 2 total
1 Sign per street
Frontage up to 2 total
1 Sign
Maximum Sign Area
(Square Feet)
6 sq ft each Sign 24 sq ft total all Signs
combined
12 sq ft total
Municipal Signs
Number Permitted Per
Premises
Exempt Exempt Exempt
Maximum Sign Area
(Square Feet)
Exempt Exempt Exempt
Portable signs
Number Permitted Per
Premises
1 Sign 1 Sign Not Permitted
Maximum Sign Area
(Square Feet)
18 sq ft 18 sq ft Not Permitted
Home Occupation Signs
Number Permitted Per
Premises
1 Sign per house 1 Sign per house 1 Sign per house
Maximum Sign Area
(Square Feet)
6 sq ft 6 sq ft 6 sq ft
Directory Signs
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 10
ARTICLE 4 – PERMITS AND CONFORMANCE
406.4.1 SIGN PERMITS
Except as otherwise herein provided, no person shall erect, modify or move any signs visible from
the public way without first applying for and obtaining a sign permit from the Codes Enforcement
Officer (CEO). Applications shall be on forms prescribed and provided by the CEO setting forth
such information as may be required by him/her for a complete understanding of the proposed work
including applicable fees.
406.4.2 MAINTENANCE AND CONFORMANCE OF SIGNS
No sign shall be erected or altered except in conformity with the provisions herein. The sign
must be kept clean, neatly painted or otherwise printed and free from all hazards such as, but not
limited to, faulty wiring and loose fastenings, and must be maintained at all times in such safe
condition so as not to be detrimental to the public health or safety or detrimental to physical
appearance or scenic or natural beauty of the community as otherwise provided herein, or
constitute a distraction or obstruction that may contribute to traffic accidents.
Legally erected non-conforming signs installed prior to adoption of this Ordinance amendment
may continue usage if:
Regular repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs, such as repainting and electrical
repairs, replacement of parts and light bulbs, are performed, provided that repainting shall not
include a change of copy.
Replacement panels replicate or convey the same business or activity conducted or product sold
as the original panels.
Legally erected non-conforming sign(s) installed prior to adoption of this Ordinance amendment
may not continue usage if:
The sign no longer advertises a bona fide business or activity conducted on premises, product
sold, or public notice or is an abandoned sign.
Number permitted Per
Establishment
1 per Frontage 1 per Frontage 1 per Frontage
Maximum Sign Area
(Square Feet)
3 sq ft per Occupant 3 sq ft per Occupant 3 sq ft per Occupant
Maximum Height (feet) 8 ft 8 ft 8 ft
Maximum Width (feet) 7 ft 7 ft 7 ft
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 11
The sign becomes or is in disrepair. It shall be removed upon order of the CEO if not repaired
within thirty (30) days after written notification from the CEO. Any new sign must conform to
this Ordinance.
The sign requires changes to the display surface if the advertised business or activity conducted
or product sold is changing from the original.
There is a change in ownership in the premises, resulting in a change in business name, since the
adoption of the Ordinance.
The sign is moved for any reason for any distance or the sign is temporarily removed along with
its supporting uprights or braces, in which event it shall be required to conform to this
Ordinance when re-assembled.
In no case, may the replacement or repair of any sign existing prior to adoption of this
Ordinance be less compliant than the original. Any replacement panels or repaired sign(s) are
subject to the review of the CEO to insure compliance with the standards set forth in this
Section 406.4.2.
Any sign deemed inconsistent with this Ordinance shall be taken down and removed by the
owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building or premises upon which such
sign may be found within ten (10) days after the activity has ceased, or if the removal has not
occurred, within thirty (30) days after written notification from the CEO.
If there is a change of use on a property and there were one or more on-premise non-conforming
signs which advertised the former business or use, any new signs used, and all new sign(s) faces
for the new use or business must meet all sign requirements in this Ordinance.
No non-conforming sign shall continue to be used or allowed to remain following any activity
that requires Site Plan Review approval as established in the Zoning Ordinance.
ARTICLE 5 – TEMPORARY SIGNS
406.5.1 TEMPORARY SIGNS
Temporary signs shall not require issuance of a permit by the CEO with exception of portable signs,
which shall require CEO permits. The following temporary signs are permitted and shall conform
to standards within municipal, state or federal Ordinances, statutes or regulations, including Tables
1.1, 1.2 and 1.3 of this Ordinance:
1) Temporary Public Notice Sign: Signs of a temporary nature, not including banners, that
display advertisements of charitable functions, notices of meetings and other non-commercial
signs of a similar nature, are permitted for a period not to exceed twenty-one (21) days in any
one calendar year and shall be removed by the person(s) who posted the signs within forty-eight
hours after fulfilling their function. Temporary signs specified in this section shall not be
attached or painted to fences, trees, or other natural features, or utility poles and shall not be
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 12
placed in a position that will obstruct or impair vision or traffic or in any manner create a hazard
or disturbance to the health and welfare of the general public.
2) Temporary Political Signs: Temporary political signs on public property or within public
rights-of-way shall be permitted as provided by State law. Political signs are prohibited from all
Town-owned properties except the public rights of way as otherwise provided by state law.
Political signs are specifically prohibited on the grassy knoll located on State Route 26 just
northeast of the intersection of Route 26A ("by-pass"). For the purposes of this Section
406.5.1.2, the grassy knoll shall be considered the portion of road frontage on the northeasterly
side of the intersection of Routes 26 and 26A commencing at the fire hydrant ("2006" on
casting, located fifty (50) feet southeasterly from CMP/ Utility pole # 280) extending
southeasterly two-hundred and fifty (250) feet to CMP/ Utility pole #277 (Pole #277 is located
fifty (50) feet from edge of pavement). Measurements are perpendicular to the road and extend
the full width of the road right-of-way.
3) Temporary Real Estate Signs: a real estate sign advertises the lease or sale of land, space or
structure. Unless prohibited by State Authorities, one off-premises Temporary Real Estate sign
and/or one temporary Real Estate sign bearing the message “Open House” may be placed at the
entrance to a dead-end or cul-de-sac street for the purpose of directing motorists to property for
sale on that street. All other real estate signs must be physically located on the actual property
for sale or lease, and only one sign may be located per street frontage. Real estate signs must
be removed within ten (10) business days of the date of sale or lease of property. The Town’s
Public Works Department shall have the authority to remove signs that remain after the ten (10)
day period, and violators will be charged for the cost of removal. If legal action is necessary to
collect fines, violators must also reimburse the Town for associated legal and court costs.
Additionally, the Town will not issue building permits or permit the erection of new signs for
the property cited for a sign violation until all fines and costs have been paid.
4) Portable Signs: Portable signs on movable frames, whether or not the wheels have been
removed, shall be prohibited in the Village zone. No person shall park any vehicle or trailer or
truck trailer on a public right-of-way, public property or on private property visible from a
public right-of-way, which has attached thereto or located thereon any sign or advertising device
for the purpose of providing advertisement of products or directing people to a business or
activity. This section is not intended to apply to standard advertising or identification practices
where such signs or advertising devices are painted on or permanently attached to business or
commercial vehicles. Portable signs may be permitted for a period not to exceed twenty-one
(21) days in any one calendar year and shall be removed by the person(s) who posted the signs.
5) Temporary Grand Opening Signs: One (1) Temporary Grand Opening sign may be installed
on the premises of a newly opened business. Business establishments located on corner lots
may install two (2) Temporary Grand Opening signs. Temporary Grand Opening signs may be
in the form of a banner or window sign. A Temporary Grand Opening sign shall be displayed
for no more than sixty (60) days and shall be removed by the person(s) who posted the sign. A
Temporary Grand Opening sign shall conform to standards in this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 6 – REGULATIONS ALL DISTRICTS
406.6.1 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO SIGNS IN ALL DISTRICTS
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 13
The following provisions relating to signs are applicable in all districts.
1) One sign identifying the name, address and profession of a permitted home occupation or a
lawfully existing nonconforming home occupation is allowed.
2) One (1) bulletin board or similar sign in connection with any church, museum, library, school or
similar public structure, but not exceeding twelve (12) square feet is allowed.
3) No sign, except traditional barber poles for licensed barber shops, shall have visible moving
parts, blinking, moving or glaring illumination, or any part consisting of banners, pennants,
ribbons, streamers, spinners or other similar devices. In addition, “Open” flags are permitted
only as described in Article 7 Section 406.7.1.5 of this Ordinance.
4) Any sign, or portion thereof, which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted, product
sold, activity being conducted, or public notice, shall be taken down and/or removed by the
owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building or premises upon which such
sign is located within ten (10) days after the activity has ceased, or if the removal has not
occurred, within thirty (30) days after written notification from the CEO. Temporary signs shall
be removed in accordance with Article 5 of this Ordinance.
5) District setback requirements as established in the Town’s Zoning Ordinance shall not apply to
signs; however, no part of any sign shall project over or be within the public right-of-way if it is
located in a zoning district which has a front setback building requirement. No ground or
portable signs shall be permitted in the public right-of-way. Signs located in any business sign
district, as established in Section 406.3.1 above, shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet
from the edge of the public right of way including any overhanging portions of the sign.
6) In addition to the maximum number and size of signs permitted, directional signs solely
indicating ingress and egress placed at driveway locations, containing no advertising material,
having a display area not exceeding five (5) square feet, and not extending higher than three (3)
feet above ground level, are permitted with issuance of a CEO permit evidencing compliance
with this Ordinance.
7) Non-conforming signs may continue only as referenced in Article 4 Section 406.4.2 of this
Ordinance, but may not be rebuilt or relocated on the same premises; however, non-conforming
signs located on land which is acquired for governmental purposes may be relocated on the
same premises.
8) In addition to the maximum number and size of permitted signs, identification signs may be
erected over or by the doorway or entrance to such portion of the building. The sign area shall
not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of such doorway or entrance to such portion of the
building.
9) A sign with an identical double signboard or display area (two back-to-back sign faces) shall be
construed to be one sign for the purpose of this Ordinance.
10) Lighter-than-air or gas-filled balloon or other similar devices used to advertise or define a fixed
location shall be prohibited.
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 14
11) Any sign added or attached to a sign’s upright or brace by any means shall be considered part of
the sign area and will be included in calculating the permitted signs total area.
12) Murals are allowed in all districts, but may not contain any advertising, commercial messages,
or logos. Such murals are still subject to all requirements of any zoning standards which may
apply and are considered public art.
13) No sign shall obscure required vehicular sight lines from any driveway or roadway intersection
or cause a safety hazard to pedestrians or motorists. The CEO or the Town’s Public Works
Department shall have the authority to remove any such sign.
14) No sign, whether new or existing, shall be permitted that causes a sight, traffic, health or welfare
hazard or results in a nuisance, as specifically prohibited elsewhere in this Ordinance due to
illumination, placement, display, or manner of construction.
15) For the purpose of this Ordinance, the term "sign" does not include signs erected and maintained
for public safety and welfare or pursuant to and in discharge of any governmental function, or
required by law, Ordinance or governmental regulation, nor to a "name sign" not exceeding one
(1) square foot in area identifying the name(s) of the residents of the premises where such sign
is located.
16) No lighted sign, including a non-conforming sign that is replaced or relocated shall be placed
within eight (8) feet of the drip lines of any overhead utility wires and their appurtenances. This
requirement is not subject to variance or waiver.
ARTICLE 7 – SPECIFIC STANDARDS
406.7.1 SPECIFIC STANDARDS
The standards of this Section 406.7.1 apply on a per building basis. In calculating allowable
signage, each principal building together with its accessory buildings or structures, if any, shall
count as one building.
1) Signs Excluded from this Section
a) Temporary signs conforming to this Ordinance;
b) Signs displayed within the interior of a window of a building if the sign or grouping of signs
does not occupy more than one-third of the surface area of such window or 10% of the wall
area upon which the window is placed, whichever is more restrictive;
c) Directory signs conforming to this Ordinance;
d) Identification signs as described in Article 6 Section 406.6.1.8 of this Ordinance.
2) Wall, Projecting, and Roof Signs
Unless otherwise provided, wall, projecting and roof signs shall not extend more than six (6)
inches from the wall to which it is attached or party wall separating occupancies into the wall
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 15
area of other premises. Wall, Projecting, or Roof Signs shall not exceed 25% of the wall area or
roof on which they are located and/or attached.
3) Electronic message Display Board
Electronic message centers in all districts shall be equipped with an operational, automatic
dimming photocell, which automatically adjusts the display’s brightness based on ambient light
conditions. The brightness level in all districts shall not increase by more than 0.3 foot candles
(or 3.23 lumens per square meter or lux) (over ambient levels) as measured using a foot candle
meter at a pre-set distance. The owners of such signs shall include a signed letter accompanying
their permit application, certifying that they will comply with the prescribed brightness
limitations set by this Ordinance.
Brightness measurement process for electronic message centers shall be as follows:
a) At least 30 minutes past sunset, use a foot candle meter to record the ambient light reading
for the area. This is done while the electronic message center is off or displaying all black
copy.
b) The reading shall be taken with the meter aimed directly at the electronic message center at
the appropriate pre-set distance.
c) Measurement distance criteria: 0-100 square foot signs to be measured 100 feet from
source.
d) Turn on the electronic message center to full white copy and take another reading.
e) If the difference between the readings is 0.3 foot candles or less, the brightness is properly
adjusted.
f) Electronic Message Display Boards do constitute sign area and shall be maintained to
conform to the following standards:
i) Except for the time and temperature information, changeable signs may change no more
often than once per minute.
ii) Time/date/temperature information must be displayed for a minimum of 3 seconds each
time it is shown.
iii) When changing messages, the message must change instantly and may not include any
phasing, rolling, scrolling, flashing, or blending of messages.
iv) Streaming of information or video animation is not permitted.
v) While being displayed, the message shall remain fixed with no flashing, phasing, rolling,
scrolling, or blending of information.
4) Illuminated Signs
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 16
a) The light source, whether internal or external, shall be shielded from view and shall not
create a hazardous glaze for pedestrians or motor vehicles either in a public right of way or
on any private premises.
b) Sign illumination for externally illuminated signs shall utilize focused light fixtures that do
not allow light or glare to shine above the horizontal plane of the top of the sign or onto any
right of way or abutting property.
5) Open Flags
In addition to the maximum number, total square footage per lot and size of permitted signs,
“Open” flags are permitted in all districts subject to the following conditions:
a) Only one flag per business establishment shall be permitted.
b) The flag shall be flown only during open business hours.
c) The flag area is limited to a maximum of sixteen (16) square feet.
d) Flag design shall be limited to the standard “Open” type.
e) No logos, signage or advertising for the respective business(es) of any size or type is
permitted.
6) Fuel Dispensing Canopy Signs: Signs on any canopy covering a fuel dispensing area shall not
extend beyond the edges of the canopy and shall comply with one of the two following
provisions:
a) No sign shall exceed 15% of the square footage of the side of the canopy upon which it is
located. No side shall contain more than one (1) sign.
b) The total area of signs on the canopy shall not exceed 9% of the total square footage of all
sides of the canopy. No canopy shall have more than two (2) signs located on it.
7) Canopy (non-Fuel Dispensing), Marquee, or Awning signs: may be permitted provided that
the sign area does not exceed 25% of the plane of the canopy, marquee, or awning on which the
sign appears.
8) Home Occupation Signs: Unless prohibited by State authorities, one non-internally
illuminated off-premises sign identifying the name, address, and profession of a permitted home
occupation is allowed provided that such sign does not exceed six (6) square feet and may be
placed (subject to necessary permission from property owner(s)) at the entrance to a dead-end or
cul-de-sac for the purpose of directing motorists to the location of the Home Occupation.
9) Menu Board signs: A menu board installed at the point where customers place their orders at a
drive-thru restaurant which does not exceed 32 square feet of gross display area and the location
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 17
of which has been approved by the Planning Board under the Site Plan Review standards, shall
not be counted as a sign in applying the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance.
10) Motor Vehicle Signs: Signs on, attached to, or affixed to motor vehicles are not subject to this
Ordinance unless they have the effect of circumventing restrictions or limitations imposed
herein. A sign on a motor vehicle will be presumed to have the effect of circumventing this
Ordinance if the vehicle is parked or stored in a location visible from a public way and one or
more of the following circumstances exist:
a) the vehicle is not registered
b) the vehicle is not inspected
c) the sign is larger in any dimension than or extends beyond any surface of the vehicle to
which it is placed, attached, or affixed
d) the vehicle is parked or stored continuously in the same location
e) the vehicle is parked or stored in an area not designed, designated, or commonly used for
parking
f) the vehicle is regularly parked or stored in the front yard or in the public right of way
adjacent to the front yard
g) the vehicle is regularly parked or stored in a location where a sign would not be permitted by
this Ordinance
The presumption that a vehicle has the effect of circumventing this Ordinance may be rebutted
by evidence that the vehicle is parked or stored in a particular location for reasonable business
or personal purposes not related to advertising, identifying, displaying, directing, or attracting
attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or
location.
11) Farm Stands: To the extent permitted by State law (see Title 23 M.R.S.A., Part 1, Chapter 15,
subchapters 1 & 2 and other relevant State Statutes), the operator of a Farm Stand, as defined
herein and by State law, may install a maximum of five (5) sandwich-board style signs between
June 1st and November 15th of each year for the purposes of directing motorists to the location
where agricultural products are offered for sale provided that the standards in both this section
and this Ordinance are met and maintained.
a) A maximum of two (2) on-premises and three (3) off-premises signs shall be permitted.
b) Each sign shall be thirty-six (36) inches or less in height and may not exceed six (6) square
feet in Sign Area.
c) Signs shall not be clustered together and "Burma Shave" style signs (sequential) are not
permitted.
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 18
d) All signs shall constitute Sign Area for the purposes of calculating Maximum Aggregate per
Table 1.2 herein.
e) All signs shall be chalkboard or whiteboard and no changeable copy is permitted.
f) No add-ons such as balloons, flags, streamers, or lighting are permitted
g) All signs shall be safely secured with, for example, weights but shall not be affixed to the
ground if they are within a road right-of-way.
h) No sign shall adversely affect motorist sight distance, pedestrian and/or bicycle traffic, nor
infringe upon accessibility for handicapped individuals.
i) Subject to State law requirements, maximum of two (2) "on-premises" signs may be located
within fifteen (15) feet of the entrance or the property line and within the right-of-way,
subject to "h" above, at the sign-owners risk and the issuance of an revocable license
agreement and waiver of liability are executed and permission by the Town.
j) Subject to State law requirements, maximum of three (3) "off-premises" signs must be
located within one (1) mile of the Farm Stand, not within a road right-of-way, and only on
private property with the consent of the property owner(s).
k) The three (3) "off-premises" signs detailed above in this section 406.7.1.11 shall not require
issuance of a permit by the CEO.
12) State of Maine limited Size/Height Allowance:
a) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Tables 1.2 and 1.3 of this Sign Ordinance,
which establish maximum aggregate sign area and maximum sign standards, an individual
parcel owned by the State of Maine, located in a "residential" sign district per Section
406.3.1 of this Sign Ordinance which contains at least one hundred (100) acres and one
thousand (1,000) feet of frontage on a State-owned numbered highway shall be regulated by
the provisions contained within this Section 406.7.1.12.
b) All standards not specifically detailed in this Section 406.7.1.12 within this Sign Ordinance
shall be applicable.
c) Any State-owned parcel utilizing the provisions of this Section 406.7.1.12 of this Sign
Ordinance shall only contain one (1) free-standing sign for the entirety of the State-owned
numbered highway frontage.
d) The maximum sign area for the one (1) free-standing sign in this Section 406.7.1.12 is sixtyfive
(65) square feet. In addition, Directory Signs not exceeding twenty-two (22) square feet
shall be permitted provided that they are attached to the same supporting structure and direct
patrons to other uses or buildings on the State-owned property.
e) The maximum height of the one (1) free-standing sign utilizing this Section 406.7.1.12 shall
not exceed eighteen (18) feet.
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 19
f) The free-standing sign authorized by this Section 406.7.1.12 that is in excess of thirty-six
(36) square feet of total sign area per Table 1.3 of this Sign Ordinance shall be the entirety
of the maximum free-standing sign area and seventy-five percent (75%) of the Aggregate
Sign Area established in Table 1.2 of this Sign Ordinance.
ARTICLE 8 – COMPUTATIONS
406.8.1 COMPUTATIONS
1) Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area
of a wall sign or other sign with only one (1) face) shall be computed by means of the smallest
square, rectangle or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing,
representation, emblem or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral
part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or
structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or
decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning Ordinance regulations
and is clearly incidental to the display itself. Refer to Diagram 1 for guides to computation
methods.
2) Computation of area of multi-faced signs. The sign area for a sign with more than one (1)
face shall be computed by adding together the sign area of all sign faces from any one (1) point.
When two (2) identical sign faces are placed back to back, or at no greater than fifteen (15)
degrees from one another, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time,
and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than forty-two
(42) inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one (1) of the faces.
Refer to Diagram 2 for guides to computation methods.
3) Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base
of the sign or sign structure at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the
sign. In the case of Wall, Projecting or Roof signs, the height of a sign shall be computed as the
distance from the normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal
grade shall be construed to be the lower of either (1) existing grade prior to construction; or (2)
the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or
excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade cannot
reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of
the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown
of the street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the lot,
whichever is lower. Refer to Diagram 3 for guides to computation methods.
4) Multiple Signs: Multiple signs placed immediately adjacent to one another shall be considered
one sign for the purposes of this Ordinance. Examples include individual signs all attached to
the same supporting structure (i.e. free-standing sign) or multiple Wall/ Projecting/ Roof signs
placed in a row for the purposes of circumventing the maximum number and/ or size of allowed
sign(s). In such and similar circumstances, the areas of all such signs shall be totaled and
considered one sign for the purposes of this Ordinance.
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 20
5) Painting/ Stripes: The painting or application of stripes or banding of colors on a building
purposefully intended to function collaboratively with proposed sign(s) shall be considered sign
area for the purposes of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 9 – PERMIT FEES, ADMINISTRATION, CONFLICTS
406.9.1 PERMIT FEES
Permit fees are specified in the Town’s Municipal Fee Schedule.
406.9.2 ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTY AND APPEALS
1) This Ordinance shall be enforced by the CEO.
2) The burden of proof for compliance with all standards in this Ordinance shall be borne by the
applicant. The applicant is responsible for submitting all necessary information for the CEO to
make a decision regarding compliance with this Ordinance.
3) If the CEO finds that any provision of this Ordinance is being violated, he shall notify by
registered or certified mail the person determined to be responsible for the violation, indicating
the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it and a time limit for the
correction.
4) When any violation of any provision of this Ordinance is found to exist, the CEO is hereby
authorized and directed to institute any actions and proceedings that may be appropriate or
necessary to enforce the provision of this Ordinance.
5) Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a civil violation and
shall be fined not more than $100.00. Each day a violation is permitted to exist after
notification constitutes a separate offense.
6) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the CEO may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals
(ZBA) within thirty (30) days from the date of written decision. This applies to both
administrative appeals and waiver appeals.
7) Administrative Appeal: Any person aggrieved by a decision of the CEO in the interpretation of
standards in this Ordinance may file an administrative appeal to the ZBA within thirty (30) days
from the date of written decision.
The actions of the CEO may be modified or reversed by the ZBA by a concurring vote as
established in the Board’s by-laws or as required for a land use administrative appeal in the
Zoning Ordinance. Decisions of the CEO may be reversed only upon a finding that the decision
is clearly contrary to the specific provisions of this Ordinance.
8) Waiver Appeals: The ZBA has the authority to hear and decide upon a waiver appeal in specific
cases to relax the dimensional standards contained in this Ordinance. For the purpose of a
waiver appeal, the ZBA’s authority for dimensional standards is limited to maximum sign area
and maximum height.
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 21
A waiver appeal may only be granted upon a concurring vote as established in the Board’s bylaws
or as required for a land use variance appeal in the Town’s Zoning Ordinance.
In deciding a waiver appeal, the ZBA shall consider the following:
a) Shape and size of the lot;
b) Number of businesses in a building or on a lot;
c) Any unique feature(s) of the lot or building;
d) Compatibility with neighboring signage, lots and properties;
e) Determine that granting the waiver is not inconsistent with the general intent and purpose of
this Ordinance; and
f) Is granted solely to prevent a hardship based on conditions not generally prevalent in the
area where the premises are located.
9) When an appeal is made to the ZBA, the same notification requirements to abutters, as outlined
in Article 9 Chapter 402 of the Zoning Ordinance, shall apply.
10) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the ZBA or by an order rendered by the ZBA to
remove a sign may appeal said decisions to the Maine Superior Court. The appeal shall be filed
within thirty (30) days after the decision of the ZBA.
406.9.3 CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
This Ordinance shall not repeal, annul, or in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance
with any other rules, regulations, by-laws, permits or provision of law. Where this Ordinance
imposes a greater restriction upon the location, size, or type of sign allowed, the provisions of this
Ordinance shall control.
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 22
ARTICLE 10 – DIAGRAMS
DIAGRAM 1
Computation of Area of Individual Signs
Area of copy
The entire area within a
single continuous perimeter
composed of squares or
rectangles which encloses
the extreme limits of the
advertising message
announcement or decoration
on a fascia or wall sign.
Area of Sign
The area of the largest single
face of the sign within a
perimeter which forms the
outside shape, including any
frame, forms an integral part
of the display, but excluding
the necessary supports or
uprights on which the sign
may be placed. If the sign
consists of more than one
section or module, all areas
will be calculated.
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 23
Sign Area = A x B
DIAGRAM 2
Computation of Area of Multi-faced Signs
Sign Area Computed for
one face
Total Sign Area = (AxB) + (CxD)
CHAPTER 406 GRAY SIGN ORDINANCE
X:\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 406 SIGN\CHAPTER 406 SIGN ORDINANCE 9-24.DOCX 24
DIAGRAM 3
Computation of Height
Sign Height = A + B
Ground Mounding Height
Maximum sign height
includes any berming
CHAPTER 408
IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted September 6, 2016
SECTION 1 – TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the “Impact Fee Ordinance” of Gray, Maine
(hereafter referred to as the “Ordinance”).
SECTION 2 – AUTHORITY
The Town adopts this Ordinance under the authority of 30-A M.R.S.A §4354 and its statutory
and constitutional home rule provisions.
SECTION 3 – PURPOSE
A. The purpose of this Ordinance is to ensure that new development in the Town of Gray will be
accomplished in a safe and healthful manner and that such development will bear a
proportional or reasonably related share of the cost of new, expanded, or modified
infrastructure necessary to service the needs of the development through: 1) the payment of
impact fees that shall be dedicated to paying for the needed improvements, or 2) the
construction of appropriate improvements as provided for herein.
B. As applicable, payment of impact fee(s) shall also be required for public infrastructure
constructed within the past five (5) years prior to the adoption of this ordinance that was
specifically designed and constructed to create future reserved capacity.
SECTION 4 – DEFINITIONS
Unless otherwise defined in this Ordinance, the terms used in this Ordinance shall have the same
meaning as defined in Chapter 402, the Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 5 – APPLICABILITY
Any activity, development, construction, or change of use after the adoption or amendment to
this ordinance shall be subject to one or more of the following impact fees:
[RESERVED]
SECTION 6 – PAYMENT OF IMPACT FEES
The impact fees provided for under this Ordinance shall be determined annually by vote of the
Town Council, as a part of its annual fee setting Order, after notice and hearing, in accordance
with the provisions for the calculation of each impact fee as established by the Town Council and
set forth below in SECTION 12. Impact fees may be reduced in whole or in part by the Town
Council as specified in SECTION 11. The required impact fee(s) shall be paid to the Town of
Gray in care of the Code Enforcement Officer. The fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of any
building, plumbing, or other permit for the project subject to the fee.
SECTION 7 – REPLACEMENT DWELLING UNITS OR STRUCTURES
An impact fee shall not be required to be paid for the replacement of a dwelling unit or other
principal structure subject to an impact fee if the dwelling unit or principal structure existed as of
the date of adoption of this ordinance or if an impact fee has been previously paid for the unit or
structure being replaced.
CHAPTER 408
IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted September 6, 2016
SECTION 8 – IMPACT FEE ACCOUNTS
All impact fees collected under the provisions of this ordinance shall be segregated and
accounted for in separate impact fee accounts designated for the particular improvements in
question.
SECTION 9 – USE OF IMPACT FEES
Impact fees collected under this Ordinance shall only be used to pay for the capital cost of the
infrastructure improvements specifically associated with the fee as described below. No portion
of the fee shall be used for routine maintenance or operational activities.
The following costs may be included in the capital cost of the infrastructure improvement:
A. Acquisition of land or easements including conservation easements,
B. Engineering, surveying, and environmental assessment services directly related to the design,
construction, and oversight of the construction of the improvement,
C. The actual construction of the improvement including, without limitation, demolition costs,
clearing and grading of the land, and necessary capital equipment,
D. Mitigation costs,
E. Legal and administrative costs associated with construction of the improvement including
any borrowing necessary to finance the project,
F. Debt service costs including interest if the Town borrows for the construction of the
improvement,
G. Relocation costs,
H. Additional costs that are directly related to the project; and
I. Additional capacity from appropriate public buildings or facilities built within the past five
(5) years prior to the adoption of this ordinance.
SECTION 10 – REFUND OF IMPACT FEES
Impact fees collected in accordance with this Ordinance shall be refunded in the following cases:
J. If the building or other permit is surrendered or lapses without commencement of
construction, the permit holder or developer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of
any impact fee paid in conjunction with that project. A request for a refund shall be made in
writing to the Town Manager and shall occur within ninety (90) days of the lapse or the
expiration of the permit.
K. Any fees collected that are not spent or obligated by contract for the specified improvements
by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following ten (10) years from the date the fee
was paid shall be returned to the current owner of the property for which the fee was paid
together with interest calculated at one (1) percent per year from the date of the payment of
the fee.
CHAPTER 408
IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted September 6, 2016
SECTION 11 – MODIFICATION OF IMPACT FEES
The Town Council may by formal vote waive the payment of a required impact fee, in whole or
in part, if it finds that:
A. The developer or property owner who would otherwise be responsible for the payment of the
impact fee voluntarily agrees to construct the improvement for which the impact fee would
be collected or an equivalent improvement duly approved by the Planning Board and an
appropriate surety received by the Town, and/or
B. The developer or property owner is required, as part of a development approval by the Town
or a state or federal agency, to make or to pay for infrastructure improvements that are of the
same nature as the improvement to be funded by the impact fee;
Provided, however, in either instance, the application for such a waiver shall first be referred to
the Town’s Staff Review Committee for hearing and a recommendation back to the Town
Council.
SECTION 12 – REVIEW AND REVISION OF IMPACT FEES
The Town Council shall periodically review each impact fee established under this Ordinance. If
the Town Council finds that the anticipated cost of the improvement has changed or that the
identification of developments subject to the fee is no longer appropriate, the Council may
consider changes in the impact fee. Any changes adopted by the Town Council as a result of
such review shall apply to all future development, but shall not be applied retroactively to
projects that have already paid an impact fee.
SECTION 13 – SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be determined in court to be unconstitutional,
invalid, or unenforceable, such determination shall not affect the validity of any other portion of
the ordinance or the remainder of the ordinance as a whole.
Chapter 601
General Assistance
Ordinance
Prepared by Maine Municipal Association
September 2013
GENERAL ASSISTANCE ORDINANCE
The Municipality of __________________________ enacts the following General Assistance
Ordinance. This Ordinance is filed with the Department of Health & Human Services (DHHS)
in compliance with Title 22 M.R.S.A. §4305(4).
Signed the _______ day of ________________, _________, by the municipal officers:
(day) (month) (year)
__________________________ ___________________________
(Print Name) (Signature)
__________________________ ___________________________
(Print Name) (Signature)
__________________________ ___________________________
(Print Name) (Signature)
__________________________ ___________________________
(Print Name) (Signature)
__________________________ ___________________________
(Print Name) (Signature)
_________________________ ___________________________
(Print Name) (Signature)
i
TOWN OF GRAY
GENERAL ASSISTANCE ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I – Statement of Policy .........................................................................................................1
Article II – Definitions ......................................................................................................................3
Section 2.1 – Common Meaning of Words ..................................................................................3
Section 2.2 – Special Definitions ..................................................................................................3
Applicant .................................................................................................................................3
Application Form ....................................................................................................................3
Basic Necessities .....................................................................................................................3
Case Record ............................................................................................................................4
Categorical Assistance ............................................................................................................4
Claimant ..................................................................................................................................4
Deficit .....................................................................................................................................4
Disabled Person ......................................................................................................................5
Dwelling Unit..........................................................................................................................5
Eligible Person ........................................................................................................................5
Emergency ..............................................................................................................................5
General Assistance Program ...................................................................................................5
General Assistance Administrator ..........................................................................................5
Household ...............................................................................................................................6
Income.....................................................................................................................................6
Initial Applicants .....................................................................................................................8
Just Cause................................................................................................................................8
Lump Sum Payment ................................................................................................................8
Material Fact ...........................................................................................................................8
Maximum Levels of Assistance ..............................................................................................8
Misconduct ..............................................................................................................................8
Municipality ............................................................................................................................9
Municipality of Responsibility ...............................................................................................9
Need ........................................................................................................................................9
Net General Assistance Costs .................................................................................................9
Period of Eligibility.................................................................................................................9
Pooling of Income ...................................................................................................................9
Real Estate ..............................................................................................................................9
Recipient ...............................................................................................................................10
Repeat Applicants .................................................................................................................10
Resident.................................................................................................................................10
Resources ..............................................................................................................................10
30-Day Need .........................................................................................................................11
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants ..............................................................................................11
Unmet Need ..........................................................................................................................11
Work Requirements ..............................................................................................................11
ii
Article III – Administrative Rules and Regulations ....................................................................13
Section 3.1 – Confidentiality of Information ..............................................................................13
Release of Information ..........................................................................................................13
Information from Other Sources; Penalty .............................................................................13
Misuse of Information...........................................................................................................14
Section 3.2 – Maintenance of Records .......................................................................................14
Case Records .........................................................................................................................14
Retention of Records.............................................................................................................15
Article IV – Application Procedure...............................................................................................16
Section 4.1 – Right to Apply.......................................................................................................16
Who May Apply ...................................................................................................................16
Application Via Telephone ...................................................................................................16
Written Application Upon Each Request ..............................................................................16
Applications Accepted; Posted Notice..................................................................................17
Section 4.2 – Application Interview ...........................................................................................17
Section 4.3 – Contents of the Application ..................................................................................17
Section 4.4 – General Assistance Administrator’s Responsibilities at the Time
of the Application ....................................................................................................................18
Application Requirements ....................................................................................................18
Eligibility Requirements .......................................................................................................19
Applicant Rights ...................................................................................................................19
Reimbursement/Recovery .....................................................................................................19
Section 4.5 – Responsibilities of the Applicant at the Time of Application ...............................20
Section 4.6 – Action on Applications .........................................................................................21
Written Decision ......................................................................................................................21
Content .....................................................................................................................................21
Section 4.7 – Withdrawal of an Application ...............................................................................22
Section 4.8 – Temporary Refusal to Accept Application ...........................................................22
Section 4.9 – Emergencies ..........................................................................................................23
Disqualification ........................................................................................................................23
Assistance Prior to Verification ...............................................................................................24
Telephone Applications ...........................................................................................................24
Limitation on Emergency Assistance ......................................................................................24
Section 4.10 – Residence ...........................................................................................................26
Moving/Relocating .................................................................................................................26
Institutions ...............................................................................................................................26
Temporary Housing ................................................................................................................27
Disputes....................................................................................................................................27
Article V – Eligibility Factors .......................................................................................................28
Section 5.1 – Initial Application .................................................................................................28
Initial Application ....................................................................................................................28
Subsequent Applicants .............................................................................................................28
Section 5.2 – Eligibility for Categorical Assistance ...................................................................29
iii
Section 5.3 – Personal Property ..................................................................................................29
a) Liquid Assets .......................................................................................................................29
b) Tangible Assets....................................................................................................................30
c) Automobile Ownership ........................................................................................................30
d) Insurance ..............................................................................................................................31
e) Transfer of Property .............................................................................................................31
Section 5.4 – Ownership of Real Estate......................................................................................31
a) Principal Residence..............................................................................................................31
b) Other Property .....................................................................................................................33
Section 5.5 – Work Requirement ................................................................................................33
Employment; Rehabilitation ....................................................................................................33
Verification ..............................................................................................................................34
Ineligibility ...............................................................................................................................34
Ineligibility Due to Job Quit or Discharge for Misconduct .....................................................35
Just Cause.................................................................................................................................35
Applicant’s Burden of Establishing Just Cause .......................................................................36
Eligibility Regained .................................................................................................................36
Dependents ...............................................................................................................................36
Exemptions ..............................................................................................................................37
Section 5.6 – Municipal Work Program .....................................................................................37
Consent ....................................................................................................................................38
Subtracting Value of Workfare Performed from Client’s GA Debt ........................................38
Limitations ...............................................................................................................................38
“Workfare First” Policy ..........................................................................................................40
Work-Related Expenses ...........................................................................................................42
Disqualification ........................................................................................................................42
Eligibility Regained .................................................................................................................42
Reports .....................................................................................................................................43
iv
Section 5.7 – Use of Resources...................................................................................................44
Minors ......................................................................................................................................44
Mental or Physical Disability...................................................................................................45
Written Notice; Disqualification ..............................................................................................45
Forfeiture of Benefits ...............................................................................................................46
Section 5.8 – Period of Ineligibility ............................................................................................46
Work Requirement ...................................................................................................................46
Fraud ........................................................................................................................................47
Section 5.9 – Unemployment Fraud ...........................................................................................47
Article VI – Determination of Eligibility ......................................................................................48
Section 6.1 – Recognition of Dignity and Rights .......................................................................48
Section 6.2 – Determination; Redetermination ...........................................................................48
Section 6.3 – Verification ...........................................................................................................49
Eligibility of applicant; duration of eligibility .........................................................................49
Applicant’s responsibilities ......................................................................................................49
Initial Applicants ......................................................................................................................49
Repeat Applicants ....................................................................................................................50
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants .................................................................................................50
Overseer’s responsibilities .......................................................................................................50
Redetermination of eligibility ..................................................................................................51
Penalty for Refusing to Release Information ...........................................................................52
Section 6.4 – Fraud .....................................................................................................................52
Period of Ineligibility ...............................................................................................................52
Right to a Fair Hearing ............................................................................................................53
Reimbursement ........................................................................................................................53
Dependents ...............................................................................................................................53
Section 6.5 – Period of Eligibility...............................................................................................54
Section 6.6 – Determination of Need ..........................................................................................54
Income for Basic Necessities ...................................................................................................55
Use-of-Income Requirements ..................................................................................................56
Calculation of Income and Expenses .......................................................................................57
Consolidation of Deficit ...........................................................................................................58
Section 6.7 – Income...................................................................................................................58
Income Standards .....................................................................................................................58
Calculation of Income ..............................................................................................................59
Types of Income ......................................................................................................................59
a) Earned income ...............................................................................................................59
b) Income from Other Assistance or Social Services Programs ........................................60
c) Court-Ordered Support Payments ..................................................................................61
d) Income from Other Sources ...........................................................................................61
e) Earnings of a Son or Daughter .......................................................................................61
f) Income from Household Members .................................................................................61
g) The Pooling or Non-Pooling of Income ........................................................................62
h) Lump Sum Income ........................................................................................................62
Section 6.8 – Basic Necessities; Maximum Levels of Assistance ..............................................64
v
Overall Maximum Levels of Assistance ..................................................................................64
Maximum Levels of Assistance for Specific Basic Necessities ..............................................64
A) Food .............................................................................................................................65
B) Housing ........................................................................................................................66
Rental Payments to Relatives.......................................................................................66
Rental Payments to Non-Relatives ..............................................................................67
Mortgage Payments .....................................................................................................67
Liens .............................................................................................................................69
Property Taxes .............................................................................................................70
Housing Maximums .....................................................................................................71
C) Utilities .........................................................................................................................72
Electricity Maximums for Households Without Electric Hot Water ...........................72
Electricity Maximums for Households that Use Electrically Heated
Hot Water ................................................................................................................73
Non-Electric Utilities ...................................................................................................73
D) Fuel ..............................................................................................................................73
E) Personal Care and Household Supplies........................................................................73
F) Other Basic Necessities ................................................................................................74
1) Clothing ...................................................................................................................74
2) Medical ....................................................................................................................74
3) Hospital Bills ...........................................................................................................75
4) Dental.......................................................................................................................76
5) Eye Care ..................................................................................................................76
6) Telephone Charge ....................................................................................................77
7) Work-Related Expenses ..........................................................................................77
8) Travel Expenses .......................................................................................................77
9) Burials, Cremations .................................................................................................77
10) Capital Improvements..............................................................................................78
Section 6.9 – Burials; Cremations ..............................................................................................78
Funeral Director Must Give Timely Notice ..........................................................................78
Application for Assistance Shall be Calculated on Behalf of the Deceased .........................79
The Financial Responsibility of Certain Family Members ...................................................79
Consideration of the Financial Responsibility of Family Members .....................................80
Proration of Familial Responsibility .....................................................................................80
Eight Days to Determine Eligibility .....................................................................................81
The Municipal Obligation to Pay When Legally Liable Relatives or Others
Can Contribute ................................................................................................................81
Burial Expenses ....................................................................................................................81
Cremation Expenses..............................................................................................................82
Section 6.10 – Notice of Decision ..............................................................................................82
Written Decision ...................................................................................................................82
Contents ................................................................................................................................82
Disbursement of General Assistance ....................................................................................83
vi
Article VII – The Fair Hearing ......................................................................................................84
Section 7.1 – Right to a Fair Hearing .........................................................................................84
Section 7.2 – Method of Obtaining a Fair Hearing .....................................................................84
Written Request ....................................................................................................................84
Scheduling the Fair Hearing .................................................................................................85
Section 7.3 – The Fair Hearing Authority ..................................................................................85
Section 7.4 – Fair Hearing Procedure .........................................................................................86
Claimant’s Failure to Appear ................................................................................................87
Section 7.5 – The Fair Hearing Decision ....................................................................................88
Article VIII – Recovery of Expenses ............................................................................................90
Recipients ....................................................................................................................................90
Recipients Anticipating Workers’ Compensation Benefits ........................................................90
Recipients of SSI.........................................................................................................................91
Relatives ......................................................................................................................................91
Article IX – Severability .................................................................................................................92
Appendixes
Appendix A – GA Overall Maximums
Appendix B – Food Maximums
Appendix C – GA Housing Maximums
Appendix D – Electric Utility Maximums
Appendix E – Heating Fuel
Appendix F – Household & Personal Items
Appendix G –Mileage Rate
Appendix H – Funeral Maximums
Appendix I – Definition of Misconduct (26 MRSA § 1043(23))
1
ARTICLE I
Statement of Policy
The Municipality of Gray, Maine administers a program of general assistance (GA) available
to all persons who are eligible to receive assistance in accordance with the standards of eligibility
as provided within this ordinance, Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) GA
policy and in 22 M.R.S.A. § 4301 et seq.
Every effort will be made to recognize the dignity of the applicant while encouraging selfreliance.
The program will strive to help eligible persons achieve self-maintenance by promoting
the work incentive. When possible, it will seek to alleviate needs other than financial through
rehabilitative, preventive and protective services. The general assistance program will place no
unreasonable restrictions on the personal rights of the applicant or recipient, nor will there be any
unlawful discrimination based on sex, age, race, nationality, religion, sexual orientation or
disability. The municipality is committed to including qualified individuals with disabilities, in
municipal services, programs, and activities. As a result, the municipality will promote a GA
program that when viewed in its entirety, is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with
disabilities. GA applicants with physical or mental disabilities that require a reasonable
accommodation in order to access and/or utilize the municipal GA program are encouraged to
provide the municipality with advance notice regarding the accommodation request.
The general assistance administrator will act promptly on all applications for assistance and
requests for fair hearings. GA applicants will be provided information regarding their rights and
responsibilities under the GA program. Within 24 hours of receiving an application, the
administrator will provide the applicant a written decision, whether or not assistance is granted,
that will state the specific reasons for the decision. The administrator will also provide the
applicant written notice that the applicant may appeal to the municipal fair hearing authority if
dissatisfied with the decision. When an applicant is determined to be eligible, assistance
appropriate to the need will be furnished within 24 hours after the completed application is
submitted except when the administrator issues non-emergency assistance conditionally on the
successful completion of a workfare assignment (see section 5.6 of this ordinance).
The administrator will maintain complete and accurate records pertaining to each applicant and
recipient. These records are confidential as a matter of law (see 22 MRSA §4306).
The administrator will post notice stating the day(s) and hours the administrator will be
available. The administrator, or other designated person/entity, will be available to take
applications in the event of an emergency at all other times. A copy of this ordinance and Maine
General Assistance law will be readily available to any member of the public upon request.
Notice to this effect will be posted.
3
ARTICLE II
Definitions
Section 2.1—Common Meaning of Words
Unless otherwise apparent or defined, all words in this ordinance will have their common
meaning.
Section 2.2—Special Definitions
Applicant. A person who has submitted, either directly or through an authorized representative,
an application for general assistance or who has, in an emergency, requested assistance without
first completing an application. In addition, all persons on whose behalf an authorized
application has been submitted or on whose behalf benefits have been granted shall be
considered applicants.
Application Form. A standardized form used by the general assistance administrator for the
purpose of allowing a person to apply for general assistance and confirming the fact that a person
has made application. The application form must be signed by the applicant to be considered
complete.
Basic Necessities. Food, clothing, shelter, fuel, electricity, non-elective essential medical
services as prescribed by a physician, nonprescription drugs, basic telephone service where it is
necessary for medical reasons, property taxes when a tax lien placed on the property threatens
the loss of the applicant’s place of residence, and any other commodity or service determined
essential by the municipality.
“Basic necessities” do not include:
? Phone bills
? Cable or satellite dish television
? Mail orders
? Vehicle payments
? Credit card debt**
? Furniture
? Loan re-payments**
? Cigarettes
? Alcohol
? Pet care costs
? Vacation costs
? Legal fees
? Late fees
? Key deposits
? Security deposits for rental
property(except for those
situations where no other
permanent lodging is available
unless a security deposit is paid,
and a waiver, deferral or
installment arrangement cannot
be made between the landlord
and tenant to satisfy the need for
the immediate payment of the
security deposit or payment in
full) (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(1)).
**Repayments of loans or credit will be treated as having been spent on basic necessities when
the applicant can provide verification of this fact.
4
Case Record. An official file containing application forms; correspondence; narrative records
and all other communications pertaining to an applicant or recipient; written decisions regarding
eligibility including reasons for those decisions as well as the types and amounts of assistance
provided; and all records concerning an applicant’s request for fair hearing and those fair hearing
decisions.
Categorical Assistance. All state and federal income maintenance programs.
Claimant. A person who has requested a fair hearing.
Deficit. An applicant’s deficit is the appropriate overall maximum level of assistance for the
household as provided in section 6.8 of this ordinance less the household income as calculated
pursuant to section 6.7 of this ordinance, provided such a calculation yields a positive number. If
the household income is greater than the appropriate overall maximum level of assistance, the
household has no deficit.
Disabled Person. A person who is presently unable to work or maintain a home due to a
physical or mental disability that is verified by a physician or qualified mental health provider.
Dwelling Unit. A building or part thereof used for separate living quarters for one or more
persons living as a single housekeeping unit (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(2)).
Eligible Person. A person who is qualified to receive general assistance from the municipality
according to the standards of eligibility set forth in this ordinance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(3)).
“Eligible Person” does not include a fugitive from justice as defined in 15 M.R.S.A. § 201(4).
Emergency. Any life threatening situation or a situation beyond the control of the individual
which, if not alleviated immediately, could reasonably be expected to pose a threat to the health
or safety of a person At the municipality’s option, a situation which is imminent and which may
result in undue hardship or unnecessary cost to the individual or municipality if not resolved
immediately. (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(4), 4308(2), 4310).
General Assistance Program. A service administered by a municipality for the immediate aid
of persons who are unable to provide the basic necessities essential to maintain themselves or
their families. A general assistance program provides a specific amount and type of aid for
defined needs during a limited period of time and is not intended to be a continuing “grant-inaid”
or “categorical” welfare program. This definition shall not in any way lessen the
responsibility of each municipality to provide general assistance to a person each time that the
person is in need and is found to be otherwise eligible to receive general assistance (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4301(5)).
General Assistance Administrator. A municipal official designated to receive applications,
make decisions concerning an applicant’s right to receive assistance, and prepare records and
communications concerning assistance. He or she may be an elected overseer or an authorized
agent such as a town manager, welfare director, or caseworker (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(12)).
5
Household. “Household” means an individual or a group of individuals who share a dwelling
unit. When an applicant shares a dwelling unit with one or more individuals, even when a
landlord-tenant relationship may exist between individuals residing in the dwelling unit, eligible
applicants may receive assistance for no more than their pro rata share of the actual costs of the
shared basic needs of that household according to the maximum levels of assistance established
in the municipal ordinance. The pro rata share is calculated by dividing the maximum level of
assistance available to the entire household by the total number of household members. The
income of household members not legally liable shall be considered as available to the applicant
only when there is a pooling of income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(6)).
Income. “Income” means any form of income in cash or in kind received by the household
including:
? Net remuneration for services
performed
? Cash received on either secured
or unsecured credit
? Payments received as an annuity,
retirement or disability benefits
? Veterans’ pensions and/or
benefits
? Retirement accounts or benefits
? Workers’ compensation
? Unemployment benefits
? Federal and/or state tax returns
? Benefits under any state or
federal categorical assistance
program such as, TANF,
Supplemental Security Income,
Social Security and any other
payments from governmental
sources (unless specifically
prohibited by any law or
regulation)
? Court ordered support payments,
e.g., child support
? Income from pension or trust
funds
? Household income from any
other source, including relatives
or unrelated household members
? Student loans
? Rental income
The following items shall not be considered as income or assets that must be liquidated for the
purposes of deriving income:
1) Real or personal income-producing property, tools of trade, governmental entitlement
specifically treated as exempt assets by state or federal law;
2) Actual work-related expenses, whether itemized or by standard deduction, such as taxes,
retirement fund contributions, union dues, transportation costs to and from work, special
equipment costs and child care expenses; or
3) Earned income of children below the age of 18 years who are full-time students and who
are not working full time.
In determining need, the period of time used as a basis for the calculation shall be a 30-
day period commencing on the date of the application. This prospective calculation shall
not disqualify an applicant who has exhausted income to purchase basic necessities,
provided that the income does not exceed the income standards established by the
municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)).
6
4) Certain public benefit programs are specifically exempt from being counted as income
for purposes of GA. These programs include:
? Food Stamps (7 USCS § 2017(b))
? Li-Heap (42 USCS § 8624)
? Family Development Accounts (22 M.R.S. § 3762)
? Americorp VISTA program benefits (42 USCS § 5044 (f))
? Property tax rebates issued under the Maine Property Tax Fairness Credit
program, only so long as the money is spent on basic necessities. (22
M.R.S.A. § 4301(7))
? Aspire Support Service Payments (10-144 CMR Chapter 323)
Initial Applicant. A person who has not applied for assistance in this or any other municipality
is considered an initial applicant.
Just Cause. A valid, verifiable reason that hinders an individual from complying with one or
more conditions of eligibility or from attending a scheduled fair hearing (22 M.R.S.A. § §
4301(8), 4316-A(5)).
Lump Sum Payment. A one-time or typically nonrecurring sum of money issued to an applicant
or recipient. Lump sum payment includes, but is not limited to, retroactive or settlement portions
of social security benefits, workers' compensation payments, unemployment benefits, disability
income, veterans' benefits, severance pay benefits, or money received from inheritances, lottery
winnings, personal injury awards, property damage claims or divorce settlements. A lump sum
payment includes only the amount of money available to the applicant after payment of required
deductions has been made from the gross lump sum payment. A lump sum payment does not
include conversion of a non-liquid resource to a liquid resource if the liquid resource has been
used or is intended to be used to replace the converted resource or for other necessary expenses.
(22 MRSA § 4301 (8-A)).
Material Fact. A material fact is a fact that necessarily has some bearing on the determination
of an applicant’s general assistance eligibility, and which would, if disclosed to the
administrator, have some determinable effect on the calculation of eligibility or the issuance of a
grant of assistance.
Maximum Levels of Assistance. The amount of financial assistance for a commodity or service
as established in section 6.8 of this ordinance or the actual cost of any such basic necessity,
whichever is less.
Misconduct. For purposes of the GA work requirement (see 22 MRSA §4316-A) misconduct
shall have the same meaning as misconduct defined in 26 MRSA §1043 (23). (See Appendix I of
this ordinance for the official definition of misconduct.) Generally, employees are guilty of
misconduct when the employee violates his or her duties or obligations to the employer.
Employees who engage in a pattern of irresponsible behavior to the detriment of the employer’s
interest may also be found guilty of misconduct.
7
Municipality. Any city, town or plantation administering a general assistance program.
Municipality of Responsibility. The municipality which is financially liable for the support of
an eligible person at the time of application (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(9), 4307).
Need. The condition whereby a person’s income, money, property, credit, assets or other
resources available to provide basic necessities for the individual and the individual’s family are
less than the maximum levels of assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(10), 4308).
Net General Assistance Costs. Those direct costs incurred by a municipality in providing
assistance to eligible persons according to standards established by the municipal officers. These
do not include the administrative expenses of the general assistance program (22 M.R.S.A. §§
4301(11), 4311).
Period of Eligibility. The time for which a person has been granted assistance. The period of
eligibility may vary depending on the type of assistance provided, however, in no event shall this
period extend beyond one month (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(1)).
Pooling of Income. “Pooling of income” means the financial relationship among household
members who are not legally liable for mutual support in which there occurs any commingling of
funds or sharing of income or expenses. Municipalities may by ordinance establish as a
rebuttable presumption that persons sharing the same dwelling unit are pooling their income.
Applicants who are requesting that the determination of eligibility be calculated as though one or
more household members are not pooling their income have the burden of rebutting the
presumed pooling of income.
Real Estate. Any land, buildings, homes, mobile homes and any other things affixed to the land
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(13)).
Recipient. A person who has applied for and is currently receiving general assistance.
Repeat Applicants. All applicants for general assistance that are not initial applicants are repeat
applicants. For purposes of this ordinance repeat and subsequent shall have the same meaning.
Resident. A person who is physically present in a municipality with the intention of remaining
in that municipality in order to maintain or establish a home and who has no other residence. A
person who applies for assistance in a municipality who is not a resident of that municipality or
any other municipality is the responsibility of the municipality where the person first applies.
That municipality must take an application and grant assistance to the applicant if he/she is
eligible, until he/she establishes a new residence in another municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307).
Resources. Resources include any program, service, or other sources of support which are an
alternative to or supplement for general assistance. There are two kinds of resources: “available”
and “potential”. Potential resources are programs, services, non-liquid assets, or trusts that
typically require people to apply in writing and/or wait a period of time before eligibility is
determined or the potential income is released.
8
Potential resources include but are not limited to any state or federal assistance program,
employment benefits, governmental or private pension program, available trust funds, support
from legally liable relatives, child support payments, and jointly held resources where the
applicant or recipient share may be available to the individual (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317). Potential
resources include the TANF (previously known as AFDC) program, Food Stamps, fuel
assistance (HEAP), subsidized housing, and similar programs.
Available resources include resources which are immediately available to the applicant or which
can be conveniently secured by the applicant without delay, such as cash on hand or in bank
accounts, assets for which there is an immediate and available market, or support from relatives
which is being made available at the time of application and for which the applicant does not
have to take any unreasonable steps to secure (e.g., relocation beyond the immediate region). At
the discretion of the GA administrator a necessary minimum balance required by a financial
institution in order to obtain free checking or in order to maintain the account shall not be
considered an available resource.
The municipal GA administrator reserves the right to inform GA clients of services, commodities
or facilities made available by private organizations or charities. Although GA
applicants/recipients may be informed of the existence of a charitable resource and/or
organization, GA eligibility shall not be based or conditioned on the use of a private charitable
resource(s).
30-Day Need. An applicant’s 30-day need is the sum of the household’s prospective 30-day
costs, from the date of application, for the various basic necessities. For the purpose of this
calculation, the 30-day cost for any basic need shall be the household’s actual 30-day cost for the
basic necessity or the maximum 30-day cost for the basic necessity as established by this
ordinance, whichever is less.
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants. Are repeat applicants who have not applied for assistance
within the last twelve months and who have been regularly employed or receiving support from a
public benefit or private source and who have unexpectedly become unemployed through no
fault of their own or whose benefits (e.g., through an available resource) have ceased through no
fault of their own.
Unmet Need. An applicant’s unmet need is the household’s 30-day need as established by
section 6.6 of the ordinance less the household income as calculated pursuant to section 6.7 of
this ordinance, provided such a calculation yields a positive number. If the household income is
greater than the household’s 30-day need, the household does not have an unmet need.
Work Requirements. Work requirements are those obligations the municipal administrator
places on applicants for general assistance as directed and/or authorized by 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-
A to the extent such obligations ensure a continuing potential eligibility for general assistance
when complied with, result in ineligibility when violated, and are not merely optional,
discretionary, or advisory. Work requirements include registering for work, looking for work in
good faith, accepting all suitable job offers, maintaining employment, performing workfare, and
9
participating in training, educational, or rehabilitation programs that will assist the participant in
securing employment.
13
ARTICLE III
Administrative Rules and Regulations
The following are rules and regulations for the administration of general assistance.
Section 3.1—Confidentiality of Information
Case records and all other information relating to an applicant or recipient of general assistance
are confidential and will not be disclosed to the general public, unless the applicant or recipient
states in writing what information is to be released (22 M.R.S.A. § 4306).
Release of Information. Applicants, recipients and their legal representatives have the right to
review their case records. No record will be released to a third party, however, unless the
administrator receives a consent form signed by the applicant expressly authorizing the release of
his or her records to the specified parties. Whenever the administrator releases any information,
he/she will make a notation in the applicant’s file stating to whom the record was released and
the date. The administrator may charge a reasonable fee for the reproduction of any records
when appropriate.
Information from Other Sources; Penalty. Information furnished to the municipality by the
Department of Health and Human Services or any other agency or institution pursuant to 22
M.R.S.A. § 4314, is confidential. The general assistance administrator will also comply with
laws relating to the confidentiality of vital statistic records such as those concerning birth,
marriage and death. (22 M.R.S.A. § 2706).
Any representative of a financial institution (except national banks) or any employer of a general
assistance applicant who refuses to provide necessary information to the administrator in order to
verify an applicant’s eligibility must state in writing the reason for the refusal. Any such person
who refuses to provide information, without just cause, may be subject to a civil penalty of not
less than $25 nor more than $100. Any person, including the applicant, who knowingly and
willfully makes a false representation of a material fact to the administrator is committing a
Class E crime (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4314, 4315).
Misuse of Information. Misuse of any information relating to an applicant or recipient is a
punishable offense (22 M.R.S.A. § 42(2)).
Section 3.2—Maintenance of Records
The general assistance administrator will keep complete and accurate general assistance records
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4306). These records are necessary to:
a) provide a valid basis of accounting for municipal expenditures;
b) document and support decisions concerning an applicant or recipient; and
c) ensure the availability of all relevant information in the event of a fair hearing or
judicial review of a decision by the general assistance administrator.
14
Case Records. The administrator will establish and maintain a separate case record, either in
paper format or digital format for each applicant or recipient. Each case record will include at
least:
? household applications
? budget sheets
? information concerning the types
and amounts of assistance
provided
? narrative statements describing
the nature of the emergency
situation whenever general
assistance is granted in amounts
greater than the applicant’s
mathematical eligibility (i.e.,
deficit or unmet need, whichever
is less)
? written decisions
? requests for fair hearings and the
fair hearing authority decisions
? workfare participation records
? repayments to the municipality
? narrative writings documenting
the need for general assistance,
the results of home visits,
collateral information, referrals,
changes in status
? client authorization(s) for the
release of GA information and/or
reason(s) for the release of
confidential information
? adjustments in aid, and
suspension or termination of
eligibility
? physician’s documentation
? Supplemental Security Income
(SSI) interim assistance
reimbursement authorization
forms
? vendor forms
Case records will not include information or material that is irrelevant to either the applicant’s
or recipient’s application or the administrator’s decisions.
Retention of Records. General assistance records shall be retained for a minimum of three full
years. The three year period shall coincide with the State’s fiscal year which begins July 1 and
ends on the following June 30. Records may be destroyed after three years by one of the two
preferred methods of destruction for confidential records, i.e., supervised shredding, burning or
appropriate digital deletion/destruction process. In the event a client’s records contain SSI
reimbursement forms, the client’s records should be maintained so that the municipality may
seek reimbursement.
16
ARTICLE IV
Application Procedure
Section 4.1—Right to Apply
Who May Apply. Anyone may apply for general assistance. The head of the family, any other
responsible household member, or an authorized representative must apply in person, except in
special emergency situations as provided in section 4.9 of this ordinance or except when the
applicant is a resident of an emergency shelter and the municipality has made an agreement with
that emergency shelter to presume shelter residents to be eligible for general assistance (22
M.R.S.A. §4304(3)). In such cases, the administrator may require a representative to present a
signed statement documenting that he/she is in fact authorized to apply for general assistance on
behalf of the named applicant. The applicant or representative must complete a written
application and any other required forms so that the administrator can determine eligibility (22
M.R.S.A. § § 4305, 4308). With notice, all members of the household receiving general
assistance may be required to physically present themselves to the administrator. Note that
fugitives from justice are ineligible for general assistance.
Application Via Telephone. When a person has an emergency but is unable to apply in person
due to illness, disability, lack of child care, lack of transportation or other good cause, and he/she
cannot send an authorized representative, the administrator will accept an application by
telephone. The telephone application process will include the administrator receiving written
verification by mail and visiting the applicant’s home with his or her permission (22 M.R.S.A. §
4304).
Written Application Upon Each Request. Each request for assistance will be administered in
accordance with these guidelines. The administrator will make an independent determination of
eligibility for general assistance each time a person applies (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4308, 4309).
Applications Accepted; Posted Notice. Application forms will be available during regular
business hours at the municipal office and when the general assistance administrator is
conducting interviews with applicants. Notice will be posted stating when and where people
may apply for assistance and the name of the administrator available to take emergency
applications at all other times. In addition, the posted notice shall include the fact that the
municipality must issue a written decision on all applications within 24 hours, and the DHHS
toll-free telephone numbers for reporting alleged violations or complaints. Completed
applications will be accepted and interviews given only during the regular hours established and
posted by the administrator. In an emergency, however, the administrator or his or her designee
will be available to accept applications for assistance whenever necessary (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
Section 4.2—Application Interview
Except when it is impractical, the general assistance administrator will interview each applicant
personally before making a decision. The interview will be conducted in private, although the
applicant may be accompanied by a legal representative, friend or family member.
17
Section 4.3—Contents of the Application
At a minimum, the application will contain the following mandatory information:
a) applicant’s name, address, date of birth,
Social Security number or appropriate
United States Customs and Immigration
Services (USCIS) documentation, and
phone number;
b) names, date(s) of birth, and Social
Security number(s) or appropriate
USCIS documentation of other
household members for whom the
applicant is seeking assistance;
c) total number of individuals living with
the applicant;
d) employment and employability
information;
e) all household income, resources, assets,
and property;
f) household expenses;
g) types of assistance being requested;
h) penalty for false representation;
i) applicant’s permission to verify
information;
j) signature of applicant and date.
In the event an initial applicant is unable to provide identification records (e.g., Social Security
card/number) because the record may have been lost, stolen or misplaced, the initial applicant
may be provided a reasonable amount of time, e.g., five working days, in order to obtain copies
of identification records. Provided the initial applicant makes a good faith effort to obtain the
item/record sought, GA required to cure an immediate and/or emergency need shall not be
withheld. In such cases the municipality may elect to provide only a prorated amount of GA,
e.g., five day’s worth, while the applicant proceeds to obtain the required information.
Section 4.4—General Assistance Administrator’s Responsibilities at the Time of the Application
The administrator will make every effort to inform all applicants of their rights and
responsibilities as well as the general program requirements associated with applying for and
receiving general assistance, including application requirements, eligibility guidelines, applicant
rights, and applicant reimbursement obligations.
Application Requirements. The administrator will help the applicant fill out the application
form as described in the preceding section. The administrator will inform the applicant of any
other information or documentation that the applicant will have to provide in order for the
administrator to evaluate the applicant’s eligibility for assistance. The administrator will fully
explain the purpose of any release of information form or reimbursement agreement before
seeking to obtain the applicant’s signature or written authorization.
18
Eligibility Requirements. The administrator will inform, either verbally or in writing, the
applicant of the eligibility requirements of the program, including:
? the income standard of need;
? the applicant’s ongoing use-of-income, work-related, and resource-related
responsibilities, as described in the section immediately below;
? the financial reduction in assistance that is the consequence of spending household
income on non-basic necessities; and
? the disqualification penalties associated with committing fraud, failing to perform workrelated
assignments without just cause, or failing to make a good faith effort to secure
potential resources when the requirement to attempt to obtain those resources has been
explained to the applicant in writing.
Applicant Rights. The administrator will inform all applicants of their rights to:
? review the municipal General Assistance ordinance and Maine General Assistance law;
? apply for assistance;
? receive a written decision concerning eligibility within 24 hours of applying for
assistance;
? confidentiality;
? contact the DHHS;
? challenge the administrator’s decision by requesting a fair hearing.
Reimbursement/Recovery. The administrator will inform the applicant that he/she must
reimburse the municipality for the amount of general assistance he/she has been granted in the
event of a subsequent ability to pay. The municipality may also, as appropriate, contact the
client’s legal representative to inform him or her of the client’s obligation to repay the
municipality under the GA program. In addition to seeking repayment from a recipient, the
municipality also may recover the amount of assistance granted to a recipient during the previous
12 months from any relative legally liable for the applicant’s support (spouses, parents of
persons under the age of 25, see Article VIII, “Recovery of Expenses”) (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4318,
4319). Whenever applicable, the administrator will explain the various liens a municipality may
place against a recipient’s real or personal property, such as the mortgage or capital improvement
lien, the Workers’ Compensation lump sum payment lien, or the SSI “interim assistance
agreement” lien, as these liens are described in Article VIII, “Recovery of Expenses”.
Section 4.5—Responsibilities of the Applicant at the Time of Application
The applicant has the responsibility at the time of each application to provide accurate, complete
and current household information and verifiable documentation concerning:
? Income
? Resources
? Assets
19
? Employment
? Use of income
? Names and addresses of any relatives legally liable for the applicant’s support
? Any change in this information from a previous application that would affect
household eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. §4309).
In addition, the applicant must accurately report and provide verifiable documentation that shows
the applicant:
a) has remained employed, if previously employed, and not quit work without just
cause or been discharged from employment for misconduct;
b) has been seeking employment, if previously unemployed or employed on a parttime
basis, has accepted any suitable offer of employment, and has satisfactorily
performed all workfare assignments or had just cause not to perform those
assignments;
c) has made use of all available and potential resources when directed in writing to
such a program by the administrator, including, but not limited to, other government
benefit programs or the assistance of liable relatives of sufficient means; and
d) has participated in any training, retraining, educational or rehabilitative program
when appropriate and when directed in writing to such a program by the
administrator, in order to diminish the applicant’s need for general assistance (22
M.R.S.A. § §4316-A, 4317).
Section 4.6—Action on Applications
Written Decision. The general assistance administrator will give a written decision to the
applicant concerning his or her eligibility within 24 hours after the applicant submits a written
application. Assistance will be furnished to eligible applicants within that period except when the
municipality is permitted by law (and pursuant to section 5.6 of this ordinance) to issue
assistance conditionally on the successful completion of a workfare assignment (22 M.R.S.A. § §
4305, 4316-A, 4321). A written decision will be given each time a person applies, whether
assistance is granted, denied, reduced or terminated.
Content. The written decision will contain the following information:
a) the type and amount of aid the applicant is being granted or the applicant’s ineligibility;
b) the period of eligibility if the applicant is eligible for assistance;
c) the specific reasons for the decision;
d) the applicant’s right to a fair hearing; and
20
e) the applicant’s right to notify the DHHS if he/she believes the municipality has acted
illegally (22 M.R.S.A. § 4321).
Section 4.7—Withdrawal of an Application
An application is considered withdrawn if:
a) the applicant requests in writing that his or her application be withdrawn; or
b) the applicant refuses to complete or sign the application or any other form needed by the
general assistance administrator.
Section 4.8—Temporary Refusal to Accept Application
Under special circumstances, the general assistance administrator may temporarily refuse to
accept applications. Such circumstances may include, but are not limited to, the following:
a) When the applicant’s conduct is abusive, disruptive, or harassing, or when the applicant
is under the influence of drugs or alcohol. In these situations, the applicant will be asked
to leave, and if the applicant refuses to leave, the police may be summoned. The
applicant will be informed that an application will only be accepted when his or her
conduct is under control.
b) If the administrator believes that an applicant’s behavior presents a threat to the health or
safety of the public or to a municipal employee, or if such behavior is violent, or if an
applicant has engaged in abusive, disruptive or harassing behavior and has been required
to leave on more than one occasion, then the applicant may be required to designate a
third party to apply for assistance on his or her behalf and the applicant may be prohibited
from entering the municipal building;
c) When a third person applies for assistance on behalf of the applicant that person may be
required to provide written verification that he/she has been duly authorized to act as a
representative for the applicant (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308).
Section 4.9—Emergencies
An emergency is considered to be any life threatening situation or a situation beyond the control
of the applicant which if not alleviated immediately could reasonably be expected to pose a
threat to the health or safety of the applicant or a member of the household (22 M.R.S.A. §
4301(4)). Although they may be considered otherwise ineligible to receive general assistance,
persons who apply for assistance to alleviate an emergency may be granted assistance, except as
provided below, if they do not have sufficient income and resources to meet an actual emergency
need and have not had sufficient income and resources to avert the emergency (22 M.R.S.A. §
4308).
21
A municipality may provide emergency assistance when the municipality determines that an
emergency is imminent and that failure to provide assistance may result in undue hardship and
unnecessary costs to either the client or the municipality.
Disqualification. A person who is currently disqualified from receiving General Assistance due
to a violation of sections 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 5.9 or 6.4 of this ordinance is ineligible to receive
emergency assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)(A)). However, dependents of a disqualified
person may be eligible for assistance. For the purposes of this section, “dependents” are defined
as: 1) a dependent minor child; 2) an elderly, ill or disabled person; or 3) a person whose
presence is required to provide care for any child under the age of 6 years or any ill or disabled
member of the household (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)).
In the event one or more members of a household are disqualified and assistance is requested for
the remaining dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be calculated by dividing the
maximum level of assistance available to the entire household by the total number of household
members.
Assistance Prior to Verification. Whenever an applicant informs the administrator that he/she
needs assistance immediately, the administrator will grant, pending verification, the assistance
within 24 hours, provided that:
a) after interviewing the applicant the administrator has determined that the applicant will
probably be eligible for assistance after a verification of information is completed; and
b) the applicant submits documentation when possible, to verify his or her need. The
administrator may contact at least one other person to confirm the applicant’s statements
about needing emergency assistance. No further assistance will be authorized until the
applicant’s eligibility is confirmed (22 M.R.S.A. § 4310).
Telephone Applications. If a person has an emergency need and cannot apply in person due to
illness, disability, lack of transportation, or other good cause, and if there is no authorized
representative who can apply on behalf of the applicant, the administrator shall accept an
application over the telephone (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
The administrator will not grant any assistance as the result of a telephone application if the
applicant refuses to allow the administrator to verify the information either by visiting his or her
home or by mail and the administrator cannot determine his or her eligibility through any other
means.
Limitation on Emergency Assistance. Applicants are not automatically eligible for emergency
assistance. If applicants had income which could have been used to prevent all or part of an
emergency, but they spent that income on items which are not basic necessities, they will not be
eligible to receive general assistance to replace the misspent money (22 MRSA § § 4308(2) &
4315-A).
22
All applicants have the responsibility to provide the administrator with verifiable documentation
demonstrating that the applicant did not have sufficient income to avert the emergency situation.
According to the following criteria, the administrator may limit emergency assistance to cover
only the difference between the amount of money necessary for the household to avoid the
emergency and the amount of income available to the household during the applicable time
period.
a) The applicable time period shall be the 30 days preceding the application for emergency
assistance, except in those cases where the emergency was created by a negative account
balance for a commodity or service (such as rent, mortgage or utility payments), and the
negative account balance was created over a longer period of time. In such cases, the
applicable time period shall be the consecutive length of time the account balance has
been in the negative.
b) The administrator shall seek from the applicant all information pertinent to the
applicant’s ability to provide for his or her basic necessities for the applicable time
period, including evidence of all income and resources received over that period of time.
c) The administrator shall calculate all costs for the household’s basic necessities during the
applicable time period, per month, in accordance with the maximum levels established by
this ordinance for the specific basic necessity or the actual monthly cost, whichever is
less, including all costs associated with averting the particular emergency situation for
which the applicant is seeking assistance.
d) From the total household costs for basic necessities during the applicable time period, the
administrator shall subtract the total income and lump sum payments available to the
household for the applicable time period as well as the total general assistance actually
received during the applicable time period.
e) The administrator may restrict the issuance of emergency assistance to the difference
yielded by the computation in subsection (d), even when such a grant will not totally
alleviate the emergency situation.
f) The administrator may waive this limitation on emergency assistance in life threatening
situations or for initial applicants; that is, persons who have never before applied for
general assistance.
g) Nothing in these criteria may be construed as prohibiting a municipality from electing to
alleviate an emergency situation in the most cost-effective manner available, provided
such a determination of eligibility for emergency assistance is in conformance with
general assistance law.
Section 4.10—Residence
23
The administrator shall provide general assistance to all eligible persons applying for assistance
who are residents of this municipality. A resident is a person who has no other residence and is
physically present in this municipality and who intends to remain here and establish a household.
The municipality also recognizes its responsibility to provide assistance to eligible persons who
apply here and who are not residents of this municipality or any other municipality. If a person
who is not a resident of any municipality applies in this municipality first, the administrator will
determine his or her eligibility and, if eligible, will grant assistance until he/she establishes a
residence in another municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307).
Moving/Relocating. The municipality will not consider moving or transporting an applicant or
recipient into another municipality unless the person requests assistance to relocate to another
municipality. If the administrator determines the applicant is eligible and grants financial
assistance to help with the requested relocation, this municipality will be responsible for
providing assistance to the applicant for 30 days after he/she moves provided the recipient
remains eligible.
Institutions. If a resident of this municipality enters an institution located in another
municipality (such as a group home, shelter, rehabilitation center, nursing home, or hospital) and
requests assistance while at the institution, he/she will be the responsibility of this municipality
for up to 6 months after he/she enters the institution if the conditions of 22 M.R.S.A. § 4307 and
§4313 are met. The municipality thereafter retains responsibility for an applicant in an
institution only if the applicant has maintained a home in this municipality to which he/she
intends to return. The municipality also recognizes its responsibility for applicants residing in an
institution in this municipality if such an applicant had no residence prior to entering the
institution (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307(4)).
Temporary Housing. Hotels/motels and similar places of temporary lodging are considered
institutions if the municipality grants financial assistance for, makes arrangements for, or advises
or encourages an applicant to stay in temporary lodging.
Note: Municipalities which illegally deny housing assistance and, as a result of the denial, the
applicant stays in temporary lodging are responsible for the applicant for up to 6 months and may
be subject to other penalties (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307(4)).
Disputes. When the administrator believes that an applicant is a resident of another municipality
but that municipality disputes its responsibility the administrator will notify the DHHS in
Augusta (287-3654 or 1-800-442-6003). If the applicant applies in this municipality first, the
administrator will determine his or her eligibility and, if eligible, will grant assistance until the
DHHS has concluded which municipality is responsible for providing assistance. If another
municipality was responsible, the DHHS will recover the amount due from the other
municipality. (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4307(5), 4307(6)).
28
ARTICLE V
Eligibility Factors
A person will be eligible for general assistance if he/she is in need and has complied with the eligibility
requirements set forth below.
Section 5.1—Initial Application
Initial Application. For initial applicants, except as provided immediately below, need will be the sole
condition of eligibility. The exception to this general rule, as provided by law, applies to all applicants,
including initial applicants, who are disqualified for a defined period for quitting employment without
just cause or for being discharged from employment for misconduct (22 M.R.S.A. § 1043 (23)) (see
section 5.5 of this ordinance) and to fugitives from justice as defined in 15 M.R.S.A. § 201(4) (22
M.R.S.A. § 4301(3)). An initial applicant is a person who has never before applied for general
assistance in any municipality in Maine (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(1)).
“Need” means that the applicant’s income (including prorated income, where applicable), property,
credit, assets or other resources are less than the overall maximum level of assistance contained in
section 6.8 of this ordinance or the applicant’s 30-day need, whichever is less, and he/she does not have
adequate income or other resources available to provide basic necessities.
Subsequent Applicants. Persons who are not initial applicants are repeat applicants. Repeat applicants
are people who have applied for general assistance at any time in the past. Repeat applicants are also
people on whose behalf a general assistance application was made at any time in the past, provided that
at such a time the applicant was not a dependent minor in the household. For repeat applicants to be
eligible for general assistance, they must be in need and meet all other eligibility requirements. The
eligibility of repeat applicants may also be adversely affected to the extent they have not used their
income and resources to secure basic necessities.
29
Section 5.2—Eligibility for Categorical Assistance
Receipt of categorical assistance will not disqualify a person from receiving general assistance if the
applicant is otherwise eligible. Benefits received from other assistance programs will be considered as
income when determining need, with the exception of Food Stamps, which will not be counted as
income or resources or otherwise taken into consideration when determining need (7 U.S.C. § 2017 (b)).
In addition, any fuel assistance (HEAP/ECIP) received by an applicant will not be considered as income;
that is, the administrator will always compute the heating needs of an applicant who has received HEAP
or ECIP as if that applicant paid all costs associated with his or her fuel needs (42 U.S.C. §8624(f)). The
calculation of general assistance for heating energy needs when an applicant has received HEAP or
ECIP shall be accomplished in accordance with subsection (c) under “Types of Income” at section 6.7 of
this ordinance. For several additional exceptions please refer to the definition of “Income” in this
ordinance (see page 7, subsection 4).
Applicants or recipients must apply for other program benefits within 7 days after being advised in
writing to do so by the general assistance administrator. Persons who, without just cause, make no good
faith effort to obtain a potential resource will be disqualified from receiving assistance until they make a
good faith effort to obtain the benefit (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Section 5.3—Personal Property
a) Liquid Assets. No person owning assets easily convertible into cash, including but not limited
to, bank deposits, stocks, bonds, certificates of deposit, retirement accounts, life insurance
policies and other marketable security, will be eligible for general assistance unless and until he
or she uses these assets to meet his or her basic needs, and thereby exhausts them. At the
discretion of the GA administrator, liquid assets do not mean a reasonable minimum balance
necessary for obtaining free checking. Although one checking account per household may be
allowed, any monies over the minimum required to obtain free checking are to be considered
available liquid assets.
b) Tangible Assets. No person owning or possessing personal property, such as but not limited to:
a motor vehicle (except as provided immediately below in subsection c), or a boat, trailer,
recreation vehicle or other assets that are convertible into cash and are non-essential to the
maintenance of the applicant’s household, will be eligible for general assistance. Exceptions may
be made when a person is making an initial application or is an unforeseeable repeat applicant as
defined in Section 2.2 or when reasonable efforts to convert assets to cash at fair market value
are unsuccessful. Tools of a trade, livestock, farm equipment and other equipment used for the
production of income are exempt from the above category and are not considered available
assets.
c) Automobile Ownership. Ownership of one automobile per household will not make a person
ineligible for assistance if such vehicle is essential for transportation to employment or for
seeking employment, obtaining medical care, rehabilitation or training facilities, or for any other
reason the GA administrator determines reasonable for the maintenance of the applicant’s
household. Recipients of general assistance who own an automobile with a market value greater
30
than $8000 may be required, with written, 7-day notice, to make a good faith effort to trade that
automobile for an automobile with a market value of less than $8000. Any income received by
the applicant by virtue of such a trade down must be used for his or her basic necessities. Failure
to liquidate or trade down the excess value of any automobile asset can result in disqualification
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
The municipality will neither pay nor consider as necessary any car payment or vehicle
maintenance cost including insurance for which the applicant is responsible. However, provided
the vehicle value is $8000 or less and the applicant is utilizing the vehicle for any of the above
mentioned “essential” reasons, the municipality in its discretion may choose to not consider
reasonable car payments, reasonable car insurance and reasonable associated costs of
maintenance as “misspent” income. General assistance for travel-related needs shall be
computed in accordance with section 6.8(F)(7), (8) “Work Related/Travel Expenses.”
d) Insurance. Insurance that is available to an applicant on a non-contributory basis or that is
required as a condition of employment will not be a factor in determining eligibility for general
assistance. Life insurance with a cash surrender value may, at the discretion of the GA
administrator, be considered as a tangible asset.
e) Transfer of Property. Applicants who transfer assets for less than fair market value to someone
else solely for the purpose of establishing eligibility for general assistance will not be granted
general assistance to replace the uncompensated value of the transferred asset. Assistance will
be denied within a 120-day limit up to the uncompensated value of the asset which was
transferred unless the transfer of asset is fraudulently misrepresented, in which case a 120-day
disqualification will be issued. There will be a presumption that the applicant transferred his or
her assets in order to be eligible for general assistance whenever property is sold for less than the
fair market value or when the transfer occurred within 30 days prior to applying for general
assistance unless the applicant can demonstrate the existence of a good faith transaction.
Section 5.4—Ownership of Real Estate
a) Principal Residence. For purposes of General Assistance solely, the applicant’s principal
residence, including any adjoining land, is considered an exempt resource, even if temporarily
unoccupied because of employment, job training, education, illness or disaster, provided there is
demonstrated an intent to return. If the applicant owns land in excess of the minimum lot size
for the zone or district in which the home is located, then that land may be considered a potential
resource if:
1. The applicant has received General Assistance for the last 120 consecutive days; and
2. The applicant has the legal right to sell the land (e.g., any mortgagee will release any
mortgage, any co-owners agree to the sale, zoning or other land use laws do not render
the sale illegal or impracticable); and
3. The applicant has the financial capability to put the land into a marketable condition
(e.g., the applicant can pay for any necessary surveys); and
31
4. The land is not utilized for the maintenance and/or support of the household; and
5. A knowledgeable source (e.g., a realtor) indicates that the land in question can be sold
at fair market value, for an amount which will aid the applicant’s financial
rehabilitation; and
6. No other circumstances exist which cause any sale to be unduly burdensome or
inequitable.
If the above conditions are met, then the administrator may condition the receipt of future
assistance on the applicant’s good faith efforts to sell, or render saleable, land which could be
used to provide necessary support for the applicant (e.g., the applicant owns 100 “excess” acres.
Sale of 10 of the acres would provide for the necessary support and therefore not all the land
need be sold at the present time.) Assistance shall not be denied during the time that the
applicant is making a good faith effort to sell or render saleable the land in question.
Once the applicant ceases to receive assistance the obligations under this section shall also cease.
b) Other Property. If the applicant or dependents own real property other than that occupied as
the principal residence, continued eligibility will depend on the applicant making a reasonable
effort to:
1. Dispose of the property at fair market value in order to convert the property into cash
which can be applied toward meeting present need; or
2. Obtain a loan against such property which may be used to meet present need.
Applicants who transfer their excess property to a third party in order to become
eligible for general assistance will be ineligible.
If an applicant is granted assistance in the form of a mortgage payment or capital improvement
payment, the municipality may claim a lien against the property. The lien shall not be
enforceable until the time of sale of the property or upon the death of the recipient (see also
section 6.8 of this ordinance) (22 M.R.S.A. § 4320).
Section 5.5—Work Requirement
All general assistance recipients are required to register for work, look for work, work to the extent of
available employment, and otherwise fulfill the work requirements, unless the applicant is exempt from
such requirements as provided below.
Employment; Rehabilitation. All unemployed applicants and members of their households who are 16
years of age or older and who are not attending a full-time primary or secondary school intended to lead
to a high school diploma will be required to accept any suitable job offer and/or meet with job
counselors, attend employment workshops and rehabilitative services, except as provided below (see
“Exemptions” ). Applicants must demonstrate to the administrator that they are available for work and
are actively seeking employment.
32
A “suitable job” means any job, which the applicant is mentally and physically able to perform.
“Available for work” means that applicants must make themselves available for work during normal
business hours prevailing in the area, and show that no circumstance exists which would prevent them
from complying with the work requirement.
Verification. Unemployed applicants or applicants employed on a part-time basis will be required to
provide verifiable documentation of their pursuit of employment at the time of each application. At a
minimum, such documentation shall consist of a list of the employers contacted, the date and time of the
application contact, and the name of the employer representative contacted. “Pursuit of employment”
means actually submitting a written application or applying for a job in person when reasonable, or
submitting a written application or letter of inquiry to employers.
For the duration of any repeat applicant’s period of unemployment or partial employment, the
administrator will establish the number of employers per week to whom each non-exempt applicant shall
be required to apply in order to fulfill his or her work search requirements. The number of weekly
employer contacts required by the administrator shall be reasonably related to the number of potential
employers in the region and the number of hours in the week the applicant has available for work search
activities after considering all time the applicant must devote to existing employment obligations,
workfare obligations, and required classroom or on-site participation in job training, educational, or
rehabilitation programs. Fulfillment of these requirements will not be expected at the time of the initial
application, but will be a condition of eligibility for subsequent assistance.
Ineligibility. After being granted assistance at the time of initial application, applicants will be
considered ineligible for further assistance for 120 days if they, without just cause:
a) refuse to register for employment with the Maine Job Service;
b) refuse to search diligently for employment when the search is reasonable and appropriate;
recipients who unreasonably seek work at the same places repeatedly will not be considered to
be performing a diligent worksearch and will be disqualified;
c) refuse to accept a suitable job offer;
d) refuse to participate in an assigned training, education or rehabilitation program that would assist
the applicant in securing employment;
e) fail to be available for work; or
f) refuse to participate or participate in a substandard manner in the municipal work program (see
section 5.6).
Ineligibility Due to Job Quit or Discharge for Misconduct. No applicant, whether an initial or repeat
applicant, who has quit his or her full-time or part-time job without just cause or who has been
discharged from employment for misconduct (see Appendix I, 26 M.R.S.A. § 1043 (23) for the
definition) will be eligible to receive general assistance of any kind for a 120-day period from the date of
separation from employment (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(8), 4316-A (1-A)).
33
Just Cause. Applicants will be ineligible for assistance for 120 days if they refuse to comply with the
work requirements of this section without just cause. With respect to any work requirement, just cause
will be considered to exist when there is reasonable and verifiable evidence that:
a) the applicant has a physical or mental illness or disability which prevents him/her from working;
b) the work assignment pays below minimum wages;
c) the applicant was subject to sexual harassment;
d) the applicant is physically or mentally unable to perform required job tasks, or to meet piece
work standards;
e) the applicant has no means of transportation to or from work or a training or rehabilitation
program;
f) the applicant is unable to arrange for necessary child care or care of ill or disabled family
members; or
g) any reason found to be good cause by the Maine Department of Labor, or any other verifiable
reason the administrator considers reasonable and appropriate will be accepted as just cause. (22
M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(5)).
Applicant’s Burden of Establishing Just Cause. If the administrator finds that the applicant has
violated a work-related rule without just cause, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to establish
the presence of just cause (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A).
Eligibility Regained. Persons who are disqualified for 120 days because they violated a work
requirement may regain their eligibility if and only when they become employed or otherwise satisfy the
administrator that they are complying with the work requirement by fulfilling the work requirement or
requirements they violated.
For the purpose of regaining eligibility by becoming employed, “employment” shall mean employment
by an employer as defined in 26 M.R.S.A. § § 1043 et seq., or the performance of a service for an
employer who withholds from the employee a social security tax pursuant to federal law.
The special provisions regarding the opportunity to regain eligibility after a disqualification for workfare
violations are detailed in section 5.6 of this ordinance, under “Eligibility Regained”.
Dependents. Failure of an otherwise eligible person to comply with the work requirements shall not
affect the eligibility of any member of the person’s household who is not capable of working, including:
a) a dependent minor child;
b) an elderly, ill, or disabled person; and
c) a person whose presence is required in order to provide care for any child under 6 years
of age or for any ill or disabled member of the household (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)).
In the event one (or more) member(s) of a household is disqualified and assistance is requested for those
remaining members of the household who are dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be
34
calculated by dividing the maximum level of assistance available to the entire household by the total
number of household members.
Exemptions. The above work requirements do not apply to any person who is elderly, physically or
mentally ill or disabled. Any person whose presence is required to care for any pre-school age child or
for any ill or disabled member of the household is also exempt from these requirements.
The requirements of this section will not be imposed so as to interfere with an applicant’s existing
employment, ability to pursue a bona fide job offer, ability to attend an interview for possible
employment, classroom participation in a primary or secondary educational program intended to lead to
a high school diploma, classroom or on site participation in a training program which is either approved
by the Department of Labor or determined by the Department of Labor to be expected to assist the
applicant in securing employment, or classroom participation in a degree-granting program operated
under the control of the Department of Labor.
Section 5.6—Municipal Work Program
Each applicant and any member of the household who is capable of working may be required to perform
work for the municipality, including work for a non-profit organization, as a condition of receiving
assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)).
As part of the municipal work program, the municipality can require recipients to participate in training,
education, or rehabilitative programs that will assist the recipient in securing employment. The work
requirement provisions found in section 5.5 regarding just cause, dependents, and exemptions also apply
to the municipal workfare program.
Consent. Persons assigned to the work program are required to sign a form stating that they understand
the requirements of general assistance and the work program. Prior to signing the form, the
administrator will read it to the applicants or the applicants will read it themselves. The form will also
state the number of hours the applicants must work and the hourly rate by means of which the duration
of the work assignment is calculated. In addition, the consent form shall describe the consequences of
failing to adequately perform part or all of the workfare or workfare-first assignment.
Subtracting Value of Workfare Performed from Client’s GA Debt. Pursuant to 22 MRSA § 4318
individuals owing the municipality funds for general assistance provided to them are obligated to repay
the municipality when and if they become able (see Article VIII). However, persons performing
workfare shall have the value of the workfare performed deducted from any and all GA debt including
GA liens (e.g., Workers’ Compensation Settlement, SSI Retroactive Payment, Capital Improvement,
Home Mortgage) that might exist against their settlements, payments or other such property.
Limitations. The work requirement is subject to the following limitations (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(3)).
1) No person shall, as a condition of eligibility, be required to do any amount of work that exceeds
the value of the net general assistance that the person receives under municipal general assistance
standards. Any person performing work under this subsection shall be provided with net general
assistance, the value of which is calculated at a rate of at least the prevailing minimum wage
under state or federal law at the time the workfare was performed.
35
2) No workfare participant shall be required to work for a nonprofit organization if that work would
violate the participant’s basic religious beliefs.
3) In no case shall eligible persons performing work under this subsection replace regular municipal
employees.
4) In no case will work performed under this subsection interfere with an eligible person’s:
a) existing employment;
b) ability to follow up on a bona fide job offer;
c) attendance at an interview for possible employment;
d) classroom participation in a primary or secondary educational program intended to lead to a
high school diploma; or
e) classroom or on site participation in a training program which is approved by the Department
of Labor or determined by the Department of Labor to be reasonably expected to assist the
person in securing employment, or classroom participation in a degree-granting program
administered by the DHHS or the Department of Labor.
5) In no case may an eligible person be required to work more than 40 hours per week. An eligible
person who has full or part-time employment shall be exempt from the work requirement to the
extent that the work requirement in combination with his or her regular employment would result
in the person working more than 40 hours per week.
6) In no case will an eligible person be required to perform work beyond his or her capabilities.
However, when an illness or disability is claimed, an eligible person may be required as a
condition of receiving assistance to present a doctor’s statement detailing the extent of the
disability or illness (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309).
If the administrator requires a doctor’s statement to verify an applicant’s illness or disability and
the applicant is not currently under the care of a provider, the municipality may pay for the
doctor’s evaluation if the applicant has no means to pay for the exam. However in such a case
the administrator will choose the doctor. If there is a no-cost or low-cost health care option, the
municipality may elect to refer the client to such a resource. The administrator will not require
verification of medical conditions which are apparent or which are of such short duration that a
reasonable person would not ordinarily seek medical attention (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316(5)).
7) In no case may an eligible person with an immediate need (i.e., a person in an emergency
situation who has not been disqualified from receiving assistance for committing a program
violation) be required to perform work under this subsection prior to receiving general
assistance. The administrator shall meet immediate needs upon receiving written assurance from
the eligible person that he/she is willing to work to maintain eligibility for general assistance.
When the recipient has no immediate need, workfare participation may be required prior to
receiving general assistance in accordance with the following “workfare first” policy.
“Workfare First” Policy. Under the authority of 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)(D), the administrator may,
in accordance with the following guidelines, require a recipient of general assistance to perform a
workfare assignment prior to the actual issuance of the general assistance benefit conditionally granted.
1) In no circumstance will emergency general assistance for which an applicant is eligible be
withheld pending the satisfactory performance of workfare.
36
2) All workfare participants under this policy will be provided a written decision, as otherwise
required by law, within 24 hours of submitting an application for general assistance and prior to
performing any workfare for the municipality associated with that request for assistance. That
written decision must include:
a) a specific description of the amount of general assistance being conditionally granted
to the household, and for which basic needs;
b) the period of eligibility for which the general assistance grant is being issued (in days
or weeks, but not to exceed 30 days);
c) the rate, at a dollar-per-hour basis (but not less than the prevailing minimum wage),
upon which the duration of the workfare assignment is calculated;
d) the actual duration of the workfare assignment that must be performed, in hours,
before the general assistance grant will be actually issued;
e) the specifics of the workfare assignment(s), including the general nature of the type of
work being assigned, location(s) of work-site, date(s) and time(s) of assigned
workfare, workfare supervisors’ names and contact telephone numbers; and
f) any other pertinent information related to the workfare assignment(s) the recipient
will be expected to perform.
3) As previously provided in this section, all workfare participants under this policy must sign a
consent form that informs the participant of his or her workfare-related rights and
responsibilities, including the consequences of failing to perform all or part of the workfare
assigned without just cause.
4) If a portion of the workfare-first assignment is satisfactorily performed but there has been a
failure to perform the remainder of the assignment, without just cause, the administrator shall
issue a grant of general assistance in the amount of the number of workfare hours satisfactorily
performed times the hourly rate used to calculate the duration of the workfare assignment. In
addition to any disqualification penalty that may apply, the remaining value of the conditionally
issued general assistance grant shall be terminated, and notice of the partial termination, and the
reasons therefore, will be issued to the workfare participant in accordance with section 6.10 of
this ordinance.
5) Any amount of the workfare assignment that is not performed because the workfare participant
was temporarily unable to perform the assignment for just cause reasons shall be reassigned or
excused at the discretion of the GA administrator.
Work-Related Expenses. A participant’s expenses related to work performed under this section will be
added to the amount of net general assistance to be provided to the person (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-
A(2)(E)). The municipality will provide any special clothes or equipment the recipient needs to perform
his or her work assignment.
37
Disqualification. Any person who either willfully fails to perform or willfully performs below average
standards the work assigned by the municipality, will be ineligible for assistance for 120 days (22
M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(1)). As soon as the administrator knows that a recipient failed to fulfill the work
assignment, the administrator will notify the recipient in writing that he/she is disqualified for 120 days
starting from the last date of authorized assistance unless the recipient can show just cause. The burden
of demonstrating a just cause failure to perform a workfare assignment falls on the workfare participant.
Eligibility Regained. Recipients who are disqualified from receiving assistance because they have
violated the requirements of the municipal work program may regain their eligibility under the following
conditions.
Recipients who fail to complete the first municipal work assignment they have been given will be
disqualified from receiving assistance during the next 120 days, although dependents in the household
may be eligible (see section. 5.5, “Dependents”).
If during the 120-day disqualification period the recipient requests an opportunity to perform the work
assignment which he or she, without just cause failed to perform, the disqualified recipient will be given
one opportunity to regain eligibility. The administrator will give the recipient a work assignment as
soon as possible.
If under such a set of circumstances the recipient has an emergency need and the administrator is unable
to schedule a work assignment in time to alleviate the emergency, the administrator will provide
sufficient assistance to the recipient to avert the emergency. However, the provision of such emergency
assistance will not bar the administrator from subsequently enforcing the previously issued 120-day
disqualification if the recipient fails to regain eligibility by satisfactorily performing the work
assignment. The amount of emergency assistance granted will be considered in the computation of the
total number of hours the recipient must work.
Recipients who have asked for the opportunity to regain their eligibility during a 120 day
disqualification period and who agreed to fulfill the assignment which they previously failed to perform
and who, without just cause, fail to fulfill their municipal work assignment will be considered to have
acted in bad faith. In such a circumstance, the administrator will enforce the 120-day disqualification
for the term of its initial duration.
If a workfare participant regains eligibility under this section but is subsequently disqualified within the
initial 120-day period of ineligibility for failing to comply with the municipal work program, that
participant will be ineligible for a new 120-day period beginning with the new disqualification date, but
will be provided no opportunity to requalify.
Any recipient who intentionally causes damage to property, harasses or harms other employees or who
otherwise conducts themselves in a disruptive manner and is discharged by the work supervisor will not
be entitled to regain eligibility by returning to the work program. Eligibility may be regained by
otherwise becoming employed and meeting the definition of need.
38
Reports. The administrator will itemize the assistance that has been provided to persons who work for
the municipality in reports to the DHHS (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)).
Section 5.7—Use of Resources
Each applicant has the responsibility to make a good faith effort to utilize every available or potential
resource that may reduce his or her need for general assistance (see section 2.2 for definition of
“Resources”). People who refuse or fail to make a good faith effort to secure a potential resource after
receiving written notice to do so are disqualified from receiving assistance until they make an effort to
secure the resource. Applicants are required to prove that they have made a good faith effort to secure
the resource (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Minors. A minor under the age of 18 who has never married and is applying independently for general
assistance and who is pregnant or has a dependent child or children will be eligible to receive general
assistance only if the minor is residing in the home of his or her parent, legal guardian or other adult
relative, in which case the entire household will be evaluated for eligibility. Exceptions to this limitation
on eligibility will be made when:
1) the minor is residing in a foster home, maternity home, or other adult-supervised supportive
living arrangement; or
2) the minor has no living parent or the whereabouts of the both parents are unknown; or
3) no parent will permit the minor to live in the parent’s home; or
4) the minor has lived apart from both parents for at least one year before the birth of any dependent
child; or
5) the DHHS determines that the physical or emotional health or safety of the minor or the minor’s
dependent child or children would be jeopardized if the minor and his or her child or children
lived with a parent; or
6) the DHHS determines, in accordance with its regulation, that there is good cause to waive this
limitation on eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(4)).
Any person under the age of 25 who is applying independently from his or her parents for general
assistance will be informed that until he or she reaches the age of 25, the applicant’s parents are still
legally liable for his or her support and the municipality has the right to seek recovery from the parents
of the cost of all assistance granted to such a recipient to the extent his or her parents are financially
capable of repaying the municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319).
With regard to such application, the municipality may seek verification of the applicant’s need for
general assistance by contacting his or her parents. If the applicant’s parents declare a willingness to
provide the applicant with his or her basic needs directly, and there is no convincing evidence that the
applicant would be jeopardized by relying on his or her parents for basic needs, the administrator may
find the applicant not to be in need of general assistance for the reason that his or her needs can be
provided by a legally liable relative.
Mental or Physical Disability. Any applicant who has a mental or physical disability must make a
good faith effort to utilize any medical or rehabilitative services which have been recommended by a
physician, psychologist or other professional retraining or rehabilitation specialist when the services are
39
available to the applicant and would not constitute a financial burden or create a physical risk to the
individual.
Written Notice; Disqualification. The administrator will give each applicant written notice whenever
the applicant is required to utilize any specific potential resource(s). Any applicant who refuses to
utilize potential resources, without just cause, after receiving written 7-day notice will be ineligible for
further assistance until he/she has made a good faith effort to utilize or obtain the resources. General
assistance will not be withheld from the applicant pending receipt of a resource if the applicant has
made, or is in the process of making, a good faith effort to obtain the resource.
Forfeiture of Benefits. Any applicant who forfeits receipt of or causes a reduction in benefits from
another public assistance program due to fraud, misrepresentation, a knowing or intentional violation of
program rules or a refusal to comply with that program’s rules without just cause will be ineligible to
receive general assistance to replace the forfeited benefits. To the extent the forfeited benefits can be
considered income under general assistance law, the worth of the forfeited benefits will be considered
income that is available to the applicant for the duration of the forfeiture.
To the extent the forfeited benefits were provided not in the form of income but, rather, in the form of a
specific, regularly issued resource of a calculable value, that resource, up to its forfeited value, need not
be replaced with general assistance for a period of 120 days from the date of the forfeiture—unless the
municipality is prohibited by federal or state law from considering the forfeited resource as available
with respect to local public assistance programs (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Section 5.8—Period of Ineligibility
No one will have his or her assistance terminated, reduced, or suspended prior to being given written
notice and an opportunity for a fair hearing (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4321-4322). Each person will be notified
in writing of the reasons for his or her ineligibility, and any person disqualified for not complying with
the ordinance will be informed in writing of the period of ineligibility.
Work Requirement. Applicants/recipients who do not comply with a work requirement are
disqualified from receiving assistance for a period of 120 days (unless they regain their eligibility) (see
sections 5.5, 5.6). If an applicant/recipient is provided assistance and does not comply with the work
requirement, the applicant/recipient shall be disqualified for 120 days following the end of the period
covered by the grant of assistance. The administrator shall give recipients written notice that they are
disqualified as soon as the administrator has sufficient knowledge and information to render a decision
of ineligibility.
Fraud. People who commit fraud are disqualified from receiving assistance for a period of 120 days
(see section 6.4, “Fraud”). The administrator shall give recipients written notice that they are ineligible
as soon as the administrator has sufficient knowledge and information to render a decision. If the
disqualification for fraud is issued before the expiration of a grant of assistance, the period of
ineligibility shall commence on the day following the end of the period covered by the grant of
assistance. If fraud is discovered after the period covered by the grant of assistance has expired, the
period of ineligibility will commence on the day of the written notice of ineligibility.
Section 5.9 – Unemployment Fraud
40
An applicant who is found ineligible for unemployment compensation benefits because of a finding of
fraud by the Department of Labor pursuant to 26 M.R.S.A. § 1051(1) is ineligible to receive general
assistance to replace the forfeited unemployment compensation benefits for the duration of the forfeiture
established by the Department of Labor. 22 M.R.S.A. § 4317.
48
ARTICLE VI
Determination of Eligibility
Section 6.1—Recognition of Dignity and Rights
Any determination or investigation into an applicant’s eligibility will be conducted in a manner
that will not violate the applicant’s privacy or personal dignity or violate his or her individual
rights.
Section 6.2—Determination; Redetermination
The administrator will make an individual, factual determination of eligibility each time a person
applies or reapplies for general assistance. The administrator will make a redetermination of
eligibility at least monthly but may do so as often as necessary to administer the program
efficiently and meet the needs of the applicants. Upon any application, the administrator will
determine the applicant’s eligibility on the basis of a 30-day prospective analysis, but may elect
to disburse that applicant’s assistance periodically, e.g., weekly, throughout a 30-day period of
eligibility pursuant to that initial eligibility determination.
The administrator may redetermine a person’s eligibility at any time during the period he or she
is receiving assistance if the administrator is notified of any change in the recipient’s
circumstances that may alter the amount of assistance the recipient may receive. Once a
recipient has been granted assistance, the administrator may not reduce or rescind the grant
without giving prior written notice to the recipient explaining the reasons for the decision and
offering the recipient an opportunity to appeal the decision to the fair hearing authority (22
M.R.S.A. § 4309).
49
Section 6.3—Verification
Eligibility of applicant; duration of eligibility. The overseer shall determine eligibility each
time a person applies or reapplies for general assistance. The period of eligibility will not exceed
one month. At the expiration of this period applicants/recipients may reapply for assistance and
the person's eligibility will be redetermined.
Applicant's responsibilities. Applicants and recipients for general assistance are responsible for
providing to the overseer all information necessary to determine eligibility. If further information
or documentation is necessary to demonstrate eligibility, the applicant must have the first
opportunity to provide the specific information or documentation required by the overseer. When
information required by the overseer is unavailable, the overseer must accept alternative
available information, which is subject to verification.
Each applicant and recipient has the responsibility at the time of application and continuing
thereafter to provide complete, accurate and current information and documentation concerning
his/her:
? Need
? Income
? Employment
? Use of income
? Expenses
? Assets & liabilities
? Use of available resources
? Household composition
Initial Applicants. Persons who have not applied for assistance in this or any other municipality
are considered initial applicants and must have their eligibility determined solely on the basis of
need. Initial applicants are not subject to eligibility conditions placed on repeat applicants (see
below). However, such applicants are still responsible for providing the GA administrator with
reasonably obtainable documentation adequate to verify that there is a need for assistance. In
addition, initial applicants must also comply with both lump sum and relevant work rules (i.e. job
quit).
Repeat Applicants. All applicants for general assistance that are not initial applicants are repeat
applicants. The eligibility of repeat applicants must be determined on the basis of need and all
other conditions of eligibility established by law and this municipal ordinance.
The administrator will require documentation of a repeat applicant’s income, use of income,
assets and resources plus actual bills and receipts for rent, utilities, fuel, telephone, medical
services and other basic necessities. In addition, repeat applicants instructed to seek employment
shall verify their work search results, e.g., provide a list of the employers contacted, the date and
time of the application contact, and the name of the employer representative contacted, as
required by the GA administrator.
50
Repeat applicants are also responsible for providing any changes of information reported on
previous applications including changes in his/her household or income that may affect his/her
eligibility.
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants. Unforeseen repeat applicants are applicants who have not
applied for assistance within the last twelve months and who have been regularly employed or
receiving support from a public benefit or private source who have unexpectedly become
unemployed through no fault of their own or whose income and/or benefits (e.g., through an
available resource) have ceased through no fault of their own. Such unforeseen repeat applicants
may be considered initial applicants for purposes of verification requirements and misspent
income if the administrator finds that imposing the general verification requirements and
misspent income rules imposed on repeat applicants would be unreasonable or inappropriate.
Overseer's responsibilities. In order to determine an applicant's eligibility for general
assistance, the overseer first must seek information and documentation from the applicant. Once
the applicant has presented the necessary information, the overseer is responsible for determining
eligibility. The overseer will seek verification necessary to determine eligibility. In order to
determine eligibility, the overseer may contact sources other than the applicant for verification
only with the specific knowledge and consent of the applicant, except that the overseer may
examine public records without the applicant's knowledge and consent.
Appropriate sources, which the overseers may contact, include, but are not limited to:
? DHHS and any other
department/agency of the state or
non-profit organizations
? financial institutions
? creditors
? utility companies
? employers
? landlords
? physicians
? persons with whom the
applicant/recipient is a cohabitant
? legally and non-legally liable
relatives
Assistance will be denied or terminated if the applicant is unwilling to supply the overseer with
necessary information, documentation, or permission to make collateral contacts, or if the
overseer cannot determine that eligibility exists based on information supplied by the applicant
or others.
Redetermination of eligibility. The overseer may redetermine a person's eligibility at any time
during the period that person is receiving assistance if the overseer is informed of any change in
the recipient's circumstances that may affect the amount of assistance to which the recipient is
entitled or that may make the recipient ineligible, provided that once a determination of
eligibility has been made for a specific time period, a reduction in assistance for that time period
may not be made without prior written notice to the recipient with the reasons for the action and
an opportunity for the recipient to receive a fair hearing upon the proposed change.
51
Penalty for Refusing to Release Information. Any person governed by 22 M.R.S.A. § 4314
who refuses to provide necessary information to the administrator after it has been requested
must state in writing the reasons for the refusal within 3 days of receiving the request. Any such
person who refuses to provide the information, without just cause, commits a civil violation and
may be subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $100 which may be adjudged in any
court of competent jurisdiction. Any person who willfully renders false information to the
administrator is guilty of a Class E crime (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4314(5), 4314(6), 4315).
Section 6.4—Fraud
It is unlawful for a person to make knowingly and willfully a false representation of a material
fact to the administrator in order to receive general assistance or cause someone else to receive
general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315). False representation shall consist of any individual
knowingly and willfully:
a) making a false statement to the general assistance administrator, either orally or in
writing, in order to obtain assistance to which the applicant or the applicant’s
household is not entitled;
b) concealing information from the general assistance administrator in order to
obtain assistance to which the applicant or applicant’s household is not entitled; or
c) using general assistance benefits for a purpose other than that for which they were
intended.
No person may be denied assistance solely for making a false representation prior to being given
an opportunity for a fair hearing.
Period of Ineligibility. When the general assistance administrator finds that a person has
knowingly and willfully misrepresented material facts for the purpose of making himself or
herself eligible for general assistance, the administrator shall notify that applicant in writing that
he or she has been disqualified from receiving assistance for 120 days. For the purpose of this
section, a material misrepresentation is a false statement about eligibility factor in the absence of
which some or all of the assistance would not be or would not have been granted.
The notification of ineligibility issued by the administrator shall inform the applicant of his or
her right to appeal the administrator’s decision to the fair hearing authority (FHA) within 5
working days of receipt. The period of ineligibility shall commence on the day following the end
of the period covered by the grant of assistance fraudulently received or upon the date of
notification of ineligibility, whichever is later.
Right to a Fair Hearing. Any applicant who is denied assistance for making a false
representation will be afforded the opportunity to appeal the decision to the fair hearing authority
(FHA) in accordance with Article VII of this ordinance. No recipient shall have his or her
assistance reduced or revoked during the period of eligibility before being notified and given the
opportunity to appeal the decision. Any person who is dissatisfied with the decision of the FHA
52
may appeal that decision to the Superior Court pursuant to Rule 80-B of the Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)).
Reimbursement. If a recipient does not appeal the decision or if the fair hearing authority
determines that a recipient did make a false representation, the recipient will be required to
reimburse the municipality for any assistance received to which he/she was not entitled.
Dependents. In no event will the ineligibility of a person under this section serve to disqualify
any eligible dependent in that household (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)). In the event one or more
members of a household are disqualified and assistance is requested for the remaining
dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be calculated by dividing the maximum level
of assistance available to the entire household by the total number of household members.
Section 6.5—Period of Eligibility
The administrator will grant assistance to all eligible persons for a period that is sufficient to
meet their need but in no event may a grant of assistance cover a period in excess of one month
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4309). Upon receiving a completed and signed application the administrator will
determine the applicant’s eligibility on the basis of a 30-day prospective analysis.
When an applicant submits an incomplete or unsigned application, due to the 24-hour decision
requirement placed on the GA administrator, the GA administrator shall render a notice of
“ineligibility” and advise the applicant that he or she has a right to reapply as soon as he or she
has the necessary information and/or as soon as is practicable for the applicant.
Although eligibility is determined on a 30-day basis, for reasons of administrative efficiency the
administrator may elect to disburse an applicant’s assistance for shorter periods of time, such as
weekly, throughout the 30-day period of eligibility. When the administrator elects to disburse
general assistance for a period of time less than 30 days, subsequent grants of assistance during
that 30-day period may be issued pursuant to the initial determination of need unless the
applicant’s financial situation changes substantially enough to warrant a redetermination of
eligibility.
Section 6.6—Determination of Need
The period of time used to calculate need will be the next 30-day period from the date of
application (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)). The administrator will calculate applicants’ expenses
according to the actual expense of the basic necessity or the maximum levels for the specific
necessities allowed in section 6.8, whichever is less. The sum of these expenses, as calculated for
a prospective 30-day period, is the applicant’s 30-day need. Applicants will not be considered
eligible if their income and other resources exceed this calculation except in an emergency (22
M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)) (see section 4.9 of this ordinance).
Applicants will also not be considered in need of general assistance if their income, property,
credit, assets or other resources available to provide basic necessities for their household are
greater than the applicable overall maximum level of assistance set forth in the beginning of
section 6.8 (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(10), 4305(3-B)). The difference between the applicant’s
53
income and the overall maximum levels of assistance established by this ordinance is the
applicant’s deficit.
Once an applicant’s deficit has been determined, the specific maximum levels of assistance for
each basic necessity (see Appendixes A-H of this ordinance) shall be used by the administrator to
guide the distribution of assistance for which the applicant is eligible. The specific maximum
levels of assistance for each basic necessity are intended to be reasonable and sufficient to help
recipients maintain a standard of health and decency (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(3-A)).
Income for Basic Necessities. Applicants are required to use their income for basic necessities.
Except for initial applicants, no applicant is eligible to receive assistance to replace income that
was spent within the 30-day period prior to an application for assistance on goods and services
that are not basic necessities. All income spent on goods and services that are not basic
necessities will be considered available to the applicant and combined with the applicant’s
prospective 30-day income for the purposes of computing eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315-A).
Applicants who have sufficient income to provide their basic necessities but who use that income
to purchase goods or services which are not basic necessities will not be considered eligible for
assistance. Persons who exhaust their income on basic necessities and who still need assistance
with other basic necessities will be eligible, provided that their income does not exceed the
overall maximum level of assistance.
Use-of-Income Requirements. The administrator may require that anyone applying for general
assistance provide documentation of his or her use of income. This documentation can take the
form of cancelled checks and/or receipts which demonstrate that the applicant has exhausted all
household income received over the last 30-day period. Except as is deemed appropriate by the
GA administrator for “unforeseen” repeat applicants (See Section 6.3 of this ordinance), repeat
applicants may be required to verify that expenditure of income was for basic necessities.
Income expended that cannot be verified will generally be considered available and in such case
will be added to the 30-day prospective income.
Allowable expenditures include reasonable shelter costs (rent/mortgage); the cost of heating fuel,
electricity, and food up to the ordinance maximums; telephone costs at the base rate if the
household needs a telephone for medical reasons, the cost of nonelective medical services as
recommended by a physician which are not otherwise covered by medical entitlement, Hospital
Free Care or insurance; the reasonable cost of essential clothing and non-prescription drugs, and
the costs of any other commodity or service determined essential by the administrator.
Items not considered to be basic necessities and thus will not be allowed in the budget
computation include:
? Internet services
? Cable or satellite television
? Cellular phones
? Cigarettes/alcohol
? Gifts purchased
? Pet care costs
? Costs of trips or vacations
? Paid court fines
? Repayments of unsecured loans
? Legal fees
? Late fees
? Credit card debt.
54
The municipality reserves the right to apply specific use-of-income requirements to any
applicant, other than an initial applicant, who fails to use his or her income for basic necessities
or fails to reasonably document his or her use of income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315-A). Those
additional requirements will be applied in the following manner:
1) The administrator may require the applicant to use some or all of his or her income, at the
time it becomes available, toward specific basic necessities. The administrator may
prioritize such required expenditures so that most or all of the applicant’s income is
applied to housing (i.e., rent/mortgage), energy (i.e., heating fuel, electricity), or other
specified basic necessities;
2) The administrator will notify applicants in writing of the specific use-of-income
requirements placed on them;
3) If upon subsequent application it cannot be determined how the applicant’s income was
spent, or it is determined that some or all of the applicant’s income was not spent as
directed and was also not spent on basic necessities, the applicant will not be eligible to
receive either regular or emergency general assistance to replace that income; and
4) If the applicant does not spend his or her income as directed, but can show with verifiable
documentation that all income was spent on basic necessities up to allowed amounts, the
applicant will remain eligible to the extent of the applicant’s eligibility and need.
Calculation of Income and Expenses. When determining eligibility, the administrator will
subtract the applicant’s net income from the overall maximum level of assistance found at the
beginning of section 6.8. If income is greater than the overall maximum level of assistance, the
applicant will not be eligible except in an emergency (see section 4.9). If income is less than the
overall maximum level of assistance, the applicant has a deficit.
The municipality will provide assistance in an amount up to the deficit to the extent the applicant
also has an unmet need and is in need of basic necessities. The municipality will not grant
assistance in excess of the maximum amounts allowed in section 6.8 of this ordinance for
specific basic necessities except in an emergency or when the administrator elects to consolidate
the applicant’s deficit, as provided immediately below.
Consolidation of Deficit. As a general rule and to the extent of their deficit, applicants will be
eligible for assistance for any basic necessity up to, but not exceeding, the maximum amount
allowed for that necessity in this ordinance or the actual 30-day cost of the necessity, whichever
is less. Under certain circumstances, however, and in accordance with the following conditions,
the administrator may consolidate the applicant’s deficit and apply it toward a basic necessity in
an amount greater than the ordinance maximum for that necessity.
1) The practice of consolidating the deficit and applying it toward a basic necessity in
amounts greater than the ordinance maximum shall be the exception rather than the rule;
2) The total general assistance grant cannot exceed the total deficit unless the applicant is in
an emergency situation; and
3) The need for the application of the recipient’s consolidated deficit toward a basic
necessity was not created by the recipient misspending his or her income or resources in
violation of the use-of-income requirements of this ordinance.
55
Section 6.7—Income
Income Standards. Applicants whose income exceeds the overall maximum level of assistance
provided in section 6.8 shall not be eligible for general assistance except in an emergency. The
administrator will conduct an individual factual inquiry into the applicant’s income and expenses
each time an applicant applies.
Calculation of Income. To determine whether applicants are in need, the administrator will
calculate the income they will receive during the next 30-day period commencing on the date of
application, and identify any assets or resources that would alleviate their need. For all applicants
other than initial applicants, the administrator will also consider as available income any income
that was not spent during the previous 30-day period on basic necessities, as well as any income
that was spent on basic necessities in unreasonable excess of the ordinance maximums for
specific basic necessities. If a household’s income exceeds the amount of the household’s need
for basic necessities, up to the maximum levels contained in section 6.8, applicants will not be
considered in need.
Exceptions will be made in emergency situations, which may necessitate that the maximum
levels be exceeded (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308) (see section 4.9 of this ordinance). To calculate
weekly income and expenses, the administrator will use actual income received or actual
anticipated income.
Types of Income. Income that will be considered in determining an applicant’s need includes:
a) Earned income. Income in cash or in kind earned by the applicant through wages,
salary, commissions, or profit, whether self-employed or as an employee, is considered
earned income. If a person is self-employed, total income will be computed by
subtracting reasonable and actual business expenses from gross income. When income
consists of wages, the amount computed will be the income available after taxes, social
security and other payroll deductions required by state, federal, and local law. Rental
income and profit from produce that is sold is considered earned income. Income that is
held in trust and unavailable to the applicant or the applicant’s dependents will not be
considered as earned income.
Note: Actual work-related expenses such as union dues, transportation to and from work,
special equipment or work clothes, and child care costs will be deducted from an
applicant’s income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)).
b) Income from Other Assistance or Social Services Programs. State/federal categorical
assistance benefits, SSI payments, Social Security payments, VA benefits, unemployment
insurance benefits, and payments from other government sources will be considered as
income, unless expressly prohibited by federal law or regulation. Federal law prohibits
Food Stamps and fuel assistance payments made by the Home Energy Assistance
Program (HEAP and EPIC) from being considered income. The value of the food stamps
or fuel assistance will not be used to reduce the amount of general assistance the
applicant is eligible to receive. Although applicants may have only a limited or reduced
56
need for general assistance for heating fuel or electricity if a recently received
HEAP/ECIP benefit has sufficiently credited their account or otherwise prevented the
fuel-related costs for the prospective 30-day period.
The administrator’s obligation is to always compute the heating needs of an applicant
who has received HEAP or ECIP as if that applicant paid for his or her total fuel costs.
Accordingly, in such cases, the administrator will budget for the household’s heating
energy needs according to actual usage, up to the ordinance maximums, but the
administrator may, with written notice to the applicant, hold in reserve the heating energy
portion of the applicant’s deficit until such a time during the period of eligibility that the
applicant has a demonstrable need for the disbursement of heating energy assistance; that
is, the applicant’s fuel tank can accept a minimum fuel delivery or the applicant no longer
has a positive credit balance with his or her utility company. The municipality is not
obligated to divert any recipient’s heating energy allowance toward non-heating purposes
solely on the basis of the recipient’s receipt of HEAP/ECIP.
Other programs whose income cannot be counted for purposes of GA eligibility include:
? Family Development Accounts (22 M.R.S. § 3762)
? Americorp VISTA program benefits (42 USCS § 5044 (f))
? Property tax rebates issued under the Maine Property Tax Fairness Credit
program, only so long as the money is spent on basic necessities. (22 M.R.S.A. §
4301(7))
c) Court-Ordered Support Payments. Alimony and child support payments will be
considered income only if actually received by the applicant. The general assistance
administrator will refer cases where support payments are not actually received to the
State Department of Health and Human Services’ Child Support Enforcement Unit. In
order to be eligible for future GA, applicants being referred to DHHS for such
enforcement services shall be required to follow-through with such services. Because
child support payments are considered a resource, applicants must make a good faith
effort to secure such payments.
d) Income from Other Sources. Payments from pensions and trust funds will be
considered income. Payments from boarders or lodgers will be considered income as will
cash or in-kind contributions provided to the household from any other source, including
relatives (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)).
e) Earnings of a Son or Daughter. Earned income received by sons and daughters below
the age of 18 who are full-time students and who are not working full-time will not be
considered income. The unearned income of a minor in the household will be considered
available to the household.
f) Income from Household Members. Income from household members will be
considered available to the applicant, whether or not the household member is legally
obligated for the support of the applicant, if the household members pool or share their
57
income and expenses as a family or intermingle their funds so as to provide support to
one another.
g) The Pooling or Non-Pooling of Income. When two or more individuals share the same
dwelling unit but not all members of the household are applying for general assistance,
the administrator shall make a finding under a rebuttable presumption that the entire
household is pooling income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(12-A)).
One or more applicants for assistance can successfully rebut the presumption that all
household income is being pooled by providing the administrator with verifiable
documentation affirmatively demonstrating a pattern of non-pooling for the duration of
the shared living arrangement. Such documentation would include evidence of the entire
household expenses as well as bank statements, cancelled checks, receipts, landlord
statements or other vendor accounts clearly supporting a claim that the applicant has been
and is presently solely and entirely responsible for his or her pro-rata share of household
costs.
If the applicant is unable to successfully rebut the municipality’s presumption that all
household income is being pooled, eligibility of the entire household will be determined
based on total household income. If the applicant successfully rebuts the municipality’s
presumption that all household income is being pooled, the applicant’s eligibility will be
determined on the basis of his or her income and his or her pro-rata share of actual
household expenses.
h) Lump Sum Income. A lump sum payment received by any GA applicant or recipient
prior or subsequent to the date of application for general assistance will be considered as
income available to the household. However, verified required payments (i.e., any third
party payment which is required as a condition of receiving the lump sum payment, or
any payments of bills earmarked for the purpose for which the lump sum payment was
made) and any amount of the lump sum payment which the applicant can document was
spent on basic necessities, as described below, will not be considered available income.
Where a household receives a lump sum payment at any time prior or subsequent to the
date of application for general assistance, the administrator will assess the need for
prorating an applicant’s eligibility for general assistance according to the following
criteria (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7), (8-A)):
1) identify the date the lump sum payment was received;
2) subtract from the lump sum payment all required payments;
3) subtract from the lump sum any amount the applicant can demonstrate was spent on
basic necessities, including all basic necessities as defined by the general assistance
program such as: reasonable payment of funeral or burial expenses for a family
member; any reasonable travel costs related to the illness or death of a family
member; repair or replacement of essentials lost due to fire, flood or other natural
disaster; repair or purchase of a motor vehicle essential for employment, education,
58
training or other day-to-day living necessities. Repayments of loans or credit, the
proceeds of which can be verified as having been spent on basic necessities; and
payment of bills earmarked for the purpose for which the lump sum is paid must
also be subtracted. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7), (8-A));
4) add to the remainder all income received by the household between the date
of receipt of the lump sum payment and the date of application for general
assistance; and
5) divide the sum created in subsection (4) by the verified actual monthly
amounts for all of the household's basic necessities. 22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(3-
B)
This dividend represents the period of proration determined by the administrator to
commence on the date of receipt of the lump sum payment. The prorated sum for
each month must be considered available to the household for 12 months from the
date of application or during the period of proration, whichever is less.
The household of an initial applicant that is otherwise eligible for emergency
assistance may not be denied emergency assistance to meet an immediate need
solely on the basis of the proration of a lump sum payment. (22 MRSA § 4308)
Section 6.8—Basic Necessities; Maximum Levels of Assistance
Overall Maximum Levels of Assistance. Notwithstanding any of the maximum levels of
assistance for specific basic necessities listed in Appendices B-H of this ordinance, an
applicant’s eligibility for general assistance will be first determined by subtracting his or her
income from the overall maximum level of assistance designated in Appendix A for the
applicable household size (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305 (3-B)). The difference yielded by this
calculation shall be the applicant’s deficit.
Applicants will be eligible for general assistance up to the calculated deficit to the extent the
applicant is unable to otherwise provide the basic necessities essential to maintain themselves or
their families. Applicants with no deficit shall be found ineligible for general assistance unless
they are in an emergency, in which case eligibility for emergency general assistance will be
determined according to section 4.9 of this ordinance.
Maximum Levels of Assistance for Specific Basic Necessities. The municipality will grant
assistance to eligible applicants for basic necessities according to the maximum levels for
specific types of assistance set forth below. The administrator, in consultation with the
applicant, may apply the amount of the applicant’s deficit toward assistance with any one or
combination of necessities not to exceed the total deficit. These maximum levels will be strictly
adhered to unless the administrator determines that there are exceptional circumstances and an
emergency is shown to exist, in which case these absolute levels will be waived in order to meet
immediate needs. In all cases either the actual expenses the applicant incurs for basic necessities
or the maximum amount allowed in each category, whichever is less, will be used in determining
need.
59
In roommate situations, the applicant’s need for common living expenses for rent, fuel,
electricity, etc., will be presumed to be reduced by an amount equal to the other household
members’ proportionate fair share of the common living expenses. No applicant will be allowed
to claim a need for any expense which has been or will be paid by another person. In addition, as
a general rule the municipality will not provide a benefit toward a basic need by paying a bill that
is issued to a person not living with the applicant’s household or that has otherwise been incurred
by a person who has not been found eligible to receive assistance.
Temporary exceptions to this general rule may be made by the administrator in the following
circumstances: (1) a recent, unplanned separation has occurred in the household resulting in the
sustained or permanent absence of a former household member in whose name the bill was
customarily issued; (2) the applicant and members of the applicant’s household were or will be
the sole recipients of the commodities or services covered by any bill to be paid or partially paid
with general assistance; and (3) the applicant will make a good faith effort to direct the vendor to
issue future bills in the name of the applicant or other responsible person residing in the
household.
A) Food. The administrator will provide food assistance to eligible persons up to the allowed
maximum amounts designated by the U.S.D.A. Thrifty Food Plan for the appropriate
household size.
For this purpose, the municipality hereby incorporates by reference the U.S.D.A. Thrifty
Food Plan, as distributed by the Maine Department of Health and Human Services on or
about October of each year. See Appendix B of this ordinance for the current year’s food
maximums.
In determining need for food the administrator will not consider the value of the food stamps
an applicant receives as income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.7(A); 7 U.S.C. §2017(b)). The
municipality will authorize vouchers to be used solely for approved food products.
The administrator will exceed the maximums when necessary for households having
members with special dietary needs. The administrator may require a doctor’s statement
verifying there is a special dietary need requiring an expenditure for food that is greater than
the ordinance maximums.
B) Housing. The administrator will provide assistance with rent or mortgage payments that are
reasonable and/or within the allowed maximum levels. See Appendix C of this ordinance for
the current year’s housing maximums. It is the applicant’s responsibility to find suitable
housing, although the administrator may help the applicant find housing when appropriate.
The administrator will inform the applicant of the allowed housing maximums to assist the
applicant in his or her search for housing. The allowed maximum for any applicant will be
the categorical housing maximum representing the minimum dwelling unit space necessary
to adequately shelter the applicant household. Applicants requesting assistance for housing
that contains more bedrooms than are necessary for the number of household members will
be provided assistance according to the maximum level for the number of rooms actually
needed.
60
Rental Payments to Relatives. The municipality may elect to not issue any rental payment
to an applicant’s relatives unless the rental relationship has existed for at least three months
and the applicant’s relative(s) rely on the rental payment for their basic needs. For the
purpose of this section, a “relative” is defined as the applicant’s parents, grandparents,
children, grandchildren, siblings, parent’s siblings, or any of those relative’s children (22
M.R.S.A. § 4319(2)).
Rental Payments to Non-Relatives. When applicants are living in private homes with the
owner or sharing dwelling units with people who are not pooling income or who are not
legally liable relatives, the amount allowed as the applicant’s shelter expense will be the
applicant’s pro rata share of the actual, total shelter cost, up to the ordinance maximum (22
M.R.S.A. § 4301(6)).
Any housing assistance issued to a recipient in such a circumstance will be issued, whenever
reasonably possible, to the landlord or property owner with the most superior interest in the
property; i.e., to a landlord before a tenant, or to a mortgagee before a mortgagor.
When the municipality issues in aggregate more than $600 in rental payments to any landlord
in any calendar year, a 1099 form declaring the total amount of rental payments issued during
the calendar year will be forwarded to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) pursuant to IRS
regulation (see section 6041(a) of Internal Revenue Code).
Any landlord wishing to regularly receive rental payments from the municipality on behalf of
applicants renting rooms from the landlord’s own residence must, at a minimum, make a
good faith effort to obtain a lodging license from the Department of Health and Human
Services, Division of Health Engineering, pursuant to 10-144A Code of Maine Regulations,
Chapter 201, as a condition of that landlord receiving future general assistance payments on
behalf of his or her tenants.
Mortgage Payments. In the case of a request for assistance with a mortgage payment, the
general assistance administrator will make an individual factual determination of whether the
applicant has an immediate need for such aid. In making this determination, the
administrator will consider the extent and liquidity of the applicant’s proprietary interest in
the housing. Factors to consider in making this determination include:
(1) the marketability of the shelter’s equity;
(2) the amount of equity;
(3) the availability of the equity interest in the shelter to provide the applicant an
opportunity to secure a short-term loan in order to meet immediate needs;
(4) the extent to which liquidation may aid the applicant’s financial rehabilitation;
(5) a comparison between the amount of mortgage obligations and the anticipated
rental charges the applicant would be responsible for if he/she were to be
dislocated to rental housing;
61
(6) the imminence of the applicant’s dislocation from owned housing because of his
or her inability to meet the mortgage payments;
(7) the likelihood that the provision of housing assistance will prevent such
dislocation; and
(8) the applicant’s age, health, and social situation.
These factors shall be considered when determining whether the equity in the shelter is an
available asset which may be substituted for the assistance the municipality would otherwise
be required to provide.
The administrator shall consider issuing a benefit in response to the applicant’s request for
mortgage assistance to the extent the applicant is otherwise eligible for general assistance if
after reviewing the above criteria the administrator determines that:
(1) the monthly mortgage obligation is in accordance with the maximum levels of
assistance available for housing appropriate to the applicant’s household size;
(2) there is no capacity in the accumulated equity in the property, when considered in
the context of the applicant’s borrowing capacity with the mortgagee or the
general lending community, to suspend the mortgage obligation temporarily or
reamortize the mortgage in such a way as to suspend or reduce the mortgage
obligation; and
(3) the failure to provide a mortgage payment in a timely manner could jeopardize the
applicant’s continued right of possession of the property.
If a mortgage payment is necessary, the administrator will pay the actual amount due, up to
the amount allowed according to the maximum levels listed below. After an initial
application, assistance with such payments will be given only after the applicant has made all
reasonable efforts to borrow against the equity of his or her home. If there is not sufficient
equity in the home with which to secure a loan, and if the monthly mortgage payments are
not realistically in line with the rental rates for similar housing in the area that could meet the
applicant’s needs, the administrator will inform the applicant that he/she is responsible for
finding alternative housing within his or her ability to pay and will be obligated to make all
reasonable efforts to secure such housing.
Liens. The municipality may place a lien on the property in order to recover its costs of
granting assistance with mortgage payments. In addition, a municipality may claim a lien
against the owner of real estate for the amount of money spent by it to make capital
improvements to the real estate (22 M.R.S.A. § 4320). No lien may be enforced against a
recipient except upon his or her death or the transfer of the property. Further, no lien may be
enforced against a person who is currently receiving any form of public assistance, or who
would again become eligible for general assistance if the lien were enforced.
If the municipality determines that it is appropriate to place a lien on a person’s property to
recover its costs of providing general assistance for a mortgage payment or capital
improvement it must file a notice of the lien with the county registry of deeds where the
property is located within 30 days of making the mortgage payment. That filing shall secure
62
the municipality’s or the state’s interest in an amount equal to the sum of that mortgage or
capital improvement payment and all subsequent mortgage or capital improvement payments
made on behalf of the same eligible person, plus interest and costs.
Not less than 10 days prior to filing the lien in the registry, the municipal officers must send
notice to the owner of the real estate, the general assistance recipient, and any record holder
of the mortgage by certified mail, return receipt requested, that a lien on the property is going
to be filed with the registry. This notice must clearly inform the recipient of the limitations
upon enforcement plus the name, title, address and telephone number of the person who
granted the assistance. The municipal officers must also give written notice to the recipient
each time the amount secured by the lien is increased because of an additional mortgage
payment. This notice must include the same information that appeared on the original intentto-
file notice sent to the recipient.
The municipality may charge interest on the amount of money secured by the lien. The
municipal officers will establish the interest rate not to exceed the maximum rate of interest
allowed by the State Treasurer to be charged against delinquent taxes. The interest will
accrue from the date the lien is filed.
Property Taxes. In the event an applicant requests assistance with his or her property taxes,
the administrator will inform the applicant that there are two procedures on the local level to
request that relief: the poverty abatement process (36 M.S.R.A. § 841(2)) and General
Assistance. If the applicant chooses to seek property tax assistance through General
Assistance, or if the applicant is denied a poverty tax abatement, the administrator may
consider using general assistance to meet this need only if:
a) the property tax in question is for the applicant’s place of residence;
b) there is a tax lien on the property which is due to mature within 60 days of the date of
application;
c) as a matter of municipal policy or practice, or on the basis of information obtained
from the applicant’s mortgagee, if any, it is reasonably certain that a tax lien
foreclosure will result in subsequent eviction from the residential property; and
d) the applicant, with sufficient notice, applies for property tax relief through the Maine
Property Tax Fairness Credit program, when available.
Housing Maximums. The maximum levels of housing assistance contained in this
ordinance have been derived either from a locally accomplished fair market rental survey or
the fair market rental values developed by the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD). If the maximum levels of housing are derived from the HUD
values made effective as of every October 1, and adjusted to disregard the current and
averaged utility allowances as developed by the Maine State Housing Authority, those levels
are hereby incorporated by reference. See Appendix C of this ordinance for the current year’s
housing maximums.
If and when the maximum levels of housing contained in this ordinance are derived from a
locally developed fair market rental survey, a record of that survey will be submitted to the
63
DHHS, General Assistance Unit, and the maximum levels of housing assistance will be
incorporated into this ordinance pursuant to the ordinance adoption and amendment
procedures found at 22 M.R.S.A. § 4305.
C) Utilities. Expenses for lights, cooking, and hot water will be budgeted separately if they are
not included in the rent. Applicants are responsible for making arrangements with the utility
company regarding service, including entering into a special payment arrangement if
necessary.
Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis of their most recent bill. The
municipality is not obligated to pay back bills or utility security deposits. Exceptions may be
made in emergency situations pursuant to section 4.9.
Disconnection of utility service will not be considered an emergency in all cases. The
administrator will make an individual, factual analysis to determine if the termination of
utility service constitutes an emergency. The administrator will consider the household
composition, the time of year, the age and health of the household members, and other
appropriate factors in reaching a decision. Applicants who had sufficient income, money,
assets or other resources to pay their utility bill when it was received, but who spent all or
part of their income on items which were not basic necessities, will not be eligible to receive
general assistance to replace those funds.
Applicants have the burden of providing evidence of their income and use of income for the
applicable time period (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)) (see section 4.9 and 6.3). The administrator
will notify applicants in writing that they must give the administrator prompt notice if their
utility service is to be terminated or if their fuel supply is low. It is the applicant’s
responsibility to attempt to make arrangements with the utility company to maintain their
service and to notify the administrator if assistance is needed with a utility bill prior to
service being terminated.
Electricity Maximums for Households Without Electric Hot Water. See Appendix D of
this ordinance for the current year’s electricity maximums.
Electricity Maximums for Households that Use Electrically Heated Hot Water. See
Appendix D of this ordinance for the current year’s electricity maximums.
Non-Electric Utilities. The allowed amount for water and sewer utility service will be
budgeted at a 30-day reasonable usage rate.
D) Fuel. Expenses for home heating will be budgeted according to the actual need for fuel
during the heating season (September through May) provided such expenses are reasonable,
and at other times during the year when the administrator determines the request for fuel
assistance is reasonable and appropriate.
Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis of their most recent bill. The
municipality is not responsible for back bills except in an emergency as provided in section
64
4.9. Applicants are responsible for monitoring their fuel supply and requesting assistance
prior to depleting their fuel supply. When applicants who have been informed of this
responsibility run out of fuel nonetheless, and can show no just cause for failing to give the
administrator timely notice of their need for fuel, the administrator shall find that the
emergency was not beyond the applicants’ control, and process the emergency request
accordingly, pursuant to section 4.9 of this ordinance.
See Appendix E of this ordinance for the current year’s fuel maximums.
E) Personal Care and Household Supplies. Expenses for ordinary personal and household
supplies will be budgeted and allowed according to the applicant’s actual need for these
items. Personal and household supplies include: hand soap, toothpaste, shampoo, shaving
cream, deodorant, dish detergent, laundry supplies and costs, household cleaning supplies,
razors, paper products such as toilet paper, tissues, paper towels, garbage/trash bags light
bulbs and supplies for children under 5 years of age. See Appendix F of this ordinance for
the current year’s personal care and household supplies maximums.
F) Other Basic Necessities. Expenses falling under this section will be granted when they are
deemed essential to an applicant’s or recipient’s health and safety by the general assistance
administrator and, in some cases, upon verification by a physician. Assistance will be
granted only when these necessities cannot be obtained through the utilization of available
resources.
1) Clothing. The municipality may assist a household with the purchase of adequate
clothing. Before assistance will be granted for clothing, the general assistance
administrator must be satisfied that the applicant has utilized all available resources to
secure the necessary clothing. In some circumstances, clothing will be a postponable
item. Exceptions to this would be, for example, if fire, flood or unusually cold weather
makes extra clothing an immediate necessity, special clothing is necessary for the
applicant’s employment, or a household member is without adequate clothing.
2) Medical. The municipality will pay for essential medical expenses, other than hospital
bills (see below), provided that the municipality is notified and approves the expenses
and services prior to their being made or delivered. Medical expenses include
prescriptions, devices, treatments, or services that are determined to be ‘medically
necessary’ by a licensed physician. The municipality will grant assistance for medical
services only when assistance cannot be obtained from any other source and the
applicant would not be able to receive necessary medical care without the
municipality’s assistance. The applicant is required to utilize any resource, including
any federal or state program, that will diminish his or her need to seek general
assistance for medical expenses. The municipality will grant assistance for nonemergency
medical services only if a physician verifies that the services are essential.
Provided there is no cost to the applicant, the administrator may require a second
medical opinion from a physician designated by the municipality to verify the necessity
of the services.
65
Generally, the municipality will issue general assistance at the established Medicaid
rates for all medical services, prescriptions, or other medical commodities. Before
authorizing general assistance for any medical expenses, the administrator will inform
the pharmacy or medical service provider of the municipality’s intention to pay for the
medical service at the Medicaid rate, and ask to be billed accordingly.
Ordinary medical supplies/non-prescription drugs will be budgeted at the actual amount
when the applicant can demonstrate a need for such items. Allowable supplies include
bandages, aspirin, cough syrup, and other generic brand, non-prescription medicines.
In addition, the basic monthly rate for telephone service will be budgeted when a
telephone is essential to the health and safety of the household. In order for telephone
service to be considered an allowable expense the applicant must provide a written
statement from a physician certifying that the telephone is essential.
3) Hospital Bills. In the event of an emergency admission to the hospital, the hospital
must notify the administrator within 5 business days of the admission. Notification
must be by telephone, confirmed by certified mail, or by certified mail only. If a
hospital fails to give timely notice to the administrator, the municipality will have no
obligation to pay the bill.
Any person who cannot pay his or her hospital bill must apply to the hospital for
consideration under the Hospital’s Free Care Program as provided in Title 22 M.R.S.A.
§ 1716. Anyone who is not eligible for the hospital’s free care program may apply for
general assistance. Applicants must apply for assistance within 30 days of being
discharged from the hospital and provide a notice from the hospital certifying that they
re not eligible for the hospital’s free care program.
Before the administrator will consider whether to allow a hospital bill as a necessary
expense, the applicant must enter into a reasonable payment arrangement with the
hospital. The payment arrangement will be based upon the Medicaid rate. In
determining an applicant’s eligibility, the municipality will budget the monthly
payment to the hospital the applicant has agreed to pay. The applicant’s need for
assistance with a hospital bill will be considered each time he/she applies by including
the amount of the bill in the applicant’s monthly budget, but the recipient will be
responsible for making any necessary payments to the hospital pursuant to the use-ofincome
requirements found at section 6.6 of this ordinance.
4) Dental. The municipality will pay for medically necessary dental services only. As is
the case with medical services generally, the municipality will issue general assistance
for dental services at the established Medicaid rates for those services, and before
authorizing the general assistance benefit for dental services, the administrator will
inform the dentist or dental surgeon of the municipality’s intention to pay at the
Medicaid rate. If full mouth extractions are necessary, the municipality will pay for
dentures provided the applicant has no other resources to pay for the dentures. The
applicant will be referred to a dental clinic in the area whenever possible. The
administrator will expect the applicant to bear a reasonable part of the cost for dental
66
services, including extractions and dentures, taking into account the applicant’s ability
to pay.
5) Eye Care. In order to be eligible to receive general assistance for eyeglasses, an
applicant must have his or her medical need certified by a person licensed to practice
optometry. The general assistance administrator will provide assistance for eyeglasses
to eligible persons only after the applicant has exhausted all other available resources
and generally only at the Medicaid rate.
6) Telephone Charge. A payment for basic telephone will only be allowed if a telephone
is necessary for medical reasons as verified by a physician. At the discretion of the GA
administrator, minimum/basic telephone services may be allowed for households with
children, for households where job search or job related reasons exist and/or for any
other reasons the administrator deems necessary.
7) Work-Related Expenses. In determining need, reasonable and actual work-related
expenses will be deducted from earned income. These expenses include childcare
costs, work clothes, supplies and transportation at the actual costs not to exceed the
ordinance maximum (see Appendix G for this year’s maximum mileage allotment). The
applicant is required to provide documentation substantiating the costs and that the
expenses were necessary.
8) Travel Expenses. In determining need, necessary travel which is not work-related will
be budgeted if the applicant can satisfy the administrator that the prospective need for
travel is necessary. For applicants in rural areas, weekly transportation to a
supermarket will be considered, as will any medically necessary travel. See Appendix
G for the current rate at which such necessary travel will be budgeted. This rate shall be
construed to subsidize all costs associated with automobile ownership and operation,
including gas/oil, tires, maintenance, insurance, financing, licensing/registration, excise
tax, etc.
9) Burials, Cremations. Under the circumstances and in accordance with the procedures
and limitations described below (see section 6.9), the municipality recognizes its
responsibility to pay for the burial or cremation of eligible persons. See Appendix H for
the current maximums.
10) Capital Improvements. The costs associated with capital improvements/repairs (e.g.,
heating/water/septic system repair) will generally not be budgeted as a basic necessity.
Exceptions can be made only when the capital improvement/repair has been preapproved
by the administrator as a necessary expense and the monthly cost of the
capital improvement/repair has been reduced as far as reasonably possible; for example,
by means of the applicant entering into an installment payment arrangement with the
contractor. The administrator may grant general assistance for capital improvements
when:
1) the failure to do so would place the applicant(s) in emergency circumstances;
2) there are no other resources available to effect the capital repair; and
67
3) there is no more cost-effective alternative available to the applicant or
municipality to alleviate an emergency situation.
In some cases, the entire immediate cost of the capital improvement can be mitigated
by the applicant entering into an installment payment arrangement with a contractor.
The municipality reserves the right to place a lien on any property pursuant to 22
M.R.S.A. § 4320 when general assistance has been used to effect a capital
improvement. The lien process shall be accomplished in the same manner as for
mortgage payments, as described in subsection (B) “Liens”, above.
Section 6.9—Burials; Cremations
Funeral Director Must Give Timely Notice. In order for the municipality to be liable for a
burial or cremation expense, the funeral director must notify the administrator prior to the burial
or cremation or by the end of three business days following the funeral director’ receipt of the
body, whichever is earlier (22 M.R.S.A. §4313(2)). This contact by the funeral director shall
begin the process of developing an application for burial/cremation assistance on behalf of the
deceased. It is the funeral director’s responsibility to make a good-faith effort to determine if the
family or any other persons are going to pay all or part of the burial expenses. If family
members or others are unable to pay the expenses, and the funeral director wants the
municipality to pay all or part of the expenses, the funeral director must make timely contact to
the municipal administrator. In addition, the funeral director may refer legally liable relatives to
the administrator so that a timely determination of financial capacity may be accomplished.
Application for Assistance Shall be Calculated on Behalf of the Deceased. For the purposes
of determining residency, calculating eligibility and issuing general assistance for burial or
cremation purposes, an application for assistance shall be completed by the administrator on
behalf of the deceased.
With regard to residency, the municipality of responsibility for burial expenses shall be the
municipality in which the eligible deceased person was a resident at the time of death as
residency is determined under section 4.10 of this ordinance.
Although legally liable relatives may be asked to provide information regarding their income,
assets, and basic living expenses, that information will not be construed as an application for
general assistance inasmuch as living persons are not eligible for burial assistance. To clarify
this point of law, although legally liable relatives have a financial responsibility to pay for the
burial or cremation of their relatives, that financial responsibility only exists to the extent the
legally liable relatives have a financial capacity to do so. Therefore, legally liable relatives who
are eligible for general assistance, by virtue of their eligibility, have no legal obligation to pay for
the burial or cremation of their relatives. For these reasons, all general assistance issued for
burial or cremation purposes shall be issued on behalf of, and in the name of, the deceased.
The Financial Responsibility of Certain Family Members. Grandparents, parents, children
and grandchildren of the deceased, who live in Maine or own property in Maine, are financially
responsible for the burial or cremation of the deceased to the extent those relatives, individually
or as a group, have a financial capacity to pay for the burial or cremation either in lump sum or
68
by means of a budgeted payment arrangement with the funeral home. Accordingly, at the
request of the administrator, all legally liable relatives must provide the municipal administrator
with any reasonably requested information regarding their income, assets, and basic living
expenses.
Consideration of the Financial Responsibility of Family Members. Generally, when the
administrator can make a finding that one or more of the deceased’s legally liable relatives have
an obvious and demonstrable financial capacity to pay for the burial or cremation, by lump sum
payment or by means of a reasonable payment arrangement, the municipality will not grant the
requested burial or cremation assistance. When the administrator is unable to make such a
finding, the following proration of familial responsibility will be implemented.
Proration of Familial Responsibility. A proration of familial financial responsibility will be
used when no legally liable relative possesses an obvious and demonstrable capacity to pay for
the burial or cremation, but one or more of the financially liable relatives is found to have a
financial capacity to make a partial financial contribution, or the administrator is unable to
determine the financial capacity of one or more of said relatives.
Under these circumstances, each legally liable relative is considered to be responsible for his or
her pro rata share of the total municipal contribution that would exist if no legally liable relatives
had a financial capacity to contribute. Furthermore, and as long as all other eligibility factors
have been satisfied, the municipality will provide as a burial or cremation benefit the aggregate
of all pro rata shares less the share of any legally liable relative who refuses to cooperate with the
administrator by providing information or documentation reasonably necessary to determine that
relative’s financial capacity, and less any share or part of a share attributable to a legally liable
relative who can financially contribute or partially contribute toward the burial or cremation to
the extent of that relative’s share.
Eight Days to Determine Eligibility. The administrator may take up to 8 days from the date of
contact by the funeral director to issue a written decision regarding the amount of the municipal
contribution toward the burial or cremation. The 8-day eligibility determination period from the
date of contact by the funeral director shall be used as necessary to make third-party collateral
contacts, verify the listing of legally liable family members and determine their respective
financial capacities to contribute to the burial or cremation, contact the personal representative of
the deceased’s estate, if any, and other related administrative tasks. The administrator shall not
use this 8-day period allowed by law to unreasonably delay the municipality’s decision.
The Municipal Obligation to Pay When Legally Liable Relatives or Others Can
Contribute. The figures provided in this section are the maximum benefits provided by the
municipality when no contributions toward the burial or cremation are available from any other
source. To the extent any legally liable relatives of the deceased have a financial capacity to pay
for the burial or cremation, that financial capacity shall be deducted from the maximum burial
costs allowed by this section. In addition, any other benefits or resources that are available, such
as Social Security burial benefits, veterans’ burial benefits, or contributions from other persons,
will be deducted from the maximum amount the municipality will pay, except there will be no
deduction from the municipal benefit level with respect to any contribution provided for the
69
purpose of publishing an obituary notice up to an aggregate contribution limit for this purpose of
$75 when a paid receipt demonstrating the purchase of an obituary notice is provided to the
administrator.
Burial Expenses. The administrator will respect the wishes of family members with regard to
whether the deceased is interred by means of burial or cremated. See Appendix H for the
maximum levels of assistance granted for the purpose of burials.
Cremation Expenses. In the absence of any objection by any family members of the deceased,
or when neither the administrator nor the funeral director can locate any family members, the
administrator may issue general assistance for cremation services. See Appendix H for the
maximum levels of assistance granted for the purpose of cremations.
Section 6.10—Notice of Decision
Written Decision. The administrator will give a written decision to each applicant after making
a determination of eligibility each time a person applies. The decision will be given to the
applicant within 24 hours of receiving a completed and signed application (22 M.R.S.A. §
4305(3)) (see Article IV, section 4.6).
When an applicant submits an incomplete or unsigned application, due to the 24-hour decision
requirement placed on the GA administrator, the GA administrator may decide to render a notice
of “ineligibility” and provide the applicant with another application to submit as soon as is
practicable for the applicant.
In order to ensure that applicants understand their rights, it is the responsibility of the general
assistance administrator to explain the applicants’ right to a fair hearing in the written notice of
decision.
Contents. After an application has been completed, applicants will be given written notice of
any decision concerning their eligibility for assistance. In addition to the contents of a written
decision listed in section 4.6 of this ordinance, the notice will state that applicants:
a) have the right to a fair hearing and the method by which they may obtain a fair hearing
and;
b) have the right to contact the DHHS if they believe the municipality has violated the law.
The decision will state the method for notifying the department.
Disbursement of General Assistance. Except when determined impractical by the
administrator, all general assistance will be provided in the form of a voucher or purchase order
payable to a vendor or through direct municipal payment to a provider of goods or services.
General assistance will not be issued in the form of a cash payment to an applicant unless there is
no alternative to making such a cash payment, in which case the administrator shall document
the circumstances for issuing general assistance in the form of cash (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(6)).
84
ARTICLE VII
The Fair Hearing
Section 7.1—Right to a Fair Hearing
Within 5 working days of receiving a written notice of denial, reduction or termination of
assistance, or within 10 working days after any other act or failure to act, the applicant or his or
her authorized representative has the right to request a fair hearing (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). The
right to review a decision of the general assistance administrator is a basic right of the applicant
to a full evidentiary hearing and is not limited solely to a review of the decision.
Section 7.2—Method of Obtaining a Fair Hearing
Upon receiving notification of the decision of the general assistance administrator, all claimants
will be informed of the method of obtaining a fair hearing. All complaints that are not clear
requests for a fair hearing will be answered by a personal interview or in writing by the general
assistance administrator. If the client is satisfied with the adjustment or explanation, the
administrator will make an entry in the case record and file any correspondence involved.
Written Request. To obtain a fair hearing, the claimant, or his or her authorized representative,
must make a written request within 5 working days of receiving the administrator’s decision to
grant, deny, reduce or terminate assistance, or within 10 working days after any other act or
failure to act. The administrator will make available a printed form for requesting a fair hearing
and will assist the claimant in completing it if necessary. On the printed form, the claimant will
give the following information:
a) the decision on which review is sought;
b) the reason(s) for the claimant’s dissatisfaction and why the claimant believes he/she is
eligible to receive assistance; and
c) the relief sought by the claimant.
The administrator cannot deny or dismiss a request for a hearing unless it has been withdrawn (in
writing) by the claimant.
Scheduling the Fair Hearing. Upon receipt of the completed written request the fair hearing
authority must meet and hold the hearing within 5 working days. The administrator will notify
the claimant in writing when and where the hearing will be held (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). In
addition to the date, time and place of the hearing, the notice of fair hearing sent to the claimant
shall include, at a minimum, the claimant’s rights to:
a) be his or her own spokesperson at the fair hearing, or be represented by legal counsel or
other spokesperson at the hearing, at the claimant’s own expense;
b) confront and cross-examine any witnesses presented at the hearing against the claimant;
and
c) present witnesses on his or her own behalf.
85
Arrangements for the date, time, and place of the hearing will take into consideration the
convenience of the claimant and hearing authority. The claimant will be given timely notice to
allow for preparation and will also be given adequate preliminary information about the hearing
procedure to allow for effective preparation of his or her case.
Section 7.3—The Fair Hearing Authority
The municipal officers will appoint a fair hearing authority (FHA) that will determine, based on
all the evidence presented at the fair hearing, whether the claimant(s) were eligible to receive
assistance at the time they applied for GA. The FHA is charged with the responsibility of
ensuring that general assistance is administered in accordance with the state law and local
ordinance.
The fair hearing authority may consist of the municipal officers, one or more persons appointed
by the municipal officers to act as the FHA , or, if designated, the board of appeals created under
30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691 (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). In determining the organization of the fair hearing
authority, the municipal officers will use the following criteria. The person(s) serving as FHA
must:
a) not have participated in the decision which is the subject of the appeal;
b) be impartial;
c) be sufficiently skilled in interviewing techniques to be able to obtain evidence and the
facts necessary to make a fair determination; and
d) be capable of evaluating all evidence fairly and realistically, explaining to the claimant
the laws and regulations under which the administrator operated, and interpreting to the
administrator any evidence of unsound, unclear, or inadequate policies, practices or
actions.
Section 7.4—Fair Hearing Procedure
When a claimant requesting a fair hearing is notified of the date, time, and place of the hearing in
writing, he/she will also be given adequate preliminary information about the hearing procedure
to allow for effective preparation of his or her case. The claimant shall be permitted to review
his or her file prior to the hearing. At a minimum, the claimant will be told the following
information, which will govern all fair hearings. All fair hearings will:
a) be conducted privately, and will be open only to the claimant, witnesses, legal counsel, or
others whom the claimant wants present, and the general assistance administrator, his or
her agents, counsel and witnesses;
b) be opened with a presentation of the issue by the fair hearing authority;
c) be conducted informally, without technical rules of evidence, but subject to the
requirements of due process;
d) allow the claimant and the administrator the option to present their positions for
themselves or with the aid of others, including legal counsel;
86
e) give all participants an opportunity to present oral or written testimony or documentary
evidence, offer rebuttal; question witnesses presented at the hearing; and examine all
evidence presented at the hearing;
f) result in a decision, based exclusively on evidence or testimony presented at the hearing;
and
g) be tape recorded, and result in a written decision that is given to the claimant and filed with
evidence introduced at the hearing. The fair hearing authority will allow the claimant to
establish all pertinent facts and circumstances, and to advance any arguments without
undue interference. Information that the claimant does not have an opportunity to hear or
see will not be used in the fair hearing decision or made part of the hearing record. Any
material reviewed by the fair hearing authority must be made available to the claimant or
his or her representative. The claimant will be responsible for preparing a written transcript
if he/she wishes to pursue court action.
The fair hearing authority shall admit all evidence if it is the kind of evidence upon which
reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322).
Claimant’s Failure to Appear. In the event the claimant fails to appear, the FHA will send a
written notice to the claimant that the GA administrator’s decision was not altered due to the
claimant’s failure to appear. Furthermore, the notice shall indicate that the claimant has 5
working days from receipt of the notice to submit to the GA administrator information
demonstrating “just cause,” for failing to appear.
For the purposes of a claimant’s failure to appear at a fair hearing, examples of “just cause”
include:
a) a death or serious illness in the family;
b) a personal illness which reasonably prevents the party from attending the hearing;
c) an emergency or unforeseen event which reasonably prevents the party from attending
the hearing;
d) an obligation or responsibility which a reasonable person in the conduct of his or her
affairs could reasonably conclude takes precedence over the attendance at the hearing; or
e) lack of receipt of adequate or timely notice; excusable neglect, excusable inadvertence, or
excusable mistake.
If the claimant (or their attorney) establishes just cause, the request for the hearing will be
reinstated and a hearing rescheduled.
In the event a claimant who is represented by legal counsel fails to appear at a fair hearing, legal
counsel shall not testify in place of the claimant on matters of ‘fact’ but may cross examine
witnesses and make ‘legal’ arguments on behalf of the claimant.
Section 7.5—The Fair Hearing Decision
The decision of the fair hearing authority will be binding on the general assistance administrator,
and will be communicated in writing to the claimant within 5 working days after completion of
the hearing. Written notice of the decision will contain the following:
87
a) a statement of the issue;
b) relevant facts brought out at the hearing;
c) pertinent provisions in the law or general assistance ordinance related to the decision; and
d) the decision and the reasons for it.
A copy of the notice of the decision will be given to the claimant. The hearing record and the
case record will be maintained by the general assistance administrator.
The written notice of the decision will state that if the claimant is dissatisfied with the fair
hearing decision, he/she has a further legal right to appeal the decision pursuant to the Maine
Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B. To take advantage of this right, the claimant must file a
petition for review with the Superior Court within 30 days of receipt of the fair hearing decision.
When the decision by the fair hearing authority or court authorizes assistance to the claimant, the
assistance will be provided within 24 hours.
90
ARTICLE VIII
Recovery of Expenses
Recipients. The municipality may recover the full amount of assistance granted to a person
from either the recipient or from any person liable for the recipient, or his or her executors or
administrators in a civil action. However, prior to recovering assistance granted, the
municipality shall “offset” the value of any workfare performed by a GA recipient, at a rate not
less than minimum wage.
Prior to taking a recipient to court to recover the amount of assistance, the municipality will seek
voluntary repayment from the recipient by notifying him/her in writing and discussing it with the
recipient. The municipality shall not attempt to recover such costs if, as a result of the
repayment, the person would again become eligible for general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318).
Recipients Anticipating Workers’ Compensation Benefits. The municipality shall claim a
lien for the value of all general assistance payments made to a recipient on any lump sum
payment made to that recipient under the Workers’ Compensation Act or similar law of any
other state (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318, 39-A M.R.S.A. § 106). After issuing any general assistance on
behalf of a recipient who has applied for or is receiving Workers’ Compensation, the
municipality shall file a notice of the municipal lien with the general assistance recipient and the
Office of Secretary of State, Uniform Commercial Code division.
The notice of lien shall be filed on a UCC-1 form which must be signed by the recipient of
general assistance who has applied for or is receiving Workers’ Compensation. Any general
assistance applicant who has applied for or who is receiving Workers’ Compensation benefits
and who refuses to sign a properly prepared UCC-1 form will be found ineligible to receive
general assistance until he or she provides the required signature. The municipality shall also
send a photocopy of that filing to the recipient’s Worker’s Compensation attorney, if known, the
applicant’s employer or the employer’s insurance company, and, at the administrator’s
discretion, to the Workers’ Compensation Board. The lien shall be enforced at the time any
lump sum Workers’ Compensation benefit is issued.
Recipients of SSI. All applicants who receive general assistance while receipt of their
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) assistance is pending or suspended, and which therefore
may be retroactively issued to the applicant at a later date, will be required to sign a statement on
an Interim Assistance Agreement form distributed by the DHHS that authorizes the Social
Security Administration to direct a portion of any retroactive SSI payment to the municipality
and/or the state in repayment for the general assistance granted. Any general assistance
applicant who has applied for or who may be applying for SSI, or who may be required to apply
for SSI pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4317, and who refuses to sign the Interim Agreement SSI
authorization form will be found ineligible to receive general assistance until he or she provides
the required signature (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318).
Relatives. The spouse of an applicant, and the parents of any applicant under the age of 25, are
liable for the support of the applicant (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319). In addition, grandchildren,
91
children, parents and grandparents are liable for the burial costs of each other. The municipality
considers these relatives to be available resources and liable for the support of their relatives in
proportion to their respective ability. The municipality may complain to any court of competent
jurisdiction to recover any expenses made on the behalf of a recipient if the relatives fail to fulfill
their responsibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319).
92
ARTICLE IX
Severability
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the ordinance.
Appendix A










Appendix F
Effective: 10/01/13 to 09/30/14
APPENDIX F - PERSONAL CARE & HOUSEHOLD SUPPLIES
Number in Household Weekly Amount Monthly Amount
1-2 $10.50 $45.00
3-4 $11.60 $50.00
5-6 $12.80 $55.00
7-8 $14.00 $60.00
NOTE: For each additional person add $1.25 per week or $5.00 per month.
SUPPLEMENT FOR HOUSEHOLDS WITH CHILDREN UNDER 5
When an applicant can verify expenditures for the following items, a special supplement will be
budgeted as necessary for households with children under 5 years of age for items such as cloth
or disposable diapers, laundry powder, oil, shampoo, and ointment up to the following amounts:
Number of Children Weekly Amount Monthly Amount
1 $12.80 $55.00
2 $17.40 $75.00
3 $23.30 $100.00
4 $27.90 $120.00
Appendix G
Mileage Rate
This municipality adopts the State of Maine travel expense reimbursement rate as set by the
Office of the State Controller. The current rate for approved employment and necessary medical
travel etc. is 44 cents (44¢) per mile.
Please refer to the Office of State Controller for changes to this rate: Telephone: 626-8420 or
visit: http://www.state.me.us/osc/
Appendix H
Effective: 10/01/13 to 09/30/14
Funeral Maximums
Burial Maximums
The maximum amount of general assistance granted for the purpose of burial is $1,125.
Additional costs may be allowed by the GA administrator, where there is an actual cost, for:
? the wholesale cost of a cement liner if the cemetery by-laws require one;
? the opening and closing of the grave site; and
? a lot in the least expensive section of the cemetery. If the municipality is able
to provide a cemetery lot in a municipally owned cemetery or in a cemetery
under municipal control, the cost of the cemetery lot in any other cemetery
will not be paid by the municipality.
The municipality’s obligation to provide funds for burial purposes is limited to a reasonable
calculation of the funeral director’s direct costs, not to exceed the maximum amounts of
assistance described in this section. Allowable burial expenses are limited to:
? removal of the body from a local residence or institution
? a secured death certificate or obituary
? embalming
? a minimum casket
? a reasonable cost for necessary transportation
? other reasonable and necessary specified direct costs, as itemized by the
funeral director and approved by the municipal administrator.
Cremation Maximums
The maximum amount of assistance granted for a cremation shall be $785. Additional costs may
be allowed by the GA administrator where there is an actual cost, for:
? a cremation lot in the least expensive section of the cemetery
? a reasonable cost for a burial urn not to exceed $50
? transportation costs borne by the funeral director at a reasonable rate per mile
for transporting the remains to and from the cremation facility.
Appendix I
26 MRSA §1043 (23)
Misconduct. “Misconduct” means a culpable breach of the employee’s duties or obligations
to the employer or a pattern of irresponsible behavior, which in either case manifests a disregard
for a material interest of the employer. This definition relates only to an employee’s entitlement
to benefits and does not preclude an employer from discharging an employee for actions that are
not included in this definition of misconduct. A finding that an employee has not engaged in
misconduct for purposes of this chapter may not be used as evidence that the employer lacked
justification for discharge. [1999, c. 464, §2 (rpr).]
A. The following acts or omissions are presumed to manifest a disregard for a material
interest of the employer. If a culpable breach or a pattern of irresponsible behavior is shown,
these actions or omissions constitute “misconduct” as defined in this subsection. This does
not preclude other acts or omissions from being considered to manifest a disregard for a
material interest of the employer. The acts or omissions included in the presumption are the
following:
(1) Refusal, knowing failure or recurring neglect to perform reasonable and proper
duties assigned by the employer;
(2) Unreasonable violation of rules that are reasonably imposed and communicated and
equitably enforced;
(3) Unreasonable violation of rules that should be inferred to exist from common
knowledge or from the nature of the employment;
(4) Failure to exercise due care for punctuality or attendance after warnings;
(5) Providing false information on material issues relating to the employee’s eligibility
to do the work or false information or dishonesty that may substantially jeopardize a
material interest of the employer;
(6) Intoxication while on duty or when reporting to work or unauthorized use of alcohol
while on duty;
(7) Using illegal drugs or being under the influence of such drugs while on duty or when
reporting to work;
(8) Unauthorized sleeping while on duty;
(9) Insubordination or refusal without good cause to follow reasonable and proper
instructions from the employer;
(10) Abusive or assaultive behavior while on duty, except as necessary for self-defense;
(11) Destruction or theft of things valuable to the employer or another employee;
(12) Substantially endangering the safety of the employee, coworkers, customers or
members of the public while on duty;
(13) Conviction of a crime in connection with the employment or a crime that reflects
adversely on the employee’s qualifications to perform the work; or
(14) Absence for more than 2 work days due to incarceration for conviction of a crime.
Appendix I
[1999, c. 464, §2 (new).]
B. “Misconduct” may not be found solely on:
(1) An isolated error in judgment or a failure to perform satisfactorily when the
employee has made a good faith effort to perform the duties assigned;
(2) Absenteeism caused by illness of the employee or an immediate family member if
the employee made reasonable efforts to give notice of the absence and to comply with
the employer’s notification rules and policies; or
(3) Actions taken by the employee that were necessary to protect the employee or an
immediate family member from domestic violence if the employee made all reasonable
efforts to preserve the employment.
[1999, c. 464, §2 (new).]
CHAPTER 801
JOINT SERVICES ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted January 5, 2016
SECTION 801.1 – AUTHORITY; JURISDICTION
This ordinance has been prepared and is authorized under Town Charter Art. II, Sec. 4(A) and
(C) and under the joint services provisions of Maine statute, 30-A M.R.S.A. Sec. 2203, and
under the Home Rule Provisions of Maine law, Me. Constn. Art. VIII, Pt. 2, Sec. 1 and 30-A
M.R.S.A. Sec. 3001. The jurisdictional reach of any such shared function under this ordinance
shall be determined by written joint services agreement(s) with any other Maine municipality
with which the Town contracts for any such shared services. Such agreements shall be subject
to Town Council approval.
SEC. 801.2 SHORT TITLE.
This ordinance shall be known as the Joint Services Ordinance.
SEC. 801.3 POWER OF SHARED TOWN OFFICIAL.
In addition to the powers granted to any Town of Gray Official under the Town Charter and by
the general provisions of Maine law, such shared Official may serve as a municipal official for
any other Maine municipality with which the Town contracts for the provision of such joint
services, including any applicable subordinate employee(s) (current or future) as reasonably
required and fully covered by the municipalities’ joint services agreement(s). Such
agreement(s) shall provide the terms for its duration; organizational structure to provide
sufficient services for each municipality, including, without limitation, physical office space in
each municipality, office hours in each municipality and access to the Town Official in each
municipality; administrative control of the Town Official’s time and that of any applicable
subordinate employee(s) within each separate municipality; respective cost sharing and funding
for not only the Town Official’s time, but for all applicable subordinate employee(s); provisions
for termination of agreement(s); and any other necessary or appropriate matters. For
administrative purposes, the Town Official and any applicable subordinate employee(s) (current
or future) shall at all times remain Town of Gray employee(s) unless expressly provided to the
contrary in the individual municipalities’ joint services agreement.
APPLICABILITY DATE
Pursuant to 1 M.R.S.A. Sec. 302, this ordinance, once passed by the Gray Town Council, shall
be deemed applicable as of January 5, 2016.
1
CHAPTER 221
CABLE TELEVISION ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Proposed May 1, 2018, 2nd Reading May 15th 2018
Approved May 15th 2018, Effective June 14, 2018
Proposed Updates January 8, 2019, 2nd Reading January 22, 2019
Approved January 22, 2019, Effective March 1, 2019
Section 1. Designation of Ordinance.
This Ordinance shall be known as the Town of Gray Cable Television Ordinance and is
adopted by the Town Council pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3008 and pursuant to the home
rule authority granted to municipalities by 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 and by the Constitution
of Maine, Article VIII, Part Second.
Section 2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the plural number
include the singular number, and vice versa. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
2.1 “Access” or “Access Cablecasting”: Cablecasting on the Cable System’s
access channels for the following purposes: (i) non-commercial and nondiscriminatory
use by the public; (ii) carriage of non-commercial educational
programs or information; and (iii) non-commercial use for governmental purposes
in accordance with the Cable Act.
2.2 “Access Channel(s)”: A video channel(s) which the Company shall make
available to the Town of Gray, without charge, for the purpose of transmitting
programming by/for members of the public, Town departments, boards and
agencies, public schools, educational, institutional, non-profit and similar
organizations in accordance with the Cable Act.
2.3 “Affiliate” or “Affiliated Person”: An entity that owns or controls is
owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership with a Cable Operator,
herein defined as “Company”.
2.4 “Alphanumeric”: Consisting of a combination of letters and numbers, used
in reference to keyboards permitting communication in such form and in
reference to Channels or Programs transmitting information in such form.
2.5 “Area Outage”: An area outage occurs when cable or equipment is
damaged, fails or otherwise malfunctions (collectively called malfunctions”), and
2
ten or more Subscribers receiving services from that section of cable or that
equipment receive unusable or no service as a result of that malfunction.
2.6 “Basic Service”: The minimum service transmitted to all Subscribers which
includes, at a minimum, (1) all signals of domestic television broadcast stations
entitled to “must carry” status under FCC rules, (2) any Public, Educational and
Governmental programming required by a Franchise Agreement to be carried on
the basic tier, and (3) any additional video programming signals added to the
basic tier by the Company in its sole discretion.
2.7 “Broadcast”: Over-the-air transmission by a television station.
2.8 “Cable Act”: The Cable Communications Policy and Communications Act
of 1984, as amended by the Cable Consumer Protection and Competition Act of
1992 and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as further amended.
2.9 “Cablecast”: Programming (exclusive of broadcast signals) carried on the
Cable System.
2.10 “Cable Programming Service”: Any video programming provided over a
Cable System, regardless of service tier, including installation or rental of
equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other than (1) video
programming carried on the Basic Service tier, and (2) video programming offered
on a pay-per-channel or pay-per-program basis.
2.11 “Cable Service”: The one-way transmission to Subscribers of video
programming or other programming services, together with Subscriber interaction,
if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or
other programming services.
2.12 “Cable System”: A facility serving the Town, which is owned, constructed,
installed, operated and maintained by Company, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control
equipment that is designed to provide Cable Service, including video programming,
to multiple Subscribers within a head-end service area as defined in accordance
with Section 602 of the Cable Act. Such term does not include (a) a facility that
serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast
stations; (b) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way;
(c) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the
provisions of Title II of the Cable Act, except that such facility shall be considered
a cable system (other than for purposes of section 621(c) of the Cable Act) to the
extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to
subscribers unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand
services; or (d) an open video system that complies with section 653 of this title, or
(e) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility
systems.
3
2.13 “Channel” or “Video Channel”: A portion of the electromagnetic
frequency spectrum which is used in a Cable System and which is capable of
delivering a television channel (as defined by the FCC by regulation).
2.14 “Company”: Any Person or Persons owning, controlling, operating,
managing or leasing a Cable System within the Town, pursuant to this Ordinance,
and pursuant to any Franchise granted to it by the Town. This term shall include
any lawful successor(s) to the interest of such Person or Persons where consent to
such successor(s) is approved under the provisions of this Ordinance and under any
applicable terms of a Franchise Agreement entered into pursuant to this Ordinance.
2.15 “Completion of Construction”: That point when the Company has
provided written documentation to the Town that a Cable System serving Gray has
been fully upgraded in accordance with any applicable requirements of this
Ordinance and a Franchise Agreement, and service has been made available to
Subscribers and potential Subscribers pursuant to the Franchise Agreement.
2.16 “Contractor or Subcontractor or Agent”: Any person or entity who or
which directly or indirectly works for or is under the direction of “The Company”
for the purpose of installation or repair of any portion of the Company’s Cable
system in the Town.
2.17 “Converter”: A special tuner or device attached to the Subscriber’s
television set which expands reception capacity and/or unscrambles coded signals
distributed over the Cable System.
2.18 “Designated Access Provider”: The entity or entities which may be
designated from time to time by the Town to provide PEG access to the residents
of the Town of Gray.
2.19 “Downstream Channel”: A Channel over which signals travel from the
Cable System Headend or Sub-headend to an authorized recipient of programming.
2.20 “Downstream Transmissions”: Signals traveling from a Cable System
distribution point to an authorized location.
2.21 “Drop” or “Cable Drop”: The interconnection between each home or
building and the feeder line of the Cable System.
2.22 “FCC”: The Federal Communications Commission or any successor
agency.
2.23 “Feeder Cable”: The cable, connected to trunk cable, from which cable
television signal service is distributed to Subscribers, as distinguished from trunk
4
cable (which distributes cable television service throughout the Franchise area) and
drop cable.
2.24 “Franchise Authority”: The Gray Town Council.
2.25 “Franchise”: The non-exclusive Cable Television License to be granted to
the Company to include the right, privilege and franchise to construct, operate and
maintain a Cable System, and appurtenances or parts thereof, in the Streets, roads,
alleys, and other Public Ways of the Town.
2.26 “Franchise Agreement”: The contract entered into between the Company
and the Town governing the terms and conditions of the Company’s use of the
Franchise granted to the Company.
2.27 “Gross Annual Revenues”: Revenue of any form or kind received by the
Company from the carriage of Cable Service including, without limitation: the
distribution of any Cable Service over the System; Basic Service monthly fees; all
other Cable Service fees; fees paid for pay and/or pay-per-view services,
installation, reconnection, downgrade, upgrade and any other similar fees; fees paid
for channels designated for commercial use; converter, remote control and other
equipment rentals, and/or leases and/or sales; all home shopping service(s)
revenues; and advertising revenues. Gross Annual Revenue shall not include any
taxes or fees other than franchise fees on services furnished by the Company
imposed directly on any Subscriber or user by any governmental unit and collected
by the Company for such governmental unit. In the event that an Affiliate is
responsible for advertising on the Cable System in the Town, advertising revenues
shall be deemed to be the pro-rata portion of advertising revenues excluding
commissions and/or applicable agency fees, paid to the Company by an Affiliate
for said Affiliate’s use of the Cable System for the carriage of advertising. It is the
intention of the parties here to that Gross Annual Revenues shall only include such
revenue of Affiliates and/or Persons relating to the provision of Cable Service over
the Cable System and not the gross revenues of any such Affiliate(s) and/or
Person(s) itself, where unrelated to Cable services. Gross Annual Revenue shall be
computed in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
2.28 “Headend”: A company owned or leased facility through which Broadcast
and cablecast signals are electronically acquired, translated, or modified for
distribution over the Cable System.
2.29 “Interactive Service”: Any service that offers to Subscribers the capability
of both transmitting and receiving Signals of any kind.
2.30 “Leased Channel” or “Leased Access”: A video and/or audio or data
Channel which the Company shall make available pursuant to Section 612 of the
Cable Act.
5
2.31 “Local Origination”: Local programming produced by the Company.
2.32 “Origination Point”: A connection to the cable system which is provided
to allow for live or recorded programming to be transmitted from that location
Upstream to the Head-end and from there Downstream to the Subscribers over one
or more access channels, also referred to in this Agreement as a return feed.
2.33 “Other Programming Service”: Services that the Company may make
available to all Subscribers generally.
2.34 “Outlet”: An interior cable connection that connects a Subscriber or User
to the Cable System.
2.35 “Parent”: When used in reference to the Company, any Person holding
direct or indirect ownership or control of thirty percent (30%) or more of the rights
of control of the Company; and any Person holding such ownership or control of a
Parent to the Company.
2.36 “Pay Cable” or “Premium Service”: Optional additional Program services,
provided to Subscribers at a monthly charge in addition to the charge for Basic
Service.
2.37 “Pay-Per-View”: Programming delivered for a fee or charge to Subscribers
on a per-program or time basis, in addition to the charge or fee to Subscribers for
Basic Service, or for such other service tier required by applicable law.
2.38 “PEG”: The acronym for Public, Educational and Governmental, used in
conjunction with Access Channels, support and facilities.
2.39 “Person”: Any corporation, partnership, limited partnership, association,
trust, organization, other business entity, individual or group of individuals acting
in concert.
2.40 “Public Building”: All State-accredited public schools, police and fire
stations, public libraries, Town Hall, and other public buildings owned or leased by
the Town, but shall not include buildings owned by the Town but leased to third
parties or buildings such as storage facilities at which government employees are
not regularly stationed.
2.41 “Video Programming”: Programming provided by, or generally
considered comparable to Programming provided by, a television broadcast station.
2.42 “Signal”: Any transmission of electromagnetic or optical energy that
carries Cable Services from one location to another.
2.43 “State”: The State of Maine.
6
2.44 “Street” or “Public Way”: The surface of, and the space above and below,
any public Street, highway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk,
parkway, way, lane, Public Way, drive, circle, or other public right-of-way,
including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility strips, or
rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary or permanent
fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the Town in the
Town which shall entitle the Company to the use thereof for the purpose of
installing, operating, repairing, and maintaining the Cable System. “Street” or
“Public Way” shall also mean any easement now or hereafter held by the Town
within the Town for the purpose of public travel, or for utility or public service use
dedicated for public travel, or for utility or public service use dedicated for
compatible uses, and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall within
their proper use and meaning entitle the Company to the use thereof for the
purposes of installing or transmitting the Company’s Cable Service or other service
over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers,
appliances, attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and
pertinent to the Cable System. Reference herein to “Public Way” or “Street” shall
not be construed to be a representation or guarantee by the Town that its property
rights are sufficient to permit its use for any purpose, or that the Town shall gain or
be permitted to exercise any rights to use property in the Town greater than those
already possessed by the Town.
2.45 “Sub-headend”: A signed distribution point for part of the Cable System
linked to the Headend by fiber optic cable, coaxial supertrunk or microwave, and
also referred to as a “Hub.”
2.46 “Subscriber”: Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who or which
elects to subscribe to for any purpose, a Cable Service provided by the Company
by means of, or in connection with, the Cable Television System.
2.47 “Subscriber Network”: The 750 MHz bi-directional-capable network to be
owned and operated by the Company, over which Cable Service(s) can be
transmitted to Subscribers.
2.48 “Town”: The Town of Gray organized and existing under the laws of the
State of Maine and all territory within its existing and future territorial corporate
limits.
2.49 “Two-way Capability”: The ability to transmit audio and video signals
upstream and downstream on the Cable System.
2.50 “Upstream Channel”: A Channel over which signals travel from an
authorized location to a Cable System distribution point.
7
2.51 “Upstream Transmissions”: Signals traveling from Subscribers or other
originating points on the Cable System to a cable distribution point.
Section 3. Franchise Required.
No Person, firm or corporation shall install, maintain or operate within the Town or any
of its Public Ways or Streets or other public areas any equipment or facilities for the
operation of a Cable System unless a Franchise authorizing the use of said Public Ways
or Streets or areas has first been granted pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance and
unless a Franchise Agreement with the Cable Company is in full force and effect.
Section 4. Franchise Agreement.
4.1 The Town Council or its designee may enter into Franchise Agreements
on such terms, conditions and fees as are in the best interest of the Town and its
residents with one or more Cable Companies for the operation of a Cable
System(s) within the Town.
4.2 Prior to issuing a request for proposals to any Cable Company for
Franchise Agreements or renewals, the Town shall hold a public hearing or
conduct some other process to determine any special local needs or interests with
respect to Cable Service and shall allow a reasonable period for public comment
on the request for proposals.
4.3 Franchise Agreement applications, including renewal applications, and
any submittals in response to a request for proposals or solicitation of bids and
related documents, are public records. Upon the filing of such documents, the
Town shall provide reasonable notice to the public that such documents are open
to public inspection during reasonable hours.
4.5 Each Franchise Agreement between the Town and a Company shall
contain, at a minimum, the following provisions:
(a) A statement of the area or areas to be served by the Company;
(b) A line extension policy;
(c) A provision for renewal, the term of which may not exceed ten
(10) years;
(d) Procedures for the investigation and resolution of Subscriber
complaints by the Company;
(e) An agreement to comply with the requirements of 30-A M.R.S.A.
§3010 regarding consumer rights and protection and any
amendments thereto;
8
(f) A franchise fee to be paid by the Company to the Town in
accordance with Section 9 of this Ordinance;
(g) A provision for access to, and facilities to make use of, one or
more local PEG Access Channels;
(h) A provision for the assessment of reasonable fees to defray the
costs of public notice, advertising and other expenses incurred by
the Town in acting upon applications for initial and renewal
Franchise Agreements;
(i) A provision whereby the Company agrees to defend, indemnify
and hold harmless the Town and its agents from claims and
liabilities arising out of the Company’s construction, ownership,
operation, maintenance, repair and control of the Cable System;
and
(j) Any other terms and conditions that are in the best interests of the
Town.
Section 5. Town’s Retained Rights and Authority.
5.1 Right to Grant Additional Franchises. The Town expressly reserves the
right to grant other such Franchises in the Town of Gray on such terms as it
deems appropriate and to operate a Town-owned Cable System.
5.2 Eminent Domain. No privilege or power of eminent domain is bestowed
upon a Company by the granting of a Franchise.
5.3 Exercise of Police Power. All rights and privileges associated with the
grant of any Franchise are subject to the police power of the Town to adopt and
enforce local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations necessary to the health,
safety and general welfare of the public. Expressly reserved to the Town is the
right to adopt, in addition to the provisions of any Franchise Agreement, this
Ordinance and any other existing laws, ordinances and regulations (collectively
“laws”), such additional laws as it may find necessary in the exercise of its police
power. Any conflict between the terms of any Franchise Agreement and any
present or future exercise of the Town’s police and regulatory powers, including
this Ordinance, shall be resolved in favor of the latter.
5.4 Use of Public Ways. The right to use and occupy the Streets, Public
Ways and public places granted in any Franchise Agreement shall not be
exclusive, and the Town reserves the right to grant similar or other uses of the
said Streets, Public Ways and public places to any Persons at any time during the
term of any Franchise Agreement.
9
5.5 Conflict With Public Works. The rights and privileges associated with
the grant of any Franchise shall not be in preference or hindrance to the right of
the Town or any other governmental agency, improvement district or other
authority having jurisdiction, to perform or carry on any public works or public
improvement, including without limitation any Streets and Public Ways. Should
a Company’s Cable System in any way interfere with the construction,
maintenance or repair of such public works or improvements, including without
limitation any Streets and Public Ways, the Company shall, at its own expense,
protect or relocate its Cable System or part thereof, as directed by the Town or
other authority having jurisdiction.
5.6 Removal and Relocation. The Town shall have the power at any time to
order and require a Company to remove or relocate any pole, wire, cable or other
structure machinery or equipment located within a public way that is dangerous to
life or property. In the event that a Company, after notice, fails or refuses to act
within a reasonable time, the Town shall have the power to remove or relocate the
same at the sole cost and expense of the Company.
Section 6. Bonds and Insurance.
6.1 Performance Bond to Town. Upon the award of any Franchise, and
annually thereafter during the entire term of the Franchise, a Company shall
maintain in full force and effect at its own cost and expense a performance bond
in the amount of at least $100,000 to guarantee the faithful performance by the
Company of all of its obligations under its Franchise Agreement and shall provide
evidence of the same to the Town Clerk. The performance bond shall be so
conditioned that in the event that the Company shall breach any one or more
material provisions of this Ordinance or of the Franchise Agreement, and
subsequent to any notice and opportunity to cure provision of this Ordinance
and/or the Franchise Agreement, the Town may recover from the surety any
penalties assessed in accordance with Section 10 of this Ordinance and any
damages or costs suffered or incurred by the Town as a consequence of such
breach. Said conditions shall be a continuing obligation during the entire term of
the Franchise Agreement. Not less than thirty (30) days’ prior notice to the Town
shall be provided of the Company’s or the surety’s intention to cancel, materially
change, or not to renew the performance bond or security fund. Failure to post a
bond on a timely basis shall constitute a violation of a material provision of this
Franchise Agreement.
6.2 Insurance. Company shall maintain during the full term of this Franchise
Agreement such insurance as will protect it and The Town from any claims which
may arise directly or indirectly or result from Company’s ownership, construction,
repair, operation or maintenance of Company’s cable system serving Gray, whether
such activities are performed by Company, or by anyone for whose acts Company
may be liable, under the following policies:
10
(a) Workers’ Compensation and any other legally required employee
benefits, shall be supplied in such amounts as required by law;
(b) Property insurance, all risk, replacement cost basis, on all insurable
Company assets in the Town;
(c) Commercial General Liability insurance shall be supplied in the
following amount: combined single limit for bodily injury,
personal injury, death or property damage in the amount of at
least $3,000,000 per occurrence;
(d) Excess liability (in umbrella form) in the amount of at least
$5,000,000; and
(e) Automobile liability insurance in the amount of at least $1,000,000
per occurrence.
6.3 Non-waiver. Neither the provisions of this Section, nor any bonds accepted
by the Town pursuant hereto, nor any damage recovered by the Town thereunder,
shall be construed to excuse unfaithful performance by the Company or limit the
liability of the Company under this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement for
damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise.
Section 7. Application.
7.1 Any application for a cable television Franchise in the Town must contain
the following information, except that in the case of a renewal Franchise, only the
information listed under this Section 7.1(a) through 7.1(b)(1), 7.1(b)(2) and
7.1(b)(3) shall be required:
(a) The name, address, and telephone, number of the applicant.
(b) The most recent 10-Q or 10-K of the Company or its ultimate
parent company as filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission. In the event the Company does not, at the time of
application, file 10-Q or 10-K filings with the Securities and
Exchange Commission, it shall instead file a detailed statement of
the corporate or other business entity organization of the applicant
and any other information required by the Town, including without
limitation:
(1) The names and business addresses of all officers and
directors of the applicant.
(2) The names and business addresses of all officers, Persons
and entities having, controlling, or being entitled to have or
11
control 15% or more of the ownership of the applicant and
each Parent, Affiliate or subsidiary of the applicant and the
respective ownership share of each such person or entity.
(3) The names and addresses of any Parent, Affiliate or
subsidiary of the applicant; namely, any other business
entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or
owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant,
and a statement of the nature of any such Parent, Affiliate
or subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to
Cable Systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its
Parent, Affiliate and subsidiary and the areas served
thereby.
(4) A detailed description of all previous experience of the
applicant in providing Cable Service and in related or
similar fields.
(5) A detailed and complete financial statement of the
applicant, its Parents, Affiliates and its subsidiaries,
prepared by a certified public accountant, for the fiscal year
next preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a
letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a
recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed
to both the applicant and the Town Council, setting forth
the basis for a study performed by such lending institution
or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be
required by the applicant to construct and operate the
proposed Cable System in the Town, or a statement from a
certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has
available sufficient free, net and uncommitted cash
resources to construct and operate the proposed Cable
System in the Town.
(6) A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable
television Franchise(s) awarded to the applicant, its Parent,
Affiliate or subsidiary, the status of said Franchise(s) with
respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion
or such Cable System(s); and the amount of applicant's and
its Parent’s, Affiliate’s or subsidiary’s resources committed
to the completion thereof.
(c) In the case of an application for an initial Franchise for a new
Cable System serving the Town, the applicant shall provide a
detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the
applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
12
(1) A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served,
and a proposed construction time schedule for the
installation of all equipment necessary to become
operational throughout the entire area to be served, and the
time of commencement of construction and anticipated
operation date.
(2) A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed
classifications of rates and charges to be made against
Subscribers and all rates and charges to be made against
Subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said
classifications, including installation charges and service
charges and deposit agreement.
(3) A detailed, informative, and referenced statement
describing the actual equipment and operational standards
proposed by the applicant. In no event shall said
operational and performance standards be less than those
contained in the FCC’s regulations, 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.601, et
seq., as may be amended from time to time, and shall in
addition comply with Section 13 herein.
(4) A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other
instrument proposed to be entered into between the
applicant and any Subscriber and between the applicant and
any lessee of any Channel, including provisions for
reimbursement in the event of interruption of service.
(5) A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all
agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal,
written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist
between the applicant and any Persons, firm, or corporation
which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the
application and the granting of the contract.
(6) A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety the
proposed Cable System design. Such statement shall
include proposals concerning system architecture, Channel
capacity, Channel uses, access, programming facilities,
studio location, point to point service, two-way service,
Subscriber privacy, and interconnection.
(7) Such other information as required by the Town at the time
of the Franchise application.
13
7.2 Notice. No Franchise, including any Franchise renewals, will be granted
hereunder without notice to the public and a public hearing pursuant to Section 8.3
of this Ordinance.
Section 8. Contract Term; Renewal.
8.1 Term. Any Franchise awarded by the Town Council under this Ordinance
shall be for a term of not more than fifteen (15) years.
8.2 Renewal. Any renewal of a Franchise shall be upon such terms and
conditions as the Town and the Company may mutually agree upon in accordance
with the Cable Act and applicable federal law. Such renewal shall be for a period
of not more than fifteen (15) years from the expiration of the previous Franchise.
8.3 Public Hearing. Before authorizing the issuance of any Franchise or
renewal of a Franchise, the Town Council shall review, in accordance with federal
law, the applicant’s legal, financial and technical qualifications, the proposed
agreement’s ability to meet current and future cable-related needs and interests of
the Town in light of the costs of meeting those needs and interests, and the adequacy
and feasibility of the applicant’s qualifications to operate a Cable System within
the Town, and shall conduct a public hearing thereon with at least seven (7) days’
advertised notice prior to said public hearing. Such public hearing shall provide a
reasonable opportunity for public input on the proposed Franchise or renewal.
8.4 Requests for Information. Any Company operating a Cable System in the
Town shall maintain adequate personnel and resources to respond to requests from
the Town for renewal information and review of draft franchise agreements in a
timely manner.
Section 9. Fees.
9.1 Franchise Fee. As compensation for the rights and privileges associated
with any Franchise awarded pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance, the
Company shall pay to the Town a franchise fee based on a percentage of the
Company’s Gross Annual Revenues, in accordance with federal law. The franchise
fee may be changed by the Town on 90 days’ notice to the Company, but not more
frequently than once each calendar year, to an amount within the then-applicable
maximum allowed under federal law.
9.2 Method of Computation. Payments due the Town under the terms of the
Ordinance shall be computed quarterly as of March 31, June 30, September 30
and December 31 for the preceding three months and shall be paid on or before
the forty-fifth calendar day from each said computation date at the office of the
Town Treasurer during regular business hours. The Town shall be furnished a
statement with each payment, prepared by a financial representative of the
Company, and verified as correct, reflecting the total amount of Gross Annual
14
Revenues generated by all activities within the Town, and the above charges,
deductions and computations, for the three month payment period covered by the
payment. The Company shall prepare and maintain financial information and
records in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and generally
accepted auditing standards in the cable television industry. At the Town’s
option, the information provided by the Company shall be subject to audit by an
outside firm of certified public accountants selected by The Town. Any such
audit shall be at the Town’s expense except unless such audit shall disclose an
underpayment of any franchise fees of more than four percent (4%) payable for
the period of the audit, in which event the Company shall reimburse the Town for
the expense of such audit. Repeated failure to pay the franchise fee on a timely
basis may be grounds for revocation of the Franchise under this
Ordinance. Interest shall accrue on any and all overdue franchise fees at the rate
of twelve percent (12%) simple interest per annum.
9.3 Rights of Recomputation. No acceptance of any payment shall be
construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the Town may
have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this
Ordinance or for the performance of any other obligation hereunder. However,
there shall be an accord and satisfaction with respect to any payment not subject
to an audit within thirty-six (36) months following the close of the fiscal year to
which such payment relates.
Section 10. Penalties.
10.1 Assessment. If a Company fails to comply with any provision of this
Ordinance, the Town may assess the Company a monetary penalty in accordance
with the Schedule of Penalties set forth in Section 10.8 through Section 10.12 of
this Ordinance. Such assessment shall not constitute a waiver by the Town of any
other right or remedy it may have under this Ordinance or the Franchise
Agreement, or under any other applicable law, including, without limitation, its
right to recover from the Company such additional damages, losses, costs and
expenses as may have been suffered or incurred by the Town by reason of or
arising out of such breach of this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement;
provided, that any penalties collected by the Town from the Company pursuant
hereto shall be applied against, and reduce accordingly, the amount of any
recoveries due the Town pursuant to this sentence for the failure to perform for
which such penalties were assessed.
10.2 Notification. Upon the Town’s assessing a penalty pursuant to Section
10.1, notice of such assessment shall be sent to the Company, with a concise
statement of the reasons therefor.
10.3 Procedures.
(a) Within ten (10) days after receipt of a notice pursuant to Section
10.2, the Company may request a hearing before the Town
15
Council. In the event of such a request, the Town shall provide
thirty (30) days’ written notice of the public hearing to the
Company.
(b) During the public hearing, Company shall have the right to appear
and be heard, including the opportunity to present evidence,
question witnesses, if any, and the hearing shall follow the
procedures set forth for public hearings before the Town Council.
(c) Following the hearing, the Town Council shall determine (i)
whether a failure or violation has occurred; (ii) whether such
failure or violation is excusable; and (iii) whether such failure or
violation has been or will be cured by the Company; and (iv) the
appropriate remedy for the failure or violation.
(d) If the Town Council determines that such failure has not occurred,
or that such failure either has been or will be cured in a manner and
in accordance with a reasonable schedule satisfactory to the Town
Council or that the failure is excusable, such determination shall
conclude the matter, unless Company fails to comply with the
schedule for cure.
10.4 Payment. Except as provided in Section 10.3, the Company shall pay the
full amount of any penalty to the Town within ten (10) days after receipt of a
notice pursuant to Section 10.2 and the cure period has expired.
10.5 Default. Subsequent to the notice and opportunity to cure provision
herein, upon failure of the Company to make timely payment of an assessed
penalty, the Town may recover the amount of any such penalty from the
performance bond or security fund pursuant to Section 6.1 of this
Ordinance. Failure of the Company to make timely payment of an assessed
penalty is a violation of this Ordinance.
10.6 Disposition. Amounts received by the Town as penalties assessed against
a Company may be used by the Town for any purpose it deems fit.
10.7 Schedule of Penalties. Pursuant to Sections 10.1, 10.2 and 10.3, the
following monetary penalties shall apply, and liability therefore shall accrue from
the date of receipt of notice pursuant to Section 10.2, and upon failure to cure
within the time period specified below, if any opportunity to cure is provided.
10.8 Minor Per-Day Penalty. The penalty for the following violations shall
be $50.00 per day until the violation is cured:
(a) Abandonment of service or a portion of that service without having
obtained the written consent of the Town Council or having
16
provided the Town with at least six (6) months’ prior written
notice of abandonment.
(b) Failure to maintain the Company’s required insurance pursuant to
Section 6.2, with the penalty beginning thirty (30) days after
Company receives written notification of the violation.
(c) Failure to make timely payment of the franchise fee pursuant to
Section 9, with the penalty beginning thirty (30) days after
Company receives written notification of the violation.
(d) Violation of the privacy restrictions in Sections 12.7(d) of this
Ordinance. This penalty shall be assessed with the penalty
beginning seven (7) days after Company receives written
notification of the violation.
(e) Failure to restore damaged property within the specified period
pursuant to Section 11.11, with the penalty beginning five (5) days
after Company receives written notification of the violation.
(f) Failure to make and maintain records as required by Section 13.6
with the penalty beginning thirty (30) days after Company receives
written notification of the violation. This penalty shall be assessed
for each such record not maintained.
(g) Failure to obtain and maintain the performance bond or security
fund pursuant to Section 6.1 with the penalty beginning thirty (30)
days after Company receives written notification of the violation.
(h) Failure to remove, relocate or protect the Company’s system
pursuant to Sections 5.5, 5.6 and 11.17 with the penalty beginning
seven (7) days after Company receives written notification of the
violation.
(i) Failure to eliminate objectionable interference pursuant to Section
11.18 with the penalty beginning fourteen (14) days after Company
receives written notification of the violation.
(j) Failure to provide reports within the time required by Section 18
assessed for each report not provided with the penalty beginning
fourteen (14) days after Company receives written notification of
the violation.
10.9. Per Subscriber Penalty. The penalty for the following violations shall be
$5.00 per Subscriber affected by the violation per day until the violation is cured:
17
(a) Failure to respond to a request for repair or adjustment within the
time required by Section 13.4. This penalty shall begin twentyfour
(24) hours after the Town notifies the Company in writing of
the violation.
(b) Failure to commence service to a Subscriber within the time
required by Section 14 beginning two (2) days after the Town
notifies Company in writing of the violation.
(c) Failure to pay a refund due a Subscriber upon termination within
the time required by Section 15.6. This penalty shall begin five (5)
days after the Town notifies the Company in writing of the
violation.
(d) Failure to respond to a billing complaint within the time required
by Section 16.3. This penalty shall begin two (2) days after the
Town notifies the Company in writing of the violation.
(e) Failure to respond to a service complaint within the time required
by Section 16.4. This penalty shall begin two (2) days after the
Town notifies the Company in writing of the violation.
(f) Failure to pay a rebate or apply a credit for service loss within the
time required by Section 13.5. This penalty shall begin 5 days
after the Town notifies the Company in writing of the violation.
10.10. Major Per Day Penalty. The penalty shall be $500.00 for the following
violations beginning sixty (60) days after the Town notifies the Company in
writing of the violation until the violation is cured.
(a) Failure to complete any system rebuild as required by Section 11.1
and the terms of the Franchise Agreement. This penalty shall be
assessed per day until compliance is achieved.
(b) Failure to make service available to unserved areas within the time
required by this Ordinance and the terms of the Franchise
Agreement. This penalty shall be assessed per day until
compliance is achieved.
(c) Failure to provide access channels, facilities and equipment
funding as required by this Ordinance and the terms of the
Franchise Agreement. This penalty shall be assessed per day until
compliance.
10.11. Violation of Subscriber Privacy. The penalty for a violation of Section
12.7(e) is $1,000 per occurrence of selling or disclosing subscriber lists, viewing
18
habits or personally identifiable information (and not per day or per affected
subscriber).
10.12. Failure to Provide Emergency Override Capabilities. The Cable
System shall incorporate emergency audio override capabilities in accordance
with FCC Emergency Alert System (EAS) standards and as required by Section
11.3. The penalty for a failure of the system to perform as described in the event
of a public emergency or vital public information situation, shall be $1,000
assessed per occurrence, except to the extent the Cable System is rendered nonfunctional
due to damage caused by factors outside of the Company’s reasonable
control.
10.13. Force Majeure. The Company shall not be assessed any penalties under
this Ordinance for any delay or failure to comply with the provisions of the
Ordinance if doing so is prevented by Act of God, the inability to secure materials
despite the use of all commercially reasonable efforts by the Company, flood,
storm, fire, explosions, strikes, riots, wars whether or not declared, insurrections,
epidemics, or any law, rule or act of any court of competent jurisdiction or
instrumentality of government or any other occurrence outside of the control of
the Company when using all commercially reasonable efforts.
10.14. Further Recourse. In addition to the foregoing penalties, upon the
failure, refusal or neglect of the Company to cause any work or other act required
by law or by this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement to be properly completed
in, on, over or under any Street or Public Way within any time prescribed, the
Town may (but shall not be required to) cause such work or other act to be
performed or completed in whole or in part and upon so doing shall submit to the
Company an itemized statement of the costs thereof. The Company shall, within
thirty (30) days after receipt of such statement, pay to the Town the entire amount
thereof.
Section 11. Construction and Operation of Facilities
11.1 Design. Except as otherwise provided for in the Franchise Agreement, any
Cable System serving Gray shall in any event be designed and built for technical
quality in conformance with the highest state of the art in the cable television
industry for Cable Systems of comparable size. Not later than one year from the
effective date of the Franchise, the Cable System shall be designed and built for
operation at a minimum of 750 MHz and a minimum eighty (80) video channel
capacity, with full bi-directional capability. All downstream and upstream
channels shall be activated by such date.
11.2. Emergency Power. The Cable System shall incorporate equipment
capable of providing standby powering of the Headend and all Sub-headends for a
minimum of four hours.
19
11.3. Emergency Override. The Cable System shall incorporate emergency
audio override capabilities in accordance with FCC Emergency Alert System
(EAS) standards.
11.4. Subscribers’ Antennae. Notwithstanding a required disconnection of a
Subscriber’s existing broadcast antennae and downleads to receivers connected to
the Cable System, the Company shall not remove or suggest to the Subscriber the
removal of such antennae and downleads. The Company shall furnish to each
Subscriber so requesting, at reasonable cost, an A/B switch permitting the
Subscriber to change from cable reception to home antenna reception, and back,
at the option of the Subscriber. Installation of such switches at the time of initial
installation of service to a Subscriber shall be without charge other than for such
purchase cost.
11.5. Switching. The Headend or Sub-headend shall have the capability of
accepting programming on the upstream channels of the Cable System and
simultaneously transmitting such programming on the downstream channels of
the Cable System.
11.6. VCR/Cable Compatibility. In order that Subscribers to the Cable
System have the capability to simultaneously view and tape any channel and set
their VCR to record multiple channels remotely, the Company shall provide to
any Subscriber, upon request, an A/B switch, installed at reasonable cost.
11.7 General Construction Requirements. In the construction,
reconstruction, maintenance and repair of the Cable System, the Company shall
utilize materials of good and durable quality and shall perform or cause to be
performed all work so associated with the system in a safe, thorough and reliable
manner.
11.8. Live Programming Origination Points. To facilitate live programming
within the Town of Gray each Company shall install Origination Points at the
public buildings and public locations as are designated in the Franchise
Agreement.
11.9. Compliance With Regulations. All work, including all working
conditions and facilities, associated with the construction, operation, maintenance,
repair and removal of the Cable System shall comply with:
(a) All applicable Federal and State laws, rules and regulations;
(b) All applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations of the
Town; and
20
(c) The National Electric Code, National Electrical Safety Code, the
National Cable Television Association Standard Code, and the
National Safety Code.
11.10. Town Rights. The Town reserves the right to inspect all construction and
installation work and to make such tests as it shall deem necessary to ensure
compliance with applicable laws, codes, ordinances and regulations and with
provisions of this Ordinance and the applicable Franchise Agreement, and may
order corrections of any violations.
11.11. Restoration of Damage. The Company, at its sole expense, shall restore
all damage to property, both public and private, caused by the construction,
operation, maintenance or repair of the Cable System, so as to return the damaged
property to a condition as good as before the damage was done. Such restoration
shall be made as soon as practicable after completion of work necessitating the
restoration, and shall be done in a manner approved by the owner or tenant in
possession. In no event shall such restoration be made later than ten (10) days,
weather permitting and subject to force majeure, after the Company’s receipt of
notification from the owner of the property so damaged unless otherwise mutually
agreed by the Company and the property owner; provided, that if any such
damage involves streets, water-mains, storm or sanitary sewers, or other public
facilities, such damage shall be repaired within forty-eight (48) hours or as soon
as practicable. If the Company fails to make such restoration on a timely basis, the
Town may fix a reasonable time for such restoration and repairs and shall notify
the Company in writing of the restoration and repairs required and the time fixed
for performance hereof. Upon failure of the Company to comply within the
specified time period, the Town may cause proper restoration and repairs to be
made and the Company shall pay the reasonable expense of such work upon
demand by the Town.
11.12. Identification. Each Company shall ensure that all of its vehicles are
clearly identified to the general public as being associated with the Company, and
that all of its employees, and the employees of any agents or contractors, who
enter upon private property wear an employee identification card issued by the
Company, which card shall bear a picture of said employee and shall be worn in a
conspicuous place.
11.13. Public Ways Hazards. Any openings or obstructions in streets or other
municipal or public property made by any Company shall be guarded and
protected at all times by the placement of adequate barriers, fences, boarding or
other protective devices at the sole expense of the Company. During the periods
of dusk and darkness, the protective devices shall be clearly designated by
warning lights.
11.14. Location of Physical Facilities. Within sixty (60) days after the effective
date of any Franchise Agreement, the Company shall provide the Town with
21
strand maps of the Town of Gray clearly showing the location of all distribution
lines (indicating underground, where applicable), tower, antennae, receivers,
headend, and sub-headends. Revised and corrected strand maps shall be
submitted to the Town not later than ninety (90) days after such changes or
additions are made.
11.15. Cable Location. Insofar as practicable, the distribution system (trunk and
feeder cable) shall run along public rights-of-way. Where the cable or wire
facilities of all public utilities are installed underground, the Company shall install
its cable distribution system underground. Vaults and pedestals shall be suitably
landscaped, such landscaping to be subject to the approval of the owner or tenant
in possession, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. In all areas
where public utility lines are aerially placed, if subsequently during the term of
the Franchise Agreement all such utility lines are relocated underground pursuant
to applicable law under the Town’s police powers, the Company shall similarly
relocate its cable distribution system underground at its sole expense. Wherever
possible, the distribution system shall use the existing facilities of the public
utilities. Poles shall not be installed for the sole purpose of supporting a portion
of the distribution system without written justification and approval of the Town,
which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, pursuant to the Town’s law,
ordinances, rules and regulations.
11.16. Location of Construction. All lines, cables and distribution structure,
and equipment, including poles and towers, erected, installed or maintained by
any Company within the Town of Gray shall be located so as not to obstruct or
interfere with the proper use of Streets and Public Ways and to cause minimum
interference with the rights of property owners who abut any of the said Streets
and Public Ways, and not to interfere with existing public utility installations. A
Company shall not place new poles, towers or other obstructions in Streets or
Public Ways, or relocate existing poles, towers or other obstructions, without first
obtaining the Town’s approval, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld. A Company shall have no vested right in any location, and the
Company shall remove such construction at its own cost and expense whenever
the Town determines that there is a restriction, obstruction or interference with the
operation or location or any future operation or location of said Streets or Public
Ways.
11.17. Grade or Location Changes. If at any time during the term of a
Franchise the Town shall elect to alter, or change the grade or location of any
Street, or shall engage in any construction, reconstruction, widening, repairs or
other public works in, on or under the Streets, any Company shall, upon
reasonable notice by the Town, remove and relocate its poles, wires, cables,
conduits, manholes and other fixtures (“Fixtures”) at its own expense, and in each
instance comply with the Town’s standards and specifications.
22
11.18. No Interference. A Company shall not place Fixtures above or below
ground where the same will interfere with any gas, electricity, telephone fixtures,
water hydrants, or other utility use, and all such Fixtures placed in or upon any
Street shall be so placed as to comply with all requirements of the Town or other
applicable authority, and fully comply with local regulations, including zoning
ordinances. Each Cable System shall be constructed, operated and maintained so
that there will be no objectionable interference with television reception, radio
reception, telephone communications or other electronic installations in the Town
of Gray or with the operation of any public fire, police, rescue or safety
communications system. Should any such interference occur, the Company shall
promptly eliminate it.
11.19. Temporary Relocation. A Company shall, on request of any Person
holding a permit issued by the Town or other appropriate authority, temporarily
move its Fixtures to permit the moving or erection of buildings or other objects,
with the expense of any such temporary removal to be paid in advance by the
Person requesting same, and the Company shall be given reasonable notice to
arrange for such temporary relocation. A Company shall bear any expense to
temporarily move its Fixtures to permit the moving or erection of Town- owned
or constructed buildings or other public infrastructure.
11.20. Tree Trimming. Each Company shall have the authority to trim any trees
upon and overhanging the Town’s Streets or Public Ways to the minimum extent
necessary to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the
wires and cables of the Cable System; provided that, except for incidental
trimming done by the Company employees in the course of performing their other
duties, any tree trimming done by the Company shall be subject, in all respects, to
the Town’s prior approval. Except in an emergency, the Company will notify the
abutting property owner(s) prior to starting tree trimming work. In performing
tree trimming, the Company shall employ best management practices, shall use its
best efforts to avoid any unnecessary damage or injury to trees, and shall comply
in all respects with any Town ordinances governing tree trimming. Except for
incidental trimming performed by a Company’s employees in the course of
performing their other duties, the Town may elect to perform tree trimming
directly or by agents under the Town’s supervision and direction, at the
Company’s expense.
11.21. Drops. In areas where the cable distribution is located underground, drop
connections to Subscriber’s structure shall be underground; in other areas the drop
connection shall be aerial unless the Subscriber requests underground installation
and elects to pay the cost thereof. Insofar as practicable, the Company shall
adhere to the Subscriber’s desire with regard to point of entry of the drop
connection into the structure. Within the Subscriber’s structure, drop or cable
runs shall be made as unobtrusively as possible. Each drop shall be grounded at
the Subscriber’s structure, or, at the Company’s option, at such other location as
may be permitted by the National Electrical Safety Code.
23
11.22. Zoning and Building Codes. Any and all construction performed by or
under the auspices of the Company, and any and all facilities used or operated by
the Company, shall comply with all applicable zoning and building ordinances,
codes or laws of the Town.
11.23. Contractors, Subcontractors and Affiliates. All contractors,
subcontractors and affiliates of a Company must be properly licensed under all
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. Each Company shall be
solely and completely responsible for all acts or omissions of any such contractor,
subcontractor or affiliate, or any employee or agent of any such contractor,
subcontractor or affiliate in the construction, reconstruction, installation,
maintenance, operation or removal of the Company’s cable system.
11.24. Completion of Work by the Town. Upon failure of a Company to
commence, pursue or complete any work required by this Ordinance, other
applicable law or by the provisions of the Franchise Agreement in any Street or
other public place within the time prescribed and to the satisfaction of the Town,
the Town may, at its option, cause such work to be done with reasonable
expenditures therefore and the Company shall pay to the Town the cost thereof in
the itemized amounts reported by the Town to the Company within thirty (30) days
after receipt of such itemized report.
11.25. Lockout Key. Each Company shall make available to any Subscribers so
requesting, for lease or sale, a “parental control device” or “lockout key” which will
permit the Subscriber, at his or her option, to eliminate comprehensible reception
of any or all of the Basic Service or pay cable Channels. If requested, a lockout
key will be installed within twenty (20) days of request.
Section 12. Operation, Service and Maintenance of System.
12.1 Each Company shall construct, maintain and operate its Cable System safely
and render efficient service to Subscribers during the term of any Franchise.
12.2 Each Company shall construct, upgrade, install, operate, maintain and
remove its Cable System in conformance with Occupational Safety and Health
Administration regulations, the Maine Electrical Code, the National Electric Code,
the NCTA Safety Manual, the National Electric Safety Code, the Bell Telephone
System Code of Pole Line Construction, the rules and regulations of the FCC, all
building and zoning codes, and all land use restrictions as they may now exist or
may be amended or adopted hereafter.
12.3 Any tower constructed for use in a Company’s Cable System shall comply
with the standards contained in "Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and
Antenna Supporting Structures", TIA/EIA-222-F as published by the
Telecommunications Industry Association, 2500 Wilson Blvd., Arlington,
VA 22201.
24
12.4 Installation and physical dimensions of any tower constructed for use in a
Company’s Cable System shall comply with all appropriate Federal Aviation
Agency regulations, including, but not limited to, "Objects Affecting Navigable
Airspace”, 14 C.F.R. §§ 77.1, et seq., as may be amended from time to time.
12.5 Any antenna structure used, in a Company’s Cable System shall comply
with “Construction, Marking, and Lighting of Antenna Structures", 47 C.F.R. §§
17.1, et seq., as may be amended from time to time.
12.6 Each Company shall install and maintain its wire, cable, mixers and other
equipment in accordance with the requirements of the generally applicable
ordinances of the Town as may be amended, and in such a manner which shall not
interfere with any installations of the Town or any public utility serving the Town.
12.7 Privacy.
(a) The Company shall respect the rights of privacy of every Subscriber
of the Cable Television System and, pursuant to applicable federal
law, shall not violate such rights through the use of any device or
Signal associated with the Cable Television System, and as hereafter
provided.
(b) The Company shall comply with all privacy provisions contained in
this Ordinance and all other applicable federal and State laws
including, but not limited to, the provisions of Section 631 of the
Cable Act.
(c) The Company shall be responsible for carrying out and enforcing the
Cable System's privacy policy, and shall at all times maintain adequate
physical, technical and administrative security safeguards to ensure
that personal subscriber information is handled and protected strictly
in accordance with this policy.
(d) Except as otherwise permitted by applicable law, the Company shall
not tap, monitor, arrange for the tapping or monitoring, or permit any
other person to tap or monitor, any cable, line, Signal, input device, or
subscriber Outlet or receiver for any purpose, without the prior written
authorization of the affected Subscriber; provided, however, that the
Company may conduct system-wide or individually addressed
"sweeps" solely for the purpose of verifying System integrity,
checking for illegal taps, controlling return-path transmission, or
billing for Pay Services. The Company shall report to the affected
parties any instances of monitoring or tapping of the Cable Television
System, or any part thereof, of which it has knowledge, whether or not
the Company has authorized such activity, other than as permitted
herein. The Company shall not record or retain any information
transmitted between a Subscriber and any third party, except as
25
required for lawful business purposes. The Franchisee shall destroy all
subscriber information of a personal nature after a reasonable period
of time except as authorized not to do so by the affected Subscriber.
(e) Except as otherwise permitted by applicable law, the Company shall
not sell, disclose, or otherwise make available, or permit the use of,
lists of the names or addresses of its Subscribers or any list or other
information which identifies by name or address, Subscribers viewing
habits, to any Person or agency for any purpose whatsoever without
the prior written consent of the Subscriber; provided that the Company
may make such lists available to Persons performing services for the
Company in connection with lawful business purposes hereunder (e.g.
a billing service) where the availability of such lists is necessary to the
performance of such services. A Subscriber may withdraw said
consent by providing written notice to the Company. Every
Company shall provide annual notice to each Subscriber of the right
to withdraw such authorization. In no event shall such authorization
be obtained as a condition of service or continuation thereof, except
as necessary to adequately provide particular services.
(f) Upon request, the Company shall make available for inspection by a
Subscriber at a reasonable time and place all personal subscriber
information that the Company maintains regarding said Subscriber. A
Subscriber may obtain from the Company a copy of any or all of the
personal subscriber information regarding him or her maintained by
the Company.
(g) A Subscriber may challenge the accuracy, completeness, retention,
use or dissemination of any item of personal subscriber information.
Such challenges and related inquiries about the handling of subscriber
information shall be directed to the Company's General Manager.
12.8 Performance Standards
(a) Technical Standards. Subject to Section 10.13 above, all signals,
including PEG signals, carried on a Cable System shall be
transmitted to Subscribers without material degradation and with a
quality no less than that prescribed by rules of any Federal or State
regulatory agencies having jurisdiction. Anything contained in a
Franchise Agreement to the contrary notwithstanding, the technical
specifications, operation and performance of the system shall, at
minimum, conform at all time to the specifications established by
any Federal or State regulatory agencies having jurisdiction thereof,
and such specifications existing on the effective date hereof,
whichever is of the higher quality.
26
(b) Performance Testing. At such time as the performance monitoring
and testing, conducted pursuant to requirements of any Federal or
State regulatory agencies having jurisdiction, provides evidence that
the Cable System’s transmissions do not meet the prescribed
standards, the performance monitoring and testing shall be repeated
for all segments of the Cable System which do not meet such
prescribed standards, upon completion of the necessary repair or
adjustment, notwithstanding the lack of such requirement by the
Federal or State agencies, and a report of the second test submitted
to the Town; provided, that the Company shall not be required to
furnish any such reports with respect to technical problems
discovered in the course of the Company’s routine maintenance
testing, except as may be specifically requested by the Town in each
instance. The Company shall provide and keep accurately
calibrated test equipment on hand at all times for the testing of all
services and operational standards outlined in this Franchise
Agreement.
Section 13 – Maintenance and Repair.
13.1 Maintenance Policy. Each Company shall promulgate and adhere to a
preventative maintenance policy directed toward maximizing the reliability
(mean-time-between-malfunctions) and maintainability (mean-time-to-repair) of
its Cable System with respect to its delivery of Cable Service to Subscribers at or
above the performance standard set forth herein. Whenever it is necessary to
interrupt service for the purpose of making scheduled maintenance or repairs,
adjustments, installations or other maintenance activities, the Company shall do
so at such a time as will cause the least inconvenience to Subscribers. Except in
an emergency, and except for interruptions of five minutes or less which may
occur during the course of normal maintenance, and except during the rebuild of
the Cable System, service is to be interrupted for planned or scheduled
maintenance or repairs between the hours of midnight and 7:00 a.m. where
practicable.
13.2 Repair. Each Company shall maintain a repair department comprising
qualified technicians, service vehicles and equipment to provide prompt and
efficient repair service within the parameters set forth below.
13.3 Notice. Except in an emergency, and except for interruptions of five minutes
or less, each Company shall give Subscribers at least 24 hours’ notice of any
planned interruption of service for purposes of maintenance or repair. In an
emergency, a Company shall give such notice as is reasonable in the
circumstances. Notice given on the alphanumeric channels on Basic Service shall
be considered sufficient. During any rebuild of the Cable System, a Company
shall not be required to provide 24 hour notice of any interruption of service if
such interruption is the direct result of rebuild work. However, a Company shall
be required to provide written notification to Subscribers of planned rebuild work
27
schedules and when Subscribers may experience service interruptions. The
Company shall use its best efforts to minimize the length of any service outage
due to a rebuild.
13.4 Repair Procedure. Each Company shall have a toll free telephone number
listed in the local area and so operated that requests for repairs or adjustments can
be received at any time, twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per
week. A recording device or answering service may be used during non-business
hours. A Company’s responses to such requests shall occur no later than 24 hours
after the Company’s receipt of such a request; provided, the response time for
service complaints other than complaints of no or unusable service shall be
computed excluding Sundays and holidays.
A Company shall respond within four (4) hours to any area outage that occurs
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. of any day, and by not later than
the following 11:00 a.m. to any area outage that occurs between 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. If a Company responds to a service complaint as herein required and
the Subscriber is not satisfied that the problem giving rise to the original
complaint has been resolved, the Subscriber shall notify the Company thereof
within forty eight (48) hours of the repair visit by the Company personnel, and the
Company shall have an additional period of twenty-four (24) hours within which
to correct the problem. If such second complaint is made to the Town instead of
the Company, the Company shall have a period of twenty-four (24) hours after
receipt of oral or written notice from the Town within which to make the
correction. The requirements for maintenance and repair shall not apply to
Subscribers’ television or radio receivers or other Subscriber-owned equipment.
13.5 Rebate or Credit for Service Loss. Upon request, for every loss of
service in excess of six (6) continuous hours, the Company shall grant a pro rata
rebate or credit of the regular monthly charge to the Subscriber. In the event a
Subscriber reports a loss of service to the Company, and such outage exceeds six
(6) continuous hours, the Company shall grant the credit or rebate whether or not
the Subscriber specifically requests it. The credit shall be pro-rated by
multiplying the applicable monthly service rate by a fraction whose numerator
equals the number of days of the outage and whose denominator equals the
number of days in the month of the outage. In no case shall the refund be less
than twenty-four (24) hours’ credit. For purposes of this paragraph, loss of Basic
Service shall be considered a Subscriber’s receipt of less than two-thirds of the
respective available channels, and loss of pay Cable Service shall be considered
the loss of signal on any pay Channel. The Company shall give the Subscriber a
credit no later than the next billing cycle. The Company shall include on each
Subscriber bill for service, a notice regarding the Subscriber’s right to a pro rata
credit or rebate for interruption of service upon request in accordance with this
Section. The notice must include a toll-free telephone number and a telephone
number accessible by a teletypewriter device or TTY for contacting the Company
to request the pro rata credit or rebate for service interruption. The notice must be
28
in nontechnical language, understandable by the general public and printed in a
prominent location on the Customer bill in boldface type.
13.6 Records. Each Company shall maintain records of all oral and written
complaints regarding quality of service, equipment malfunctions, billing procedure,
and similar matters that requires further action on the part of the Company. Such
records shall show the exact date and time of receipt of all such customer
complaints, identifying the Subscriber, the nature of the complaint and the exact
time action was taken by the Company in response thereto, together with a
description of such action. Each Company shall also maintain a record of all whole
or partial system outages, including the date, approximate time and duration, type
and probable cause of each outage, except for outages caused by routine testing or
maintenance. Such records shall be available at the Company’s local office for at
least two (2) years, for inspection by the Town as it may from time to time request,
during regular business hours and upon reasonable notice, subject to any privacy
restrictions imposed by law. The Company shall, within ten (10) days after
receiving a written request therefore, send a written report to the Town with respect
to any complaint. Such report shall provide a full explanation of the investigation,
finding(s) and corrective steps taken.
Section 14 - Time of Installation.
Service to any Subscriber served by a standard aerial Drop shall commence by not later
than seven (7) business days after service is requested; service to any Subscriber served by
a standard underground Drop shall commence by not later than forty-five (45) days after
service is requested unless additional time is required by severe weather or other
circumstances outside of Company’s control. The Company shall exert every reasonable
effort to commence service to a Subscriber served by a non-standard Drop as expeditiously
as possible. A standard Drop, for which the Subscriber shall be charged the Company’s
standard installation fee, is a drop running not more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from
feeder cable to the Subscriber’s structure; provided, that any installation which requires
Company to cross a street underground shall be considered a non-standard installation. An
aerial Drop in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet in length shall be considered a nonstandard
installation. If the Company schedules an appointment with a Subscriber for an
installation, repair or other service call, and the Company fails to arrive at the Subscriber’s
premises within one (1) hour of the scheduled time or scheduled window of time (which
window shall not exceed four (4) hours) for reasons not caused by the Subscriber unless
rescheduled in advance by the Company, the Company shall, in the case of an appointment
for a standard installation, make no charge to the Subscriber for the standard installation,
and in the case of a repair or other service call, shall apply a minimum twenty dollar
($20.00) credit to the Subscriber’s account to reduce the cost of any make-up or late repair
or service call.
Section 15 – Subscriber Rates and Charges.
15.1 Regulation. The Town shall have the right to regulate charges to
Subscribers for Cable Service to the extent allowed by law.
29
15.2 Rate or Service Discriminations: Special Classifications. No Company
shall subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage, preference or advantage
in connection with rates, charges, service facilities, rules or regulations. Nothing
herein shall prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of rates for classified
schedules to which any Subscribers within such classification shall be entitled.
15.3 Connection Charges. Subscribers shall be assessed no special connection
charges other than standard installation charges for cable drops from any
Company’s distribution plant up to one hundred fifty (150) feet. Subscribers
requiring drops over one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be charged only for the
incremental cost of extending the drop beyond one hundred fifty (150) feet.
15.4 Rates and Programming.
(a) Each Company shall give the Town and each Subscriber thirty (30)
days’ written notice of any change in Subscriber rates or
charges. At the Town’s request, exercised by the Town giving the
Company at least ten (10) days’ notice thereof, the Company shall
attend, and respond to questions, at any public meeting held by the
Town concerning the rate increase. Notice to Subscribers of rate
changes shall be by mail. Each Company shall also provide each
Subscriber at least annually with a detailed explanation of
downgrade and upgrade policies and the manner in which
Subscribers may terminate Cable Service. Subscribers shall have
at least thirty (30) days from receipt of notification of any rate
increase to either downgrade service or terminate altogether
without any charge.
(b) Each Company shall give the Town and each Subscriber thirty (30)
days written notice of any change, including additions or deletions,
or change in Channel position, in the programming carried on the
Cable System, as well as any re-tiering of such programming, and
any other changes in the programming service offered by each
Company. At the request of the Town, with at least ten (10) days’
notice, each Company shall meet with the Town at a public
meeting to discuss programming issues and options and to hear and
consider the input of the Town and the public.
(c) Each Company shall use its best efforts to provide a wide diversity
of programming options to its Subscribers. Each Company shall
provide the following broad categories of programming:
(1) public broadcasting programming;
(2) educational programming;
30
(3) news programming;
(4) music programming;
(5) sports programming;
(6) children’s programming;
(7) religious programming;
(8) arts and/or cultural programming; and
(9) family programming.
(d) Rate schedules shall be provided to Subscribers annually.
15.5 Billing Practices. Each Company shall set forth, in writing its billing and
collection practices and policies, and procedures for ordering changes in or
termination of services and refund policies, and shall furnish a copy thereof to
each new Subscriber and to the Town, and thereafter to the Town and all
Subscribers at such time as there is a change in such policies.
15.6 Pro-Rated Service. In the event a Subscriber’s service is terminated,
monthly charges for service shall be pro-rated on a daily basis and, where advance
payment has been made by a Subscriber, the appropriate refund shall be made by
the Company to the Subscriber within thirty (30) days of such termination.
15.7 Disconnection for Non-Payment. The Company shall have the right to
disconnect a Subscriber for failure to pay an overdue account; provided, that:
(a) The Company’s billing practices and policy statement set forth the
conditions under which an account will be considered overdue;
(b) At least twelve (12) days prior to the proposed disconnection, the
Company mails to the Subscriber written notice of intent to
disconnect for delinquency in payment;
(c) The Subscriber’s account is at least sixty (60) days delinquent at
the time said notice is mailed, and
(d) The disconnection occurs at least twelve (12) days, and not more
than sixty (60) days, after the mailing of the above written notice.
15.8 Notice of Rates and Programming. All rates and charges associated with
the provision of Cable Service and the lease of Channel space shall be published.
31
A written schedule of all such rates currently in effect, including special and
promotional rates, shall be available and obtainable in person or by mail upon
request during business hours at each Company’s business office.
(a) At least once each calendar year, each Company shall provide to
each Subscriber and the Town a complete schedule of all services,
rates and charges for Cable Service provided by the Company and
of the programming offered and channel alignment. Such
information shall also be provided to all new or prospective
Subscribers prior to installation or commencement of service.
(b) Such information shall be written in plain English and shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the following: all services,
tiers and rates, deposits, if applicable, installation costs, additional
television set installation charges, service upgrade or downgrade
charges, stolen or lost converter charges, charges for lockout
devices and for connecting video cassette recorders to the Cable
System.
15.9 General Customer Service. Each Company shall comply with any and all
customer service standards provided under Maine law, Federal law, FCC
regulations, including those regulations found at 47 C.F.R. § 76.309, and as
promulgated by the cable industry (such as NCTA standards), as well as with the
provisions of the applicable Franchise Agreement. To the extent there is any
conflict in the requirements of this Ordinance, the Franchise Agreement, State and
federal law, FCC regulations and/or cable industry standards, the strictest of such
standards shall govern.
Section 16 – Subscriber Complaints.
16.1 Complaint Policy. Any Company issued a Franchise under this Ordinance
shall promulgate, within one hundred twenty (120) days of issuance, a written
policy statement setting forth the procedure for reporting and resolving Subscriber
complaints, and shall furnish a copy thereof to each new Subscriber and to the
Town, and thereafter, annually, to the Town and all Subscribers. Such notice
shall comply in all respects with the Cable Act, FCC Regulations, Maine law and
this Ordinance.
16.2 Company Response. Each Company shall receive Subscriber complaints at
its business office serving the Town and shall handle all such complaints
promptly but in no event later than as set forth below.
16.3 Billing Complaints. In the case of a billing complaint, the Company shall
respond to the complainant no later than five (5) business days following receipt
of the complaint.
32
16.4 Service Complaints. In the case of a service complaint not requesting repair
or adjustment, the Company shall respond to complainant within five (5) business
days following receipt of the complaint.
Section 17. Preferential or Discriminatory Practices Prohibited.
The Company shall not, as to rates, charges, service, service facilities, rules, regulations,
or in any other respect, make or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person,
nor subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage.
Section 18. Reports and Records.
18.1 General Report Filing Requirements. The Town may require each Company
to maintain and file such reports, contracts and statements which are reasonably
necessary to monitor compliance with this Ordinance and the Franchise Agreement,
including but not limited to ownership, accounting, auditing and operating
statements, engineering reports, and other data, which the Town shall deem
necessary or appropriate to administer the provisions of this Ordinance.
Records to be available for inspection and review by the Town shall include, but
not be limited to:
(a) All correspondence among the Company and any of his agents, and
all regulators or other government agencies pertaining to the
operation of the Cable System in the Town necessary to monitor
compliance.
(b) All reports, applications, and other documents sent to, or required
by, any government agency pertaining to the operation of the Cable
System in the Town necessary to monitor compliance.
(c) All oral and written complaints received by the Company or its
agents from the Subscribers in the Town for the preceding two (2)
years of the term of the Franchise, and the disposition thereof.
(d) All financial records reasonably necessary to determine compliance
with and carry out the provisions of this Ordinance and any
Franchise Agreement necessary to monitor compliance.
18.2 Annual Report. No later than April 1 of each year during the term of a
Franchise Agreement, each Company shall submit an annual report to the Town for
the prior calendar year, which report shall include at a minimum:
(a) Total number of Subscribers in Gray, including a breakdown of
Subscribers taking basic Cable Service, Cable Programming
Service and premium services as of December 31 of the prior
calendar year.
33
(b) The increase or decrease in the number of Subscribers over the prior
calendar year for Gray.
(c) A specific description of any line extensions in Gray in the prior
calendar year.
(d) Any price or programming changes in the prior year.
(e) A description of any technological upgrades or enhancements in
Cable Service over the past year.
(f) A listing of any system outages in Gray over the prior year in excess
of one hour, including the affected locations, the date, time,
duration, cause of the outage, and steps taken to address the outage.
(g) A summary of customer complaint records for the prior year,
including an identification of any significant customer service issues
raised in Gray in the prior year and any resolution or changes in
service resulting.
After delivery of the Annual Report, each Company shall, at the request of the
Town, attend a meeting with the Town to review and discuss any issues or questions
raised in the grantor’s review of the Annual Report.
18.3 Supplemental Reporting. Upon written request of the Town, the Company
shall provide, not more than annually a report listing the following:
(a) A summary of the most recent FCC proof of performance tests and
measurement records interpreted in laymen’s language describing
the Cable System’s compliance or lack of compliance with the FCC
Technical Standards set forth in 76 C.F.R. §§ 76.601, et seq., as may
be amended from time to time, identifying any instances of noncompliance
and describing all measures taken or under way to
achieve compliance;
(b) A list of any material violations by the Company of the technical
rules of the FCC, including but not limited to violations of rules and
regulations regarding signal quality and safety during the past 12
months, and describing all measures taken or underway to achieve
compliance; and
(c) A copy of the Company’s most recent S.E.C. Forms 10 K and 10Q.
Section 19. Rights Reserved to the Town.
19.1 Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way,
to any extent, the right of the Town to acquire the property of the Company, either
by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain and nothing
34
herein contained shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge,
whether for a term or in perpetuity, the Town's right of eminent domain.
19.2 Neither the awarding of a Franchise nor any provision hereof shall
constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the
Town.
19.3 The Town Manager is hereby authorized and empowered to adjust, settle,
or compromise any controversy or charge arising from the operations of the
Company under this Ordinance on behalf of the Town.
19.4 The Town shall have the right to inspect all construction of installation work
for a Cable System and to make such inspections as it shall find necessary to insure
compliance with the terms of this Ordinance, and Franchise awarded pursuant
hereto, and any other pertinent provisions of the law.
19.5 Upon revocation or denial of a renewal under the formal process of the
Cable Act of any Cable Franchise, the Town shall have the right to require the
Company to remove at its own expense all portions of the Cable System from all
Streets and Public Ways within the Town.
19.6 Nothing in this Ordinance or the Franchise shall encumber or prohibit the
Town from the collection of property taxes, of whatsoever kind, allowed by state
law.
Section 20. Rules, Regulations and Procedures.
20.1 The Town Council shall, either directly or through its designees, conduct
public hearings and issue such appropriate orders as it may deem necessary to
enforce the provisions of this Ordinance, including the revocation of a Franchise and
the assessment of penalties for violations, as well as to correct any deficiencies in
the operation of the Cable System.
20.2 Any such order adopted by the Town Council shall not be in conflict with
any orders adopted by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) for the
operation of such Cable Systems, except that unless preempted, such ordinances,
regulations, rules and orders may be more detailed, more strict or more restrictive
than applicable FCC regulations.
20.3 As part of its enforcement authority, the Town Council has the authority to
bring legal action for damages, penalties and for injunctive relief on behalf of the
Town against a Company. In the event that the Town brings a legal action to enforce
the provisions of this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement, and the Town prevails
in the action, the Town shall be entitled to recover its costs, including reasonable
attorney’s fees, incurred in the prosecution of any such action.
35
20.4 The Company shall have the right to appeal any decision of the Town
Council under this Ordinance within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision or
ruling to the Maine Superior Court pursuant to M.R. Civ. P. 80B.
Section 21. Revocation.
20.1 Notice and Hearing. The Town Council may revoke any Franchise
awarded pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance and federal law upon thirty
(30) days written notice to the Company and after hearing, in the event that the
Company:
(a) violates any material provision of its Franchise Agreement, where
such violation remains uncured for a period of thirty (30) days;
(b) ceases to provide service over the Cable System or fails to restore
service after ninety-six (96) consecutive hours of interrupted service
except in cases of force majeure or when approval of such
interruption is obtained from the Town;
(c) fails to provide or maintain in full force and effect the insurance
coverages and the performance bond as required by this Ordinance
and under the terms of the Franchise Agreement, where such
violation remains uncured for a period of thirty (30) days;
(d) violates any rule, order or determination of the Town made pursuant
to the Franchise Agreement or this Ordinance where such violation
remains uncured for a period of thirty (30) days; or
(e) violates any other provision of law.
20.2 Procedures. The Town shall follow the following procedures in revoking
a franchise:
(a) The Town shall provide the Company with notice of intention to
revoke the Franchise. The written notice shall be sent by certified
or overnight mail and shall describe in reasonable detail the specific
violations alleged to have occurred.
(b) The Company shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice
either to correct the alleged violation or dispute the Town’s
allegations in writing. In the event that, by nature of the alleged
violation, such violation cannot be cured within such thirty (30) day
period, the parties shall meet in good faith and agree to a reasonable
cure schedule.
(c) If the Company disputes the Town’s allegations, the Town Council
shall conduct a public hearing within thirty (30) days of receipt of
notice that the Company disputes the allegations. The hearing shall
36
follow the procedures set forth for public hearings before the Town
Council and the Company shall have the right to present evidence,
and question witnesses, if any.
(d) Following the public hearing, the Town Council shall make a
determination as to whether to revoke the Franchise, and shall issue
a written decision containing its findings.
CHAPTER 304
ACTIVE DUTY MILITARY EXCISE TAX EXEMPTION ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted October 15, 2019, Effective November 14, 2019
SECTION 304.1 — TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Active Duty Military Excise Tax Exemption
Ordinance of the Town of Gray, Maine.
SECTION 304.2 — AUTHORITY; PURPOSE
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to 36 M.R.S. § 1483-A, which expressly authorizes such ordinances.
The purpose of this ordinance is to grant an excise tax exemption for residents of the Town of Gray who
are currently on active duty in the United States Armed Forces.
SECTION 304.3 — DEFINITIONS
A. Automobile: For the purpose of this Ordinance, "automobile" means a motor vehicle as further
defined in 36 M.R.S. § 1481(6), as amended.
B. Deployed for Military Service: For the purpose of this Ordinance, "deployed for military service"
shall refer to an individual who is on active duty with the state military forces, or the United States
Armed Forces, including the National Guard and Reserves, as defined in 26 M.R.S. § 814, as
amended.
C. Primary Vehicle: For the purposes of this Ordinance, "primary vehicle" means an automobile with
title held by the eligible resident applying for an excise tax exemption. If such resident owns more
than one vehicle, the exemption outlined in Section 304.4 shall only apply to the automobile on
which the least amount of excise tax is owed in the current year. A primary vehicle does not include
a snowmobile, as the same is defined in 12 M.R.S. § 13001, as amended.
D. United States Armed Forces: For the purpose of this Ordinance, "United States
Armed Forces" shall mean all branches of the United States Military, including the Army,
Marine Corps, Navy, Air Force and Coast Guard, as well any reserve components of any
branch such as the National Guard, or special forces units of any branch such as the “Green
Berets” or “SEALs”.
SECTION 304.4 — EXCISE TAX EXEMPTION; QUALIFICATIONS
A. A primary vehicle owned by a resident of the Town of Gray who is on active duty serving in the
United States Armed Forces and who is either permanently stationed at a military or naval post,
station, or base outside of the State of Maine, or who is deployed for military service for a period
of more than 180 days and who desires to register that resident’s primary vehicle in this state is
hereby exempted from the annual excise tax imposed pursuant to 36 M.R.S. § 1482.
B. To apply for this exemption, the resident must present to the excise tax collector of the Town of
Gray certification from the commander of the resident’s post, station, or base, or from the
commander’s designated agent, that the resident is permanently stationed at that post, station or
base, or is deployed for military service for a period of more than 180 days. SECTION 207.7 —
SEVERABILITY
SECTION 304.5 — SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Ordinance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such ruling shall
not affect the remaining provisions which shall remain in full force and effect.
CHAPTER 207
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GRAY MAINE
Adopted January 4, 1979
Amended May 21, 2019 – effective June 20, 2019
SECTION 207.1 — TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Special Amusement Ordinance of the Town of
Gray, Maine.
SECTION 207.2 — AUTHORITY/PURPOSE
This Ordinance is enacted under the Town’s home rule authority pursuant to Article VIII, Part Second of
the Maine Constitution and 30-A M.R.S. § 3001, et seq. The purpose of this Ordinance is to control the
issuance of special permits for music, dancing, or entertainment, in facilities licensed by the State of Maine
to sell liquor.
SECTION 207.3 — DEFINITIONS
A. Dancer: For the purpose of this Ordinance, "dancer" means a person, other than a patron, under the
licensee's control and dancing for entertainment in facilities licensed by the State of Maine to sell
liquor.
B. Entertainment: For the purpose of this Ordinance, "entertainment" shall include any amusement,
performance, exhibition or diversion for patrons or customers of the licensed premises whether
provided by professional entertainers or by full-time or part-time employees of the licensed premises
whose incidental duties include activities with an entertainment value.
C. Exotic Dancing: For the purposes of this Ordinance, "exotic dancing" means the appearance of a
person or persons, under the licensee's control, other than a patron, and on the licensee's premises, in
such a manner or attire as to expose to view any portion of the pubic area, anus, buttocks, vulva or
genitals or any simulation thereof, or when any female appears on a licensee's premises in such a
manner or attire as to expose to view any portion of the breast referred to as the areola, nipple or
simulation thereof. "Expose to view" shall be interpreted to prohibit, without limitation, clear, seethrough
or clothing which is otherwise non-opaque.
D. Licensee: For the purpose of this Ordinance, "licensee" shall include any person, individual,
partnership, firm, association, corporation, or other legal entity to whom a license of any kind is
issued by the Maine State Liquor Commission.
E. Premises: For the purpose of this Ordinance, "premises" means all parts of the contiguous real estate
occupied by a licensee over which the licensee has direct or indirect control or interest, which the
licensee uses in the operation of the licensed business and which have been approved by the Maine
State Liquor Commission and/or the Town of Gray as proper places for the exercise of the license
privilege.
SECTION 207.4 — SPECIAL AMUSEMENT PERMIT
A. Application
1. No licensee for the sale of liquor to be consumed on his premises shall permit on his premises
any music, except radio or other mechanical device, any dancing or entertainment of any sort
unless the licensee shall have first obtained from the municipality in which the premises are
situated a special amusement permit.
2. Applications for all special amusement permits shall be made in writing to the Town Council
and shall state the name of the applicant; his or her business address; the nature of his or her
business; the location to be used; whether the applicant has ever had a license to conduct the
business therein described either denied or revoked and, if so, the applicant shall describe those
circumstances specifically; whether the applicant, including all partners or corporate officers,
has ever been convicted of a felony and, if so, the applicant shall describe specifically those
circumstances; and any additional information as may be required by the Town Council prior to
the issuance of said permit, including but not limited to a copy of the applicant's current liquor
license.
3. No permit shall be issued for anything or act, or premises, if the premises and building to be
used do not fully comply with all ordinances, codes and regulations of the said Town.
4. The fee for a special amusement permit shall be paid when application is made for said permit.
If an application is withdrawn or denied, the Town shall refund the then-unexpended balance of
the application fee, if any.
5. A licensee who has been issued a special amusement permit may charge admission in
designated areas approved in said permit.
B. Hearing
1. The Town Council shall, prior to granting a permit and after reasonable notice to the
municipality and the applicant, hold a public hearing, at which hearing the testimony of
the applicant and that of any interested members of the public shall be taken.
2. The Town Council shall grant a permit unless they find that issuance of the permit would be
detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or would violate municipal ordinances, codes
and/or regulations. The permit may be granted subject to such conditions and restrictions as the
Council may deem necessary.
3. A permit shall be valid only for the license year of the applicant's existing liquor license.
C. Decision
Within fifteen (15) days of receiving the permit application, the Town Council shall give
the applicant written notice of its decision.
1. If the Town Council denies a licensee a permit, it shall provide the licensee with the reasons for
the denial in writing, and shall inform the licensee of the right to appeal the denial pursuant to
Section 207.4(F) of this Ordinance.
2. The licensee may not reapply for a permit within thirty (30) days after denial of an
application for a permit.
D. Inspections
1. Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed
business which has obtained a special amusement permit fare provided for or required by
ordinance or State law, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any municipal
ordinance, code or regulation or State law, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in
charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit any officer, official, or employee of the said
Town authorized to make the inspection at any reasonable time admission is requested.
X\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 207 SPECIAL AMUSEMENT ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 207 SPECIAL AMUSEMENT ORDINANCE.DOCX 2
2. In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Town Council may revoke the
special amusement permit of any licensee in the municipality who refuses to permit any such
officer, official or employee while in the performance of his duty; provided, that no license or
special amusement permit shall be revoked unless written demand for the inspection is
made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises, at the time it is sought to make
the inspection.
E. Suspension or Revocation
The Town Council may, after a public hearing preceded by notice to interested parties, suspend or
revoke any special amusement permit which has been issued under this Ordinance on the grounds
that the music, dancing, or entertainment so permitted constitutes a detriment to the public health,
safety, or welfare or violates any municipal ordinances or regulations.
F. Appeals
Any licensee who has requested a permit and has been denied, or whose permit has been revoked or
suspended, may within thirty (30) days of the denial, suspension or revocation, appeal the decision to
the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant or reinstate the permit if it
finds: (1) that the permitted or proposed activities would not constitute a detriment to the public
health, safety, or welfare, or violate other ordinances or regulations of the Town; or (2) the denial,
revocation, or suspension of the permit was arbitrary and capricious.
SECTION 207.5 — RULES AND REGULATIONS
A. Exotic Dancing
1. No special amusement permit shall be issued to conduct the activity of exotic dancing on
the applicant's premises.
2. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Ordinance for a licensee holding a special amusement
permit thereunder to permit exotic dancing on the premises.
B. Regulations for Permitted Dancing. The following regulations apply to any and all entertainment for
which a special amusement permit is sought or issued where such entertainment includes a "dancer"
or "dancers" as defined in this Ordinance.
1. No dancer shall dance in the premises except on a raised platform intended for that purpose
which is raised at least two (2) feet from the floor.
2. No dancer shall dance closer than ten (10) feet to any patron.
3. There shall be no fondling, mingling or caressing on the premises between any patron and any
dancer with the intent to sexually arouse or excite a patron's sexual desire.
4. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer and no dancer shall solicit any pay
or gratuity from any patron.
5. The licensee shall provide on the premises a separate dressing room and toilet facilities for use
by dancers only.
6. Dancers on the premises who remove any outer garments shall not toss or throw those
outer garments at or in the direction of patrons.
7. The licensee shall, at his own expense, post a licensed security guard or an individual
authorized to act as a law enforcement officer (whether full-time or part-time and whether onduty
or off-duty) at each entrance and exit to the premises during each performance by dancers
on the premises and for one hour after each such performance.
X\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 207 SPECIAL AMUSEMENT ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 207 SPECIAL AMUSEMENT ORDINANCE.DOCX 3
8. No one under twenty-one (21) years of age shall be permitted on the premises or portion of the
premises where a performance by dancers is conducted during any such performance.
9. Any premises upon which entertainment, including a dancer or dancers, is proposed to be
conducted shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet from any church; school; park; other
facility holding a special amusement license under this Ordinance and which provides "dancers"
as defined in this Ordinance; or the boundary of any zoning district within which residential
uses are either a permitted use or a conditional use under the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of
Gray, Maine (in each of the above instances, the distance shall be measured from property line
to property line).
10. An applicant for a special amusement permit for entertainment including a dancer or dancers
must demonstrate that at the time of permit application and during the duration of the permit, the
applicant will have available during the hours that such entertainment is provided one (1)
parking space for each three (3) persons the premises is capable of accommodating plus two (2)
parking spaces for each three (3) employees, including the dancer or dancers who are on the
premises to provide such entertainment.
11. An applicant for a special amusement permit for entertainment including a dancer or
dancers shall pay an application fee of five hundred dollars ($500.) to defray the additional
administrative costs of such a permit.
12. There shall be no graphic evidence on the exterior of any facility licensed under this Ordinance
of the dancers, either live or simulated, requiring the licensee, if necessary, to black out
windows or install curtains to prevent viewing of the dancers from the outside; provided,
nothing in this paragraph shall prohibit the establishment from advertising by words the nature
of the entertainment.
C. Regulations Generally Applicable. The following regulations apply to any and all music, dancing
and entertainment for which a special amusement permit is sought or issued.
1. All music, dancing and/or entertainment subject to regulation under this Ordinance, on
the premises, shall end no later than 12:00 midnight.
2. The maximum permissible sound pressure level produced by any music, dancing and/or
entertainment on the premises shall not exceed 50 dB, measured four (4) feet above ground at the
property boundary; this measurement shall be made by a meter set on the A-weighted response
scale, slow response and the meter shall meet the American National Standards Institute (ANSI
S1.4-1961) "American Standard Specification for General Purpose Sound Level Meters."
3. The music, dancing and/or entertainment on the premises shall comply with all applicable law,
including but not limited to all ordinances and regulations of the Town of Gray.
4. Except for where a special amusement permit is sought for entertainment including a dancer or
dancers, the application for a special amusement permit shall be two hundred fifty dollars
($250.)
5. Must demonstrate that at the time of permit application and during the duration of the permit, the
applicant will have available during the hours that such entertainment is provided one (1) parking
space for each three (3) persons the premises is capable of accommodating plus two (2) parking
spaces for each three (3) employees.
D. The Town Council is hereby authorized, after public notice and hearing, to establish additional
written rules and regulations governing the issuance, suspension, and revocation of special
amusement X\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 207 SPECIAL AMUSEMENT ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 207 SPECIAL AMUSEMENT ORDINANCE.DOCX 4
permits, the classes of permits, the music, dancing, or entertainment permitted under each class, and
other limitations on these activities required to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The
rules and regulations may specifically determine the location and size of permitted premises, the
facilities that may be required for the permitted activities on those premises, and the hours during
which the permitted activities are permitted. Such rules and regulations shall be additional to and
consistent with all sections of this Ordinance.
SECTION 207.6 — PENALTY
Violations of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not less than Five Hundred Dollars ($500) nor
more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2500) in addition to such equitable relief as is necessary to
insure compliance with the terms of this Ordinance. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed
to be a new offense.
SECTION 207.7 — SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Ordinance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such ruling shall
not affect the remaining provisions which shall remain in full force and effect.
X\ORDINANCE & POLICY\CHAPTER 207 SPECIAL AMUSEMENT ORDINANCE\CHAPTER 207 SPECIAL AMUSEMENT ORDINANCE.DOCX 5