Town of Hampden, Maine
Property Assessed Clean Energy Ordinance
1
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY (PACE) ORDINANCE
The Town of Hampden Hereby Ordains that the following Ordinance be adopted:
Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance
Adopted: Hampden Town Council, August 16, 2010
Effective: September 15, 2010
CERTIFIED BY:
Denise Hodsdon, Town Clerk
Town Clerk
Affix Seal
Town of Hampden, Maine
Property Assessed Clean Energy Ordinance
2
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY (PACE) ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I – GENERAL 3
1.1. Title 3
1.2. Purpose 3
1.3. Enabling Legislation 3
1.4. Reserved 3
ARTICLE II – DEFINITIONS 3
2.1. Definitions 3
ARTICLE III – PACE PROGRAM 4
3.1. Establishment; funding 4
3.2. PACE District 5
3.2. Reserved 5
ARTICLE IV – CONFORMITY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE TRUST 5
4.1. Property Owners; Home Energy Savings Program 5
4.2. Standards Adopted 5
4.3. Rights to carbon emissions reductions 5
4.4. Reserved 5
ARTICLE V – PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION; MUNICIPAL LIABILITY 5
5.1. Program Administration 5
5.2. Adoption of Education and Outreach Program 6
5.3. PACE Assessments 6
5.4. Liability of Municipal Officials; Liability of Municipality 6
Town of Hampden, Maine
Property Assessed Clean Energy Ordinance
3
TOWN OF HAMPDEN
PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY (PACE) ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I
GENERAL
1.1 Title - This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as “Town of Hampden Property
Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance.”
1.2 Purpose - By and through this Ordinance, the Town of Hampden (“Town” or “Hampden”)
declares as its public purpose the establishment of a municipal program to enable its citizens to
participate in a Property Assessed Clean Energy (“PACE”) program so that property owners can
access financing for energy saving improvements to their properties located in the Town. The
Town declares its purpose and the provisions of this Ordinance to be in conformity with federal
and state laws.
1.3 Enabling Legislation - The Town enacts this Ordinance pursuant to State law. Specific
enabling legislation is found in Public Law 2009, Chapter 591, 124th Maine State Legislature—
“An Act To Increase the Affordability of Clean Energy for Homeowners and Businesses.”
1.4 Reserved
ARTICLE II
DEFINITIONS
2.1 Definitions - Except as specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance
shall have their customary meanings; as used in this Ordinance, the following words and phrases
shall have meanings indicated.
2.1.1. Energy saving improvement - “Energy saving improvement” means an
improvement to qualifying property that is new and permanently affixed to qualifying
property and that:
1. Will result in increased energy efficiency and substantially reduced energy use
and:
a. Meets or exceeds applicable United States Environmental Protection
Agency and United States Department of Energy Energy Star program or
similar energy efficiency standards established or approved by the Trust;
or
b. Involves air sealing, insulating, and other energy efficiency
improvements of residential, commercial or industrial property in a
manner approved by the Trust; or
2. Involves a renewable energy installation or an electric thermal storage system
that meets or exceeds standards established or approved by the Trust.
2.1.2. Municipality - “Municipality” shall mean the Town of Hampden.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Property Assessed Clean Energy Ordinance
4
2.1.3. PACE agreement - “Pace agreement” means an agreement entered into by an owner or
owners of a qualifying property and the Trust, or an agent authorized by the Trust, that
authorizes a PACE loan and the creation of a PACE mortgage on qualifying property and that
is approved in writing by all owners of the qualifying property at the time of the agreement,
other than mortgage holders.
2.1.4. PACE assessment. “PACE assessment” means an assessment made against qualifying
property to repay a PACE loan.
2.1.5. PACE district. “PACE district” means the district in which the PACE program may
operate and which is defined geographically to include the entire municipality as determined
by municipal boundary lines.
2.1.6. PACE loan. “PACE loan” means a loan made to the owner(s) of a qualified property
for an energy saving improvement.
2.1.7. PACE mortgage. “PACE mortgage” means a mortgage securing a loan made pursuant
to a PACE program to fund energy saving improvements on qualifying property.
2.1.8. PACE program. “PACE program” means a program established under State statute by
the Trust and a municipality under which property owners can finance energy savings
improvements on qualifying property.
2.1.9. Qualifying property. “Qualifying property” means real property located in the Town
of Hampden.
2.1.10. Renewable energy installation. “Renewable energy installation” means a fixture,
product, system, device or interacting group of devices installed behind the meter at a
qualifying property, or on contiguous property under common ownership, that produces
energy or heat from renewable sources, including, but not limited to, photovoltaic systems,
solar thermal systems, biomass systems, landfill gas to energy systems, geothermal systems,
wind systems, wood pellet systems and any other systems eligible for funding under federal
Qualified Energy Conservation Bonds or federal Clean Renewable Energy Bonds.
2.1.11. Trust. “Trust” means the Efficiency Maine Trust established in 35-A M.R.S.A.
§ 10103.
ARTICLE III
PACE PROGRAM
3.1 Establishment; funding - The Town of Hampden hereby establishes a PACE program
allowing property owners in the Town of Hampden who so choose to access financing for energy
saving improvements to their property through PACE loans administered by the Trust, or its
agent. The PACE loan funds are available from the Trust through grant money awarded to the
State of Maine under the federal Energy Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant Program.
These loan funds are available to citizens who reside in municipalities that 1) adopt a PACE
Ordinance, 2) adopt and implement a local public outreach and education plan, and 3) require that
participants in the program conform to the requirements of the Home Energy Savings Program
administered by the Efficiency Trust or any successor or corollary program adopted by the Trust
for the purpose of administration of PACE loan funds. The Town may, from time to time, use
Town of Hampden, Maine
Property Assessed Clean Energy Ordinance
5
any other funding sources made available to it, or appropriated by it, for the express purpose of its
PACE program. The Town shall be entitled to, and shall avail itself of, recoupment of
administrative or other costs incurred by the Town in conjunction with its PACE program to the
fullest extent permissible by the Trust or governing law.
3.2 PACE District - The Town hereby establishes a PACE district in which the PACE program
may operate and which is defined geographically as being the entire municipality as determined
by municipal boundary lines.
3.3 Reserved -
ARTICLE IV
CONFORMITY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE TRUST
4.1. Property Owners; Home Energy Savings Program - In order to access PACE loans for
home energy savings improvements, participating property owners must conform to the
requirements of the Home Energy Savings Program administered by the Trust or any successor or
corollary program adopted by the Trust for the purpose of administration of PACE loan funds.
4.2. Standards adopted; Rules promulgated; model documents - If the Trust adopts standards,
promulgates rules, or establishes model documents subsequent to Town’s adoption of this
Property Assessed Clean Energy (“PACE”) Ordinance and those standards, rules or model
documents substantially conflict with Town’s PACE Ordinance, the Town, should it desire to
remain eligible to participate with the Trust in this program, will be required to take necessary
steps to conform this PACE Ordinance and its PACE program to those standards, rules, or model
documents.
4.3. Rights to carbon emissions reductions - PACE agreements entered into pursuant to this
PACE Ordinance shall specify that all rights of participating property owners related to carbon
emissions reductions from energy saving improvements are deemed to be assigned by the
property owner(s) to the Trust and are held by the Trust for the purpose of quantifying,
monetizing and/or marketing aggregated carbon emission reductions in the State of Maine.
4.4. Reserved -
ARTICLE V
PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION; MUNICIPAL LIABILITY
5.1. Program Administration
5.1.1. Pursuant to §10154(2)(A)(2) and (B) of the State enabling legislation, the Town
will enter into a contract with the Trust to administer the functions of the PACE program
for the municipality. The contract with the Trust will establish the administration of the
PACE program including, without limitation, that:
1. the Trust, or its agent, will be the entity to enter into PACE agreements with
property owners;
2. the Trust, or its agent, will create and record a Notice of the PACE agreement in
the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds;
Town of Hampden, Maine
Property Assessed Clean Energy Ordinance
6
3. the Trust, or its agent, will disburse the PACE loan to the property owner;
4. the Trust, or its agent, will send assessment statements with payment deadlines to
the property owner;
5. the Trust, or its agent, will be responsible for collection of the PACE assessments;
6. the Trust, or its agent, will record any lien, if needed, due to nonpayment of the
assessment; and
7. the Trust, or its agent, will ensure the collection of data required to quantify
carbon savings and to facilitate access to and eligibility for voluntary carbon markets,
for federal grants for energy efficiency and for other incentive programs that support
energy savings improvements; and
5.2. Adoption of Education and Outreach Program - In conjunction with adopting this PACE
Ordinance, the Town shall adopt and implement an education and outreach program so that
citizens of the Town are made aware of home energy saving opportunities, including the
opportunity to finance energy saving improvements with a PACE loan.
5.3. PACE Assessments - PACE assessments do not constitute a municipal tax but may be
assessed and collected by the Trust in any manner determined by the Trust and consistent with
applicable law.
5.4. Liability of Municipal Officials; Liability of Municipality
5.4.1. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, municipal officers and
municipal officials, including, without limitation, tax assessors and tax collectors, are not
personally liable to the Trust or to any other person for claims, of whatever kind or nature,
under or related to a PACE program, including, without limitation, claims for or related to
uncollected PACE assessments.
5.4.2. Other than the fulfillment of its obligations specified in a contract with the Trust
entered into under Article VI, §1(A) above, a municipality has no liability to a property
owner for or related to energy savings improvements financed under a PACE program.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Historic Preservation Ordinance
1
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
HISTORIC PRESERVATION ORDINANCE
Adopted: Hampden Town Council November 20, 1989 Effective: December 19, 1989
Amended: (5-7-90) Amended: (5-21-90) Amended: (7-02-90) Amended: (7-20-92)
Effective: (6-6-90) Effective: (6-20-90) Effective: (7-31-90) Effective: (8-19-92)
Amended: (6-4-01) Amended: (5-20-02) Amended: (11-17-03) Amended: (06-19-06)
Effective: (7-4-01) Effective: (6-19-02) Effective: (12-17-03) Effective: (07-19-06)
CERTIFIED BY: Denise Hodsdon
Name
Town Clerk
Title Affix Seal
HISTORIC PRESERVATION ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section 1. Intent and Purpose 2
Section 2. Definitions 2
2.1. Historic District 2
2.2. Historic Site 2
2.3. Historic Landmark 2
2.4. Contributing Structure 2
2.5. Archeological Site 2
Section 3. Hampden Historic Preservation Commission 3
Section 4. Qualifications 4
Section 5. Establishment of Historic Districts, Sites or Landmarks 5
Section 6. Historic Districts, Sites or Landmarks 6
Section 7. Uses Permitted 7
Section 8. Certificate of Appropriateness 7
Section 9. Application Procedure 7
Section 10. Administrative Procedures 8
Section 11. Standards of Evaluation 9
11.1. Demolition or Removal 9
11.2. Reconstruction, Alterations and Maintenance 9
11.3. New Construction 10
11.4. Visual Compatibility for New Construction and Additions 10
11.5. Standards for Rehabilitation from Secretary of the Interior 10
Section 12. Maintenance 11
Section 13. Hardship/Appeals 12
Section 14. Validity and Separability 14
Section 15. Conflict with Other Ordinances 14
Section 16. Administration and Enforcement
Town of Hampden, Maine
Historic Preservation Ordinance
2
14
Town of Hampden, Maine
Historic Preservation Ordinance
3
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
HISTORIC PRESERVATION ORDINANCE
SECTION 1
INTENT AND PURPOSE
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the legislative authority vested in the Town of Hampden by virtue of
Title 30-A, Maine Revised Statutes Annotated § Section 3001, and acts amendatory thereto, for the purposes
of preserving, protecting, and enhancing buildings and places or areas within the Town which possess
particular historical, cultural, or architectural significance in order to promote the educational, cultural and
economic welfare of the residents and visitors to the Town. To achieve these purposes, it is intended that
historic districts and related regulations be used to prevent inappropriate alterations of buildings of historic or
architectural value; to preserve the essential character of neighborhoods; and to assure that new buildings or
structures constructed in neighborhoods and districts of historic, prehistoric or architectural value are
designed and built in a manner which is compatible with the character of the neighborhood or district.
(Amended: 5-7-90)
SECTION 2
DEFINITIONS
2.1. Historic District. A geographically definable area possessing a significant concentration, linkage or
continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical
development and designated in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance as appropriate for historic
preservation. Such historic districts may also comprise individual elements separated geographically, but
linked by association of history.
2.2. Historic Site. Any parcel of land of special significance in the history or prehistory of the Town and its
inhabitants, or upon which a historic event has occurred, and which has been designated as such in accordance
with this Ordinance. The term "historic site" shall also include any improved parcel, or part thereof, on which
is situated a historic landmark, and any abutting improved parcel, or part thereof, used as and constituting part
of the premises on which the historic landmark is situated as may be designed in accordance with this
Ordinance. (Amended: 5-7-90)
2.3. Historic Landmark. Any improvement, building or structure of particular historic or architectural
significance to the Town relating to its heritage, cultural, social, economic or political history, or which
exemplifies historic personages or important events in local, state or national history as may be designated in
accordance with this Ordinance.
2.4. Contributing Structure. A structure located within designated historic district and identified as
contributing to the historical or architectural significance of said district.
2.5. Archeological Site. A geographic location of any remains of the prior presence of human beings
including (without limitations); structure, artifacts, terrain features, graphics (such as paintings or drawings)
or remains of plants, or animals associated with human being habitations. (Amended: 5-7-90)
Town of Hampden, Maine
Historic Preservation Ordinance
4
SECTION 3
HAMPDEN HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
3.1. Appointment. - Members of the Hampden Historic Preservation Commission shall be appointed by the
Town Council.
3.2. Members. - The Commission shall consist of five (5) members who shall be residents of Hampden.
Appointments shall be made on the basis of demonstrated interest, knowledge, ability, experience and desire
to promote historic preservation in the Town, with the meaning of Section 1 of this Ordinance. Members of
the Commission shall serve without compensation.
3.3. Terms. - The Commissioners who are first appointed shall be designated to serve terms as follows: One
for one (1) year, two for two (2) years, and two for three (3) years, from the date of their appointment.
Thereafter, said Commissioners shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years, except in those instances in
which the appointment is make to fill a vacancy in an unexpired term, in which case the appointment shall be
for the remainder of the unexpired term. An attempt will be made to fill vacancies within sixty (60) days.
(Amended 5-21-90)
3.4. Associate members. - In addition, there shall be two (2) associate members appointed by the Town
Council for a term of three (3) years, who shall be residents of Hampden. The Chairperson of the Commission
shall designate which associate member shall vote in the stead of a regular member.
3.5. Eligibility. - Any regular or associate member shall be eligible to continue to serve in said capacity until
a successor is duty appointed and qualified.
3.6. Officers. - The Commission shall elect annually a chairperson, vice chairperson and secretary from its
own membership, a majority of the number of members or constitute a quorum for the transaction of business
before said Commission, but if less than such majority is present at a meeting, a majority of those present may
adjourn the meeting from time to time. The secretary shall maintain a permanent record of the activities of the
Commission, including but not limited to such items as the number and types of cases reviewed and their
disposition; new designations of historic sites, landmarks and districts made; attendance records;
correspondence and minutes of all meetings. All records maintained or prepared by the secretary are deemed
public and may be inspected at reasonable times.
3.7. Procedure. - The Commission for its purposes shall adopt, and may from time to time amend, rules of
procedure.
3.8. Public meetings. - All meetings of the Commission shall be publicly announced, open to the public and
have a previously available agenda. Public notice shall be provided prior to any special meetings of the
Commission.
3.9. Duties. - The duties of the Commission, at a minimum, shall be to:
3.9.1. Make recommendations for establishing historic districts, historic sites, or historic landmarks to
the appropriate local governing body, according to the procedures listed in Sections 4 and 5 of this
Ordinance.
3.9.2. Review all proposed additions, reconstruction, alterations, construction, relocations or demolition
of the properties designated or the jurisdiction of the Ordinance.
3.9.3. Review all proposed National Register nominations for properties within its jurisdiction.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Historic Preservation Ordinance
5
3.9.4. Serve an advisory role to local government officials regarding local historical and cultural
resources, and act as a liaison between local government and those persons and organizations concerned
with historic preservation.
3.9.5. Conduct or cause to be conducted a continuing of local historic and cultural resources, in
accordance with Maine Historic Preservation Commission guidelines.
3.9 6. Work to provide continuing education on historic issues to local citizens.
3.9.7. Attend Training Workshops.
3.9.8. Provide Annual Report. (Amended: 5-21-90)
3.10. Advisory consultants. - In addition to the regular members of the Commission, the Town Council may
appoint other persons, not necessarily residents of the Town, who shall serve on an advisory or consultant
basis to assist the members of the Commission in the performances of their functions. Persons appointed to
serve in an advisory or consulting capacity shall hold office during the pleasure of the Council.
SECTION 4
QUALIFICATIONS
The historic districts, historic sites or historic landmarks established in accordance with this Ordinance shall
have one or more or any combination of the following characteristics, without limitations as to cultural or
chronological period:
4.1. Historic event. - Structures or sites at which events occur or have occurred that contribute to and are
identified with or significantly represent or exemplify the broad cultural, political, economic, military, social
or sociological history of Hampden and the nation, including sites and buildings at which the public may gain
insight or see examples either of particular items or of larger patterns in the North American heritage.
4.2. Historic personage. - Structures or sites importantly associated with historic personages.
4.3. Historic ideal. - Structures or sites importantly associated with historic examples of a great idea or ideal.
4.4. Architectural type. - Structures or structural remains and sites embodying examples of architectural
types of specimens valuable for study of a period, style, or method of building construction, of community
organization and living, or of landscaping; or a single notable structure or a single site representing the work
of a master builder, master designer, architect or landscape architect.
4.5. Visual continuity. - Structures contributing to the visual continuity of the historic district.
4.6. Eligibility for national recognition. - Those sites or areas on or eligible for listing on the National
Register of Historic Places or as a National Historic Landmark.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Historic Preservation Ordinance
6
SECTION 5
ESTABLISHMENT OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS, HISTORIC SITES
OR HISTORIC LANDMARKS
5.1. Preliminary Procedures. - Historic districts, historic sites or historic landmarks shall be established by
amendment to Section 6 of this Ordinance, and shall overlay the districts created by the Hampden Zoning
Ordinance. Such amendments may be initiated by the Town Council, the Planning Board, a petition signed by
six (6) or more residents of the Town eighteen (18) years of age or older, or the property owner(s). A form
directed to the chairperson of the Commission shall be completed and filed with the Town Manager. The
Town Manager shall thereafter call a meeting of the Commission for the purpose of formulating the
Commission's recommendation concerning the request. Any application for designation of structures, sites
and districts for historic preservation shall be in writing, include an application fee paid in accordance with
the Hampden Fees Ordinance and shall include the following as appropriate: (Amended: 11-17-03)
5.1.1. Designation of structures and sites for historic preservation.
a. A concise description of the physical elements, qualities, architectural style, period and historical
significance represented by the structure or site, including a consideration of scale, materials,
workmanship and spatial qualities, as relevant.
b. A concise statement of how the structure or site meets the review criteria of Section 4 above.
c. Interior and exterior photographs of the structure, or a site map, illustrating significant details
described in Section 5.1.1.a above.
5.1.2. Designation of districts for historic preservation.
a. A concise statement of the remaining physical elements which make this area a historic district and a
description of building types and architectural styles and periods represented.
b. A concise statement of how the district meets the review criteria of Section 4 above.
c. A justification of the boundaries of the district.
d. A description of the types of structures that do not contribute to the significance of the district and an
estimate of the percentage of non-contributing structures.
e. A map showing all district structures with the identification of contributing structures.
5.1.3. Expansion of existing districts for historic preservation.
a. A concise statement of the physical elements that justify an expansion of an existing district, an
explanation detailing how the expansion is consistent with the character of the district, and a
description of building types and architectural styles and periods represented.
b. A concise statement of how the expansion of an existing district meets the review criteria of Section 4
above.
c. A justification of the expanded boundaries of the district.
d. A description of the types of structures that do not contribute to the significance of the district and an
estimate of the percentage of non-contributing structures in the historic district's proposed expansion
Town of Hampden, Maine
Historic Preservation Ordinance
7
area.
e. A map showing all district structures in the proposed expansion area with an identification of
contributing structures.
5.2. Studies, Recommendations. - Before making its recommendation concerning the proposed establishment
of a historic district, historic site or historic landmark, the Commission may conduct studies and research on
the proposal. The Commission will make a report to the Council on every request received. Drafts of the
report shall also be mailed to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment.
5.3. Public Hearing, Final Report. - Before a final report is made to the Council, the Hampden Historic
Preservation Commission shall hold a public hearing on the request, after due notice published at least seven
(7) days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town. Written notice of the proposal
shall also be given at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing to the applicants, owners of all property abutting
or to be included within the proposed designation, and all other persons found by the Commission to have a
special interest in the proposal. Failure of any such person to receive notice of the public hearing shall not
necessitate another hearing, nor invalidate any action of the Commission. A copy of the proposal shall be
sent, at the same time, to the chairperson of the Planning Board for review and recommendation at the next
regular meeting of said Board. Not later than sixty (60) days after said public hearing, the Commission shall
submit a final report with its recommendations to the Town Council.
5.4. Actions By The Town Council. - After receipt of the Commission's recommendations, as provided
above, the Town Council at its next regular meeting shall consider and take all appropriate action on said
proposed amendment in accordance with the Town Charter, the Council's rules of procedure adopted pursuant
thereto, and the laws of the State of Maine. (Amended 7-2-90)
5.5. Notification. - After designation a notice will be published in the local newspaper and property
owners will be notified in writing within thirty (30) days. (Amended: 7-2-90)
SECTION 6
HISTORIC DISTRICTS, HISTORIC SITES
AND HISTORIC LANDMARKS DESIGNATED
The following described lands, buildings or structures, or areas of the Town are designated historic
districts, historic sites or historic landmarks as follows: (as designated)
6.1. Historic Districts.
The Upper Corners Historic District
6.2. Historic Sites (Reserved).
6.3. Historic Landmarks.
Harmony Hall, 24 Kennebec Road
Thomas Penneman Stetson Homestead, 12 Shaw Hill Road (Amended: 5-20-02)
Town of Hampden, Maine
Historic Preservation Ordinance
8
SECTION 7
USES PERMITTED
Uses permitted in historic districts, historic sites or historic landmarks shall be those set forth in the Town of
Hampden Zoning Ordinance provisions for the zone in which such district, site or landmark are located.
SECTION 8
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS
In any historic district and with respect to any historic site or historic landmark, no building permit shall be
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer for any construction, alteration, or demolition until a corresponding
Certificate of Appropriateness has been issued by the, Commission.
8.1. Certificate Of Appropriateness. - A Certificate of Appropriateness issued by the Commission shall be
required before a permit is issued for any of the following:
8.1.1. Any change in the exterior appearance of a historic landmark or site, or any building in a historic
district by addition, reconstruction or alterations.
8.1.2. New construction or a principal or accessory building or structure visible from a public street
where such building or structure will be located in a historic district.
8.1.3. Demolition of a historic landmark or of any building in a historic district.
8.1.4. Moving of a historic landmark or any building in a historic district.
8.2. Applications. - Application for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be obtained from the Code
Enforcement Officer when obtaining a building permit, or when no building permit is required but when such
activity must be approved by the Planning Board.
SECTION 9
APPLICATION PROCEDURE
Written application for the Certificate of Appropriateness shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer
stating the location, use and nature of the matter or item for which such Certificate is sought. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall date it and transmit such application to the Chairperson of the Historic Preservation
Commission for action. The Commission shall consider each application and, within forty-five (45) days of
the date of submittal, approve, approve with modifications or deny the application. By mutual written consent
of the Commission and the applicant, the review period may be extended, to a period not to exceed forty-five
(45) days. Failure to approve or deny the application at the end of the review period shall constitute approval
of the application. When the Commission acts on the application, it shall be returned to the Code Enforcement
Officer, who shall then issue or deny the permits, as appropriate. (Amended: 5-21-90, 7-2-90)
9.1. Application Contents. - The application shall state the location, use and nature of the matter for which
such certificate is sought, include an application fee paid in accordance with the Hampden Fees Ordinance
and shall contain at least the following information or documentation unless any such information or
documentation is expressly waived by the Commission: (Amended: 11-17-03)
9.1.1. The applicant's name, address and interest in the subject property.
9.1.2. The owner's name and address, if different from the applicant's.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Historic Preservation Ordinance
9
9.1.3. The address or location of the subject property.
9.1.4. The present use and zoning classification of the subject property.
9.1.5. A brief description of the construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration, maintenance,
demolition or moving requiring the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness.
9.1.6. A drawing or drawings indicating the design, texture, color and location of any proposed
alteration or new construction for which the Certificate is being applied. As used herein, drawings shall
mean plans and exterior elevations drawn to scale, with sufficient detail to show as far as they relate to
exterior appearances, the architectural design of the buildings, including materials, textures and colors,
including samples of materials and colors. Drawings shall not be required to be professionally prepared,
but shall be clear, complete and specific.
9.1.7. Photographs of the building involved and of adjacent buildings.
9.1.8. A site plan indicating improvements affecting appearance such as walls, walks, terraces, planting,
accessory buildings, signs, lights and other elements. The Commission may waive the requirement for a
site plan if the change involved would not affect the improvements shown on such a plan.
SECTION 10
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
10.1. Notice To Owners. - Prior to issuance or denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Commission
shall take such action as may be reasonably required to inform by U.S. mail the applicant, ail persons owning
abutting property and/or within 100 feet of the exterior boundaries of the real estate under consideration in the
application and all such other persons as the Commission may deem appropriate of the pendency of the
application, and shall give such persons an opportunity to be heard. For purposes of the notice required
hereunder, the owners of property shall be considered to be those against whom municipal taxes for the real
estate are assessed. Failure of any person to receive notice shall not necessitate another hearing, nor invalidate
any action by the Commission.
10.2. Hearing. - At the request of the applicant, or any other person receiving notice under Section 10.1
above, or where the Commission deems it necessary, a public hearing on the application shall be conducted
by the Commission.
10.3. Approval. - If the Commission determines that the proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration,
moving, or demolition is appropriate, it shall approve a Certificate of Appropriateness and return it to the
Code Enforcement Officer, who shall notify the applicant of the determination.
10.4. Disapproval. - If the Commission determines that a Certificate of Appropriateness should not be issued,
it shall place upon its record the reasons for such determination and shall forthwith return the application to
the Code Enforcement Officer who shall notify the applicant of such determination, furnishing him/her an
attested copy of the reasons therefor, and the recommendations, if any, as appearing in the records of the
Commission.
10.5. Deleted (Amended: 7-20-92)
Town of Hampden, Maine
Historic Preservation Ordinance
10
SECTION 11
STANDARDS OF EVALUATION
The standards and requirements contained in this section and in the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's Standards
for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings (the most current edition) as the same
may be amended from time to time, shall be used in review of applications for Certificates of Appropriateness
and specifically as to procedures before demolition can take place. Design considerations and structural
factors related to maintaining historic structures in good conditions shall be the Commission's primary areas
of focus. (Amended 7-2-90)
11.1. Demolition Or Removal. - A historic landmark, or any building or structure in a historic district, or any
appurtenance thereto, shall not be demolished or moved and a Certificate of Appropriateness shall not be
approved until either (a) in a historic district such building or structure has been identified by the Commission
as incompatible with the historic district in which it is located, or (b) the property owner can demonstrate that
it is not capable of earning an economic return on its value in its present location as appraised by a qualified
real estate appraiser. If such a demonstration can be made, issuance of a Certificate for movement or
demolition shall be delayed for a period of 180 days. Such time period shall commence when an application
for a Certificate and the Statement of Sale, as outlined below, have been filed with the Commission.
Notices shall be posted on the premises of the building or structure proposed for demolition in a location
clearly visible from the street. In addition, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general local
circulation at least three (3) times prior to demolition, the final notice of which shall be not less than fifteen
(15) days prior to the date of the permit, and the first notice of which shall be published no more than fifteen
(15) days after the application for a permit to demolish is filed.
Prior to the issuance of such Certificate for removal, the owners shall stipulate that the proper notices as
required have been posted, that the property was properly offered for sale, that there have been no bona fide
offers made, and that no contract for sale has been executed with interested parties. The owner shall for the
period of time set forth and at a price reasonably related to its fair market value, make a bona fide offer to sell
such building or structure, and the land pertaining thereto, to any person, firm, corporation, government or
agency thereof, or political subdivision or agency thereof, which gives reasonable assurance that it is willing
to preserve and restore the building or structure and the land pertaining thereto.
Prior to making such offer to sell, an owner shall first file a statement with the Historic Preservation
Commission, identifying the property, the offering price and the date the offer to sell shall begin. The time
period set forth in this Section shall not commence until such statement has been filed.
The purpose of this Section is to further the purposes of this Ordinance by preserving historic buildings which
are important to the education, culture, traditions, and the economic value of the Town, and to afford the
Town, interested persons, historical societies or organizations the opportunities to acquire or to arrange for the
preservation of such buildings. The Commission may at any time during such stay approve a Certificate of
Appropriateness in which event a permit shall be issued without further delay.
11.2. Reconstruction, Alterations And Maintenance. - A building of structure classified as a historic
landmark, a historic site, or a building or structure located in a historic district, or any part thereof, or any
appurtenance related to such structures or sites, including but not limited to walls, fences, light fixtures, steps,
paving, signs and natural features shall not be reconstructed, altered or maintained, and no Certificate of
Appropriateness shall be issued for such actions unless they will preserve or enhance its historical and
architectural character.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Historic Preservation Ordinance
11
11.3. Construction Of New Buildings And Structures In Historic Districts. - The construction of a new
building or structure within a historic district shall be generally of such design, form, proportion, mass,
configuration, building material, texture, color and location on a lot as will be compatible with other buildings
in the historic district and with streets and open spaces to which it is visually related and in keeping with the
area.
11.4. Visual Compatibility Factors For New Construction And Additions. - Within historic districts, historic
sites, or historic landmarks, all new construction and all new additions shall be visually related generally in
terms of the following factors:
11.4.1. Height. The height of proposed buildings shall be compatible with adjacent buildings.
11.4.2. Proportion of Building's Front Facade. The relationship of the width of the building to the height
of the front elevation shall be visually compatible with buildings, structures, and open spaces where it is
visually related.
11.4.3. Proportion of Opening within the Facade. The relationship of the width of the windows to height
of windows and doors in a building shall be visually compatible with those of windows and doors of
buildings to which the building is visually related.
11.4.4. Rhythm of Solids to Voids in Front Facades. The relationship of solids to voids in the front
facade of a building shall be visually compatible with that of the buildings to which it is visually related.
11.4.5. Rhythm of Spacing of Buildings on Streets. The relationship of the building to the open space
between it and adjoining buildings shall be visually compatible with those prevailing in the area to which
it is visually related.
11.4.6. Rhythm of Entrance and/or Porch Projection. The relationship of entrances and porch projections
to sidewalks of a building shall be visually compatible with those of buildings to which it is visually
related.
11.4.7. Relationship of Materials and Textures. The relationship of the materials and textures of the
facade of a building shall be visually compatible with that of the predominant materials used in the
buildings to which it is visually related.
11.4.8. Roof Shapes. The roof shape of a building shall be visually compatible with that of the buildings
to which it is visually related.
11.4.9. Scale of Building. The size of the building, the building mass of a building in relation to open
spaces, the windows, door openings, porches and balconies shall be visually compatible with those
characteristics of buildings and spaces to which it is visually related.
11.4.10. Directional Expression of Front Elevation. A building shall be visually compatible with the
building, squares, and places to which it is visually related in its directional character, whether this be
vertical character, horizontal character or non-directional character.
11.5. Standards For Renovation, Alterations, And Repairs Of Existing Buildings, Structures, And
Appurtenances Thereof. - Within historic districts, historic sites, and historic landmarks, the Commission
shall use the standards listed below in the evaluation of an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness for
all renovations, alterations, and repairs of existing buildings, structures, and appurtenances thereof:
11.5.1. Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide compatible use for a property which require
Town of Hampden, Maine
Historic Preservation Ordinance
12
minimal alteration of the building, structure, or site and its environment, or to use a property for its
originally intended purpose. (Amended: 7-2-90}
11.5.2. The distinguishing original qualities or characters of a building, structure, or site and its
environment shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive
architectural features should be avoided when possible. (Amended: 7-2-90)
11.5.3. All buildings, structures, and sites shall be recognized as products of their own time. Alterations
that have no historical basis and which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged. (Amended
7-2-90)
11.5.4. Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the history and
development of a building, structure, or site and its environment. These changes may have acquired
significance in their own right, and this significance shall be recognized and respected. (Amended 7-2-90)
11.5.5. Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a building,
structure, or site shall be treated with sensitivity. (Amended: 7-2-90)
11.5.6. Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible. In
the event replacement is necessary, the new material should match the material being replaced in
composition, design, color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing
architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by historic,
physical, or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different
architectural elements from other buildings or structures. (Amended: 7-2-90)
11.5.7. The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the gentlest means possible.
Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage the historic building materials shall not be
undertaken. (Amended: 7-2-90)
11.5.8. Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect preserve archeological resources affected by, or
adjacent to any project. (Amended: 7-2-90)
11.5.9. Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties shall not be discouraged
when such alterations and additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural or cultural material,
and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and character of the property,
neighborhood or environment. (Amended: 7-2-90)
11.5.10. Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to structures shall be done in such a manner that
if such additions or alterations were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the
structure would be unimpaired. (Amended: 7-2-90)
SECTION 12
MAINTENANCE
12.1. Ordinary Maintenance Permitted; Public Safety
12.1.1. Ordinary Maintenance Permitted. - Nothing in the Ordinance shall be construed to prevent the
ordinary maintenance of any exterior feature in a historic district or of any historic landmark which does
not involve a change in the design, material, or outer appearance thereof. Paint color shall be specifically
excluded from the scope of this Ordinance. The replacement and/or removal of the following
distinguishing elements: doors, windows, siding, trim and roofing materials are considered as
renovations, alterations, and repairs and are subject to 11.5 Standards For Renovation, Alterations, And
Town of Hampden, Maine
Historic Preservation Ordinance
13
Repairs Of Existing Buildings, Structures, And Appurtenances Thereof. (Amended: 6-4-01)
12.1.2. Safety. - Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration,
restoration, or demolition of any feature which the Code Enforcement Officer shall certify is required by
the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition.
12.2. Maintenance And Repair Required. - Neither the owner of nor the person in charge of a structure
within a historic district, or of a historic landmark, shall permit such historic structure or historic landmark to
fall into a state of disrepair which may result in the deterioration of any exterior appurtenances or architectural
features so as to produce or tend to produce, in the judgment of the Commission, a detrimental effect upon the
life and character of the historic landmark or structure in question, or which could lead to a claim that
demolition is necessary for public safety, including but not limited to:
12.2.1. The deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports.
12.2.2. The deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members.
12.2.3. The deterioration of exterior chimneys.
12.2.4. The deterioration or crumbling of exterior plaster or mortar.
12.2.5. The ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, and foundations, including broken
windows or doors.
12.2.6. The deterioration of any feature so as to create or permit the creation of any hazardous or unsafe
condition or conditions.
SECTION 13
APPEALS
(Amended: 07-20-92) (Amended: 06-19-06)
Compliance With Board of Appeals Ordinance. All appeals and variances shall be subject to the provisions
of the Town of Hampden Board of Appeals Ordinance including but not limited to filing deadlines,
application requirements, fees, appeal procedures, decisions of the Board of Appeals and subsequent appeals
to Superior Court. (Amended: 06-19-06)
13.1. Administrative Appeals. - An administrative appeal form any final decision of the Commission may be
taken by any party or person aggrieved thereby to the Town of Hampden Board of Appeals within thirty {30)
days from the date upon which the decision was rendered. The Board of Appeals shall hear the appeal at a
public hearing, and shall affirm, modify or reverse the Commission's decision within thirty (30) days of said
hearing, or the appeal shall be deemed denied. The Board of Appeals shall conduct an appellate review
Commission’ ruling. The Board's review of the decision shall be limited to a determination of whether the
Commission acted arbitrarily, capriciously, or unreasonably, or whether the decision was based on an error of
law. The Board shall not substitute its judgment for that of the Commission on issues dealing with a
Certificate of Appropriateness. (Amended: 06-19-06)
13.2. Variance Appeals. - A variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by any person or party
claiming that the application of the Ordinance to their property constitutes an undue hardship. After a public
hearing on the application, the Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the strict application of the
Ordinance if it finds that:
Town of Hampden, Maine
Historic Preservation Ordinance
14
13.2.1. The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted;
13.2.2. The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not the general
conditions of the neighborhood or historic district; and
13.2.3. The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or historic
district.
Any vote to grant a variance shall require a vote in favor thereof of at least four (4) members of the Board.
13.3. Economic Appeals. - An economic appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by any person or party
claiming that the strict application of the Ordinance to their property creates an unreasonable economic or
financial burden. Such an appeal shall not be taken until the person or party has exhausted all other applicable
remedies before the Commission or the Board of Appeals. After a public hearing, the Board may grant a
waiver from the strict application of the Ordinance if it finds that:
13.3.1. The cost of compliance is unreasonable and unduly burdensome in light of the financial
capability of the applicant or the cost of compliance far outweighs any increase in the fair market value of
the property that would arise from the required improvements (as demonstrated by a professional
appraisal);
13.3.2. The alleged burden includes substantially more than inconvenience or inability to attain a higher
financial return;
13.3.3. The wavier will not adversely affect the objectives of this Ordinance, nor alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or historic district; and
13.3.4. The waiver will not have an undue adverse effect on the property values of adjoining property
owners who have complied with the Ordinance.
Any vote to grant a waiver shall require a vote in favor thereof of at least four (4) members of the Board.
13.4. Deleted. (Amended: 06-19-06)
13.5. Deleted. (Amended: 06-19-06)
Town of Hampden, Maine
Historic Preservation Ordinance
15
SECTION 14
VALIDITY AND SEPARABILITY
Should any section or provision of the Ordinance be declared to be invalid by any court, such decision shall
not invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
SECTION 15
CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
This Ordinance shall not repeal, annul, or in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any
other ordinance, law, regulation or bylaw. Where this Ordinance imposes higher and/or stricter standards, the
provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail.
SECTION 16
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
16.1. Code Enforcement Officer. - This Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
16.2. Authority. - The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to inspect properties to ensure
compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance, shall keep public records of proceedings and certificates
issued under this ordinance, and shall have the authority to institute any and all actions and proceedings,
either legal or equitable, that may be necessary or appropriate to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
16.3. Certificate of Appropriateness. - A Certificate of Appropriateness secured under the provisions of this
Ordinance shall expire if the work authorized thereby is not commenced within one (1) year of the date on
which it was granted and if the work is not completed within two (2) years of said date. The Commission may
grant an extension for up to one (1) additional year for good cause shown.
16.4. Penalties. - Any person, firm, or corporation, being the owner or having control of, or the use of, any
building, structure or land, or part thereof, or any building contractor, who violates any of the provisions of
this Ordinance shall be guilty of a civil infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance
with the following:
16.4.1. The minimum penalty for starting construction or undertaking any activity without the required
Certificate of Appropriateness shall be $100.00 and the maximum penalty shall be $2,500.00.
16.4.2. The minimum penalty for a specific violation shall be $100.00 and the maximum penalty shall be
$2,500.00.
16.5. Beneficiary. - All civil penalties shall inure to the benefit of the Town of Hampden. Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Town Of Hampden, Maine
Special Amusement Ordinance
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT ORDINANCE
ADOPTED: Hampden Town Council October 6, 1997
Effective: November 11, 1997
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council November 17, 2003
Effective: December 17, 2003
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council June 19, 2006
Effective: July 19, 2006
CERTIFIED BY: Denise Hodsdon
Name
Town Clerk
Title Affix Seal
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT ORDINANCE
CONTENTS
ARTICLE PAGE
ARTICLE I - GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 2
1.1. Title. 2
1.2. Purpose 2
1.3. Definitions 2
1.4. Separability 2
ARTICLE II - STANDARDS OF ISSUANCE 2
2.1. Permit Required 2
2.2. Inspections 3
2.3. Suspension or Revocation of a Permit 4
2.4. Rules and Regulations 4
2.5. Permit and Appeal Procedures 4
2.6. Admission Charge 4
ARTICLE III - ENFORCEMENT 4
3.1. Penalty 4
ARTICLE IV – APPEALS 4
4.1. Compliance with Board of Appeals Ordinance 4
4.2. Appellate Review 5
4.3. Basis of the Appeal 5
4.4. Granting or Reinstating a Permit 5
1
Town Of Hampden, Maine
Special Amusement Ordinance
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT ORDINANCE
The Town of Hampden hereby ordains:
ARTICLE I
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
1.1. Title. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited at the Special Amusement Ordinance of the
Town of Hampden, Maine
1.2. Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to control the issuance of special permits for music,
dancing or entertainment in facilities licensed by the State of Maine to sell liquor as required by 28-A
MRSA § 1054.
1.3. Definitions.
Entertainment: For the purposes of this ordinance, “entertainment” shall include any amusement,
performance, exhibition or diversion for patrons or customers of the licensed premises whether provided
by professional entertainers or by full-time or part-time employees of the licensed premises whose
incidental duties include activities with an entertainment value.
Licensee: For purposes of this Section, “Licensee” shall include the holder of a license issued under the
Alcoholic Beverages Statutes of the State of Maine, or any person, individual, partnership, firm,
association, corporation, or other legal entity, or any agent, or employee of any such licensee.
1.4. Separability. The invalidity of any provisions of this Ordinance shall not invalidate any other part.
ARTICLE II
STANDARDS OF ISSUANCE
2.1. Permit Required. No licensee for the dale of liquor to be consumed on the licensed premises shall
permit, on the licensed premises, any music, except radio or other mechanical device, any dancing or
entertainment of any sort unless the licensee shall have first obtained from the municipality in which the
licensed premises are situated a special amusement permit signed by at least a majority of the municipal
officers.
2.1.1. Information Included on Application. Applications for all special amusement permits shall
be made in writing to the municipal officers and shall state the name of the applicant; the applicant’s
residence address; the business address; the nature of the business; the location to be used; whether
the applicant has ever had a license to conduct the business therein described either denied or revoked
and, if so, the applicant shall describe those circumstances specifically; whether the applicant,
including all partners or corporate officers, has ever been convicted of a felony and, if so, the
circumstances; and any additional information as may be needed by the municipal officers in the
issuing of the permit, including but not limited to a copy of the applicant’s current liquor license.
2.1.2. Entertainment Regulated. No licensee shall permit entertainment on the licensed premises,
whether provided by professional entertainer(s), employees of the licensed premises, or any person or
by electronic depiction, video or movie screen, when the entertainment involves:
2
Town Of Hampden, Maine
Special Amusement Ordinance
1. The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse, or any sexual acts which are
prohibited by law;
2. The actual or simulated touching, caressing, or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, or anus, or
genitals, by the entertainer, employee, or patron;
3. The actual or simulated displaying of the breast, the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, or anus;
4. The permitting by any licensee of any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who
exposes to any public view any portion of his or her genitals, anus, or breasts.
5. For the purposes of this subsection, the terms “displaying” or “expose” shall mean unclothed or
un-costumed and not covered by a fully opaque material.
2.1.3. Compliance with Other Municipal Regulations. No permit shall be issued for any thing, or
act, or premises, if the premises and building to be used for the purposes do not fully comply with all
ordinances, articles, bylaws, or rules and regulations of the municipality.
2.1.4. Fee Required. The fee for a special amusement permit shall be paid in accordance with the
Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance. (Amended: 11-17-03)
2.1.5. Public Hearing. The municipal officers shall, prior to granting a permit and after reasonable
notice to the municipality and the applicant, hold a public hearing within 30 days of the date of the
application was received, at which the testimony of the applicant and that of any interested members
of the public shall be taken.
2.1.6. Issuance of Permit. The municipal officers shall grant a permit unless they find that issuance
of the permit will be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or would violate municipal
ordinances, or rules and regulations, articles, or by-laws.
2.1.7. Validity of Permit. A permit shall be valid only for the license year of the applicant’s
existing liquor license.
2.2. Inspections. Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of
a licensed business which has obtained a special amusement permit are provided for or required by
ordinance of the State law, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance
provision of State law, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be
inspected, to admit any officer, official, or employee of the municipality authorized to make the
inspection any reasonable time that the admission is requested.
2.2.1. Analysis of Commodities or Materials. Whenever any analysis of any commodity or
material is reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any ordinance provision or State law, it
shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises, to give to any authorized
officer, official, or employee of the municipality requesting the same sufficient samples of the
material or commodity for analysis.
2.2.2. Revocation of Permit. In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the
municipal officers may revoke the special amusement permit of any licensee in the municipality who
refuses to permit any such officer, official, or employee to make an inspection of take sufficient
samples for analysis, or who interferes with such officer, official, or employee while in the
3
Town Of Hampden, Maine
Special Amusement Ordinance
performance of their duty. Provided, that no license or special amusement permit shall be revoked
unless written demand for the charge of the premises, at the time it is sought to make the inspection.
2.3. Suspension or Revocation of a Permit. The municipal officers may, after a public hearing
preceded by notice to interested parties, suspend or revoke any special amusement permits which have
been issued under this Ordinance on the grounds that the music, dancing, or entertainment conducted on
the licensed premises constitutes a detriment to the public health, safety, or welfare, or violates any
municipal ordinance, articles, by-laws, or rules and regulations.
2.4. Rules and Regulations. The municipal officers are hereby authorized, after public notice and
hearing, to establish written rules and regulations governing the issuance, suspension, and revocation of
the special amusement permits, the classes of permits, the music, dancing, or entertainment permitted
under each class, and other limitations on these activities required to protect the public health, safety and
welfare. These rules and regulations may specifically determine the location and size of permitted
premises, the facilities that may be required for the permitted activities on those premises, and the hours
during which the permitted activities are permitted.
Such rules and regulations shall be additional to and consistent with all sections of this Ordinance.
2.5. Permit Procedures. Amended 06-19-2006
2.5.1. Notification of Applicant. Any licensee requesting a special amusement permit from the
municipal officers shall be notified in writing of their decision no later than fifteen (15) days from the
date of their decision. In the event that a licensee is denied a permit, the licensee shall be provided
with the reasons for the denial in writing. The licensee may not reapply for a permit within 30 days
after an application for a permit has been denied.
2.5.2. Deleted. (Amended: 06-19-2006)
2.6. Admission Charge. A licensed hotel, Class A restaurant, Class A tavern or restaurant malt liquor
licensee who has been issued a special amusement permit may charge admission in designated areas
approved by the municipal special amusement permit
ARTICLE III
ENFORCEMENT
3.1. Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be punished by a fine of
not more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, and up to Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00) for the subsequent offenses, to be recovered, on complaint, to the use of the Town of Hampden.
Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. If the Town is the prevailing party in any action
brought to enforce this ordinance, the Town shall be awarded reasonable attorney’s fees, expert witness
fees, and costs, unless the court finds that special circumstances make the award of these fees and costs
unjust.
ARTICLE IV
APPEALS
(Amended: 06-19-2006)
4.1. Compliance With Board of Appeals Ordinance. All appeals shall be subject to the provisions of the
Town of Hampden Board of Appeals Ordinance including but not limited to filing deadlines, application
requirements, fees, appeal procedures, decisions of the Board of Appeals and subsequent appeals to
Superior Court. Any licensee who has requested a permit and has been denied, or whose permit has been
4
Town Of Hampden, Maine
Special Amusement Ordinance
revoked or suspended, may, within 30 days of the denial, suspension or revocation, appeal the decision to
the Board of Appeals as defined in 30-A MRSA § 2691. (Amended: 06-19-2006)
4.2 Appellate Review. The Board of Appeals may conduct an appellate review of the denial of permit
request and may also conduct an appellate review of the revocation or suspension of a permit. (Amended: 06-
19-2006)
4.3 Basis of the Appeal. The Board of Appeals may consider if the permitted activities constitutes a
detriment to the public health, safety, or welfare, or if the denial, revocation, or suspension was arbitrary
or capricious, or if the denial, revocation, or suspension was not supported by a preponderance of the
evidence demonstrating violation of any ordinance, article, by-law, or rule or regulation of the
municipality. (Amended: 06-19-2006)
4.4 Granting or Reinstating a Permit. The Board of Appeals may grant or reinstate the permit if it finds
that the permitted activities would not constitute a detriment to the public health, safety, or welfare, or
that the denial, revocation, or suspension was arbitrary or capricious, or that the denial, revocation, or
suspension was not supported by a preponderance of the evidence demonstrating violation of any
ordinance, article, by-law, or rule or regulation of the municipality. (Amended: 06-19-2006)
5
Town of Hampden Maine
Concourse Gathering Ordinance
CONCOURSE GATHERING ORDINANCE
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1 - GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 2
1.1 Title. 2
1.2 Purpose. 2
1.3 Definitions. 2
1.4 Separability. 2
1.5 Effective Date. 2
ARTICLE 2 - STANDARDS OF ISSUANCE 2
2.1 Factors Applicable to Issuance of Permit. 2
2.2 Water Supply. 3
2.3 Off Street Parking Facilities. 3
2.4 Sanitation Facilities. 3
2.5 Medical Facilities. 4
2.6 Dining Facilities. 4
2.7 Fire Prevention Facilities. 4
ARTICLE 3 - PERMIT PROCEDURE 4
3.1 Permit Required. 4
3.2 Permit Application. 4
3.3 Information Included on Application 5
3.4 Fee. 6
3.5 Notice of Rejection 6
3.6 Appeal Procedure. 6
3.7 Notice to Town Officials arid Other Officials. 6
3.8 Contents of Permit. 6
3.9 Duties of Permitee. 6
ARTICLE 4 - MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS 7
4.1 Public Conduct During Concourse Gathering. 7
4.2 Revocation of Permit. 7
4.3 Release of Corporate Surety Bond. 7
ARTICLE 5 - ENFORCEMENT 7
5.1 Penalties. 7
ADOPTED: Hampden Town Council July 24, 1978
Effective Date: August 24, 1978
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council November 17, 2003
Effective Date: December 17, 2003
1
Town of Hampden Maine
Concourse Gathering Ordinance
CONCOURSE GATHERING ORDINANCE
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
1.1. Title. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Concourse Gathering Ordinance of
the Town of Hampden, Maine,” and will be referred to herein as “this Ordinance”.
1.2. Purpose. The purposes of this ordinance are to further the maintenance of safe and healthful
conditions for the masses of people which attend public outdoor gatherings for an extended period of time
and to assure the comfort, convenience, safety, health and welfare of the citizens of the Town of
Hampden, Maine and surrounding communities.
1.3. Definitions. In general, words and terms used in this ordinance shall have their customary
dictionary meanings. For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words and terms are defined as follows:
Concourse: An outdoor space where crowds of people may gather.
Concourse Gathering: A gathering of 200 or more persons for an extended period of time in an outdoor
space.
Concourse Gathering Permit: A permit is required by this ordinance.
Extended Period of Time: A duration of time greater than 20 hours. Such time will include eight (8)
hours before and eight (8) hours after the scheduled times of the permit.
Gathering of People: An accumulation of people attending an event such as an amusement show, music
festival, theatrical performance or pageant.
Municipality: A city, town or other district having local self-government. The specific meaning of the
word “municipality” used herein would be the Town of Hampden, Maine.
Parking Space: As defined in State laws.
Person: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
1.4. Separability. The invalidity of any provision of this ordinance shall not invalidate any other part.
1.5. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force thirty (30) days after it is enacted by
the voters of the Town of Hampden, Maine.
The effective date of this ordinance is August 24, 1978.
ARTICLE 2
STANDARDS OF ISSUANCE
2.1. Factors Applicable to Issuance of Permit. The municipal officers shall issue a permit as provided
for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may
2
Town of Hampden Maine
Concourse Gathering Ordinance
otherwise be obtained, they find that:
1. The conduct of such gathering of people will not interfere with the movement of fire fighting
equipment enroute to a fire.
2. The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at the concourse gathering site will not unduly
interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such
assembly areas or within the concourse area.
3. Control over the concourse gathering will be such that the entire group of people understand that this
ordinance does not grant any property rights, it does not authorize any person to trespass, it does not
authorize any person to infringe upon or injure the property of another, it does not excuse any person
of the necessity of complying with other laws and regulations.
4. The conduct of such gathering of people will not create a fire hazard such as to grassland or
woodland.
2.2. Water Supply. The water supply shall be adequate, of a safe, sanitary quality and from a source
approved by the Town of Hampden Plumbing Inspectors
2.2.1. Inspection of Water Supplies. All water supplies shall be subject to inspection at all times by
the Town of Hampden Plumbing Inspector. Water from such sources shall not be used or supplied to
the public unless samples therefrom have been tested and approved by the State of Maine Department
of Health and Welfare within the preceding six (6) months. A copy of the water analysis shall be
available on the premises.
2.2.2. Distribution of Water Supply. Supplies of safe, sanitary, portable water shall be located
throughout the concourse gathering area at reasonable intervals or sepuence. The volume of water
available at these locations shall be such that it will serve each person a minimum of one and one half
gallons per day. There shall be an adequate number of spigots, drinking cups, and dispensers provided
at these water supply locations.
2.3. Off Street Parking Facilities. Adequate off street parking facilities shall be provided and shall be
subject to approval of the Town of Hampden Road Commissioner.
2.3.1. Parking Facilities Per Person. Off street parking facilities shall be provided at a minimum
rate of one parking space for each four (4) persons reasonably expected to attend.
2.3.2. Parking Facility Entrances. All entrances to the off street parking facility from a public street
shall be approved by the Town of Hampden Road Commissioner or the State of Maine Department of
Transportation or both. Any expense involved with the provision of these entrances shall be born by
the permitee.
2.3.3. Traffic Officers. Traffic officers shall be provided, at each off street parking entrance during
periods of substantial use. It shall be the obligation of the permitee to provide said traffic officers and
bear any and all expenses involved.
2.4. Sanitation Facilities.
2.4.1. Solid Waste Containers. Solid waste containers constructed of metal, wood, or plastic shall be
located throughout the concourse gathering area at a reasonable interval for the disposal of material
3
Town of Hampden Maine
Concourse Gathering Ordinance
such as paper, cans, bottles, and garbage. These containers shall be emptied of all their contents at
least every six (6) hours or when full, which ever comes first. The material from these containers shall
be disposed of by removal from the gathering site and taken to a municipal dump.
2.4.2. Toilet Facilities. Separate male and female toilet facilities shall be provided at the rate of one
toilet seat for each forty persons. One third of the male facilities may consist of urinals hand washing
provisions shall be available at each toilet facility and shall consist of stored water in containers
equipped with spring operated spigots, soap dispensers, and paper towels. Adequate provision for the
disposal of hand washing waste water shall be made such as by dry wells or soakage pits.
2.4.3. Inspection of Sanitary Facilities. All sanitary facilities shall be subject to inspection at all
times by the Town of Hampden Plumbing Inspector.
2.5. Medical Facilities. A first aid facility shall be provided. This facility shall consist of a structurally
stable enclosure and stocked with medical supplies sufficient to administer necessary medical attention to
the number of people attending the concourse gathering.
2.5.1. Registered Nurses. The first aid facility shall be staffed with a minimum of two Registered
Nurses certified by the State of Maine.
2.5.2. Ambulance Vehicles. A minimum of two vehicles, in a safe and good running condition, shall
be available at all times (with a driver for each vehicle) to be used as ambulances.
2.5.3. Inspection of First Aid Facility. The first aid facility shall be subject to inspection at all times
by the State of Maine Department of Human Services and the Town of Hampden Civil Emergency
Preparedness Director.
2.6. Dining Facilities. A reasonable number of outdoor fireplaces and tables shall be provided
throughout the concourse gathering area.
2.7. Fire Prevention Facilities. Fire prevention facilities shall be provided throughout the concourse
gathering area. Equipment such as fire extinguishers, spades, brooms, sand and water shall be provided.
The fire prevention facilities shall be approved by the Town of Hampden Fire Chief and shall be subject
to inspection at all times by the Town of Hampden Fire Chief.
ARTICLE 3
PERMIT PROCEDURE
3.1. Permit Required. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form, or start any concourse
gathering unless a concourse gathering permit shall have been obtained from the municipal officers.
3.1.1. Governmental Agencies Exempted. This ordinance shall not apply to any governmental
agency acting within the scope of its functions.
3.1.2. Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts of America Exempted. This ordinance shall not apply to outdoor
outings concerned with the Boy Scouts of America or the Girl Scouts of America, in performance of
their normal Scout activities.
3.2. Permit Application. A person seeking issuance of a concourse gathering permit shall file an
application with the municipal officers.
4
Town of Hampden Maine
Concourse Gathering Ordinance
3.2.1. Filing Period. An application for a concourse gathering permit shall be filed with the
municipal officers not less than twenty one (21) days nor more than sixty (60) days before the date on
which it is proposed to commence the event.
3.2.2. Authorization. If the concourse gathering is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for,
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such concourse gathering permit shall file with
the municipal officers a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the concourse
gathering event authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf.
3.3. Information Included on Application. The application for a concourse gathering permit shall set
forth the following information:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the person applying to conduct such event requiring a
concourse gathering permit.
2. If the concourse gathering event Is proposed to be conducted for on behalf of, or by an organization,
the name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and the names,
addresses, and telephone numbers of the authorized and responsible officials of such organization.
3. The name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons providing the site or sites for the
concourse gathering event to be held.
4. A written statement from the property owner or owners providing the site or sites for the concourse
gathering event stating that he authorizes the use of his land for such event.
5. The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be the chairman of the event and
who will be responsible for its conduct.
6. The commencing date of the concourse gathering and the termination date of the concourse gathering.
7. The location or locations of the Concourse gathering event.
8. The number of persons who, the number and kind of animals which, and the number and types of
vehicles which are expected to attend and/or take part in the concourse gathering event.
9. A Plan View Drawing of the site or sites specifically showing the location and size of the site,
location and extent of water supply facilities, location and extent of sanitary facilities, location and
extent of fire protection facilities, location and extent of first aid facilities, location and extent of
dining facilities, location and extent of off street parking facilities, and other pertinent data.
10. A corporate surety bond from a company authorized to do business in the State of Maine insuring that
after the event is over and the mass of people have vacated the site or sites the grounds shall be left in
a clean and neat fashion, and damages to public and/or private property arising out of or in connection
with the event will be paid promptly. Such bond shall be in the amount of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) for each one thousand (1,000) persons or fractional part thereof, expected to be in
attendance.
The municipal officers may request any additional information which is deemed reasonably necessary for
a fair determination to issue a concourse gathering permit.
5
Town of Hampden Maine
Concourse Gathering Ordinance
3.4. Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a concourse gathering permit a fee
in accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance. (Amended: 11-17-03)
3.5. Notice of Rejection. The application must be presented at least five (5) days prior to the next
regularly scheduled Town Council meeting. Action to be taken by the Town Council within thirty (30)
days of said regular meeting, and notification of the decision to be sent to the applicant stating the reason
for the denial.
3.6. Appeal Procedure. Any person aggrieved by the denial of the municipal officers to issue a
concourse gathering permit shall have the right to appeal the denial of concourse gathering permit to the
Penobscot County Superior Court. The appeal shall b~ taken within seven (7) days after notice.
3.7. Notice to Town Officials arid Other Officials. Immediately upon issuance of a concourse gathering
permit, the municipal officers shall send a copy thereof to the following:
1. The Town Manager
2. The Town Attorney
3. The Fire Chief
4. The Police Chief
5 The Municipal Officers of:
a. The City of Bangor
b. The Town of Hermon
c. The Town of Newburgh
d. The Town of Winterport
3.8. Contents of Permit. Each concourse gathering permit shall state the following information:
1. Starting Date and Time
2. Ending Date and Time
3. Location
4. Such other information as the municipal officers shall find necessary to the enforcement of this
ordinance.
3.9. Duties of Permitee. A permitee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions
and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
The concourse gathering chairman or other person heading such activity shall carry the permit upon his
person during the conduct of the concourse gathering.
6
Town of Hampden Maine
Concourse Gathering Ordinance
ARTICLE 4
MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
4.1. Public Conduct During Concourse Gathering. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct,
impede, or interfere with any legally authorized concourse gathering or with any person, vehicle, or
animal participating in, or involved with, such concourse gathering.
4.2. Revocation of Permit. The municipal officers shall have the authority to revoke a concourse
gathering permit issued hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance herein set forth.
4.3. Release of Corporate Surety Bond. Before a permitee may be released from any obligation required
by his corporate surety bond, the municipal officers will require from the Town Manager, and what ever
other agencies may be involved, certification that the concourse gathering site or sites have been
satisfactorily cleaned up and that all damages to public and private property have been settled.
ARTICLE 5
ENFORCEMENT
5.1. Penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall be fined an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each
violation of this ordinance.
7
Town of Hampden, Maine
Animal Control Ordinance
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I - GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 2
1.1. Purpose 2
1.2. Definitions 2
ARTICLE II - LICENSE AND IDENTIFICATION 3
2.1. License Required 3
2.2. Tag and Collar Required 3
ARTICLE III - ANIMALS CREATING A NUISANCE BY NOISE 3
3.1. Animals Creating a Nuisance by Noise 3
ARTICLE IV - ANIMALS CREATING OTHER NUISANCES 3
4.1. Nuisances Prohibited 3
ARTICLE V - RUNNING AT LARGE 3
5.1. Running at Large 3
ARTICLE VI - RESTRAINT OR CONFINEMENT 4
OF DANGEROUS DOGS
6.1. Nuisance 4
ARTICLE VII –IMPOUNDMENT 4
7.1. Impoundment 4
7.2. Registry and Notification of Impoundment 4
7.3. Impoundment Fee 4
ARTICLE VIII- ENFORCEMENT 5
8.1. Penalty 5
8.2. Separate Offense 5
ARTICLE IX- MISCELLANEOUS 5
9.1. Separability 5
9.2. Repeal of Prior Ordinance 5
ADOPTED: Hampden Town Council April 3, 2000
Effective: May 3, 2000
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council January 7, 2002
Effective: February 6, 2002 (Deleting Article VII – Number of Dogs Limited)
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council November 17, 2003
Effective: December 17, 2003
1
Town of Hampden, Maine
Animal Control Ordinance
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
1.1. Purpose - The purpose of this Ordinance is to require that all animals in the Town of Hampden be
kept under the control of their owners or keepers so that they will not injure persons, damage property, or
create a nuisance.
1.2. Definitions - As used in this Ordinance, unless the context indicates otherwise, the following terms
have the following meanings:
A. Animal Control - means control of dogs, cats and domesticated or undomesticated animals in
accordance with Title 7 M.R.S.A. § 3948.
B. At Large - means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of any person whose
personal presence and attention would reasonably control the conduct of the animal.
C. Dog - means a member of the genus and species known as Canis familiaris or any canine regardless
of generation, resulting from interbreeding of a member of Canis familiaris with a wolf hybrid as
defined in Title 7 M.R.S.A. § 3907.
D. Dangerous Dog - means a dog that bites an individual who is not trespassing on the dog owner's or
keeper's premises at the time of the bite or a dog that causes a reasonable and prudent person who is
not on the dog owner's or keeper's premises and is acting in a reasonable and non-aggressive manner
to fear bodily harm by attacking or threatening to attack that individual or individual's domestic
animal. "Dangerous dog" does not include a dog certified by the State and used for law enforcement
use. For the purpose of this definition, "dog owner's or keeper's premises" means the residence or
residences, including building and land and motor vehicles, belonging to the owner or keeper of the
dog.
E. Enforcement Officer - The following shall have the authority to enforce this Ordinance:
a. Law Enforcement Officer/Constable - any person who, by virtue of that person's public
employment, is vested by law with a duty to maintain public order, enforce any law of this State
or Municipality establishing a civil violation, prosecute offenders or make arrest for crimes,
whether that duty extends to all crimes or is limited to specific crimes.
b. Animal Control Officer - any person acting in the capacity of Animal Control Officer as defined
by state statute and this Ordinance, pursuant to Title 7, M.R.S.A. Chapter 725.
F. Keeper - means a person in possession of control of a dog or other animal.
G. Owner - means a person owning, keeping or harboring a dog or other animal.
H. Person - means an individual, corporation, partnership, association or any other legal entity.
I. Undefined terms - any term not defined in this Ordinance shall be defined in accordance with its
customary dictionary meaning.
2
Town of Hampden, Maine
Animal Control Ordinance
ARTICLE II
LICENSE AND IDENTIFICATION
2.1 License Required - All dogs kept, harbored and maintained in the Town of Hampden shall be licensed
and tagged in accordance with the laws of the State of Maine.
2.2 Tag and Collar Required - A suitable tag showing the year such license is issued and bearing such
other data as the Commissioner of Agriculture may prescribe shall be given with each license and must be
securely attached to a collar of leather, metal, or material of comparable strength, which must be worn at
all times by the dog for which the license was issued except as expressly provided in 7 M.R.S.A. Section
3923-B(3) . It shall be unlawful for any person to remove such tag or to place either collar or tag on any
dog not described or for which the license was not issued.
ARTICLE III
ANIMALS CREATING A NUISANCE BY NOISE
3.1 Animals Creating a Nuisance by Noise - Anyone owning, possessing or harboring any animal,
excluding livestock, which barks, howls or makes other sounds common to its species continuously for
twenty minutes or intermittently for one hour or more shall be deemed to have caused a nuisance, and
shall be liable for a civil penalty under this Ordinance.
For the purposes hereof, a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each hour during which a
violation occurs or continues.
ARTICLE IV
ANIMALS CREATING OTHER NUISANCES
4.1 Nuisances Prohibited - It is unlawful for anyone owning, keeping, possession, or harboring any
animal to cause or permit such animal to perform, create, or engage in any of the following nuisances:
A. Molesting or disturbing persons or vehicles by chasing, barking, or biting.
B. Habitually attacking other animals,
C. Damaging property of others,
D. Creating noxious or offensive odors,
E. Defecating upon any public place or upon premises not owned or controlled by the person owning,
keeping, possessing or harboring the animal, unless the feces is promptly removed from said place or
premises,
F. Being on school grounds without permission during times that school is in session.
ARTICLE V
RUNNING AT LARGE
5.1 Running at Large - It is unlawful for any dog, licensed or unlicensed, to be at large, except when
used for hunting. The owner or keeper of any dog found at large shall be liable for a civil penalty under
this Ordinance.
3
Town of Hampden, Maine
Animal Control Ordinance
ARTICLE VI
RESTRAINT OR CONFINEMENT OF DANGEROUS DOGS
6.1 Nuisance – Any dangerous dog is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
6.2 Restraint or Confinement - The owner or keeper of a dangerous dog shall keep the same muzzled,
restrained, or confined to the owner's or keeper's premises. The owner or keeper shall ensure that the dog,
when out of doors on the owner's or keeper's premises, is either muzzled, contained within a secure
enclosure, or fastened with a secure latch to a chain or leash of sufficient strength to restrain the dog, the
length of which chain or leash is such that the dog may in no event be any closer than three feet to any:
(1) mail receptacle, (2) entrance or exit to a residence, (3) end or edge of a driveway, (4) walkway, stoop
or stairs leading to an entrance or exit, (5) edge of a property boundary or public sidewalk, or (6) home
fill pipe or utility meter. The owner or keeper shall ensure that the restraint is maintained and secure at all
times the dog is out of doors on the owner's or keeper's premises and not placed in a secure enclosure. For
the purposes hereof, a secure enclosure shall be suitable to prevent entry by children and designed to
prevent the dog from escaping. If a fence is used as a secure enclosure, it shall be a minimum height of
six feet.
ARTICLE VII
IMPOUNDMENT
7.1 Impoundment – Any dog found in the Town either without a license or at large may be impounded by
an enforcement officer at an animal shelter designated by the Director of Public Safety. If the owner or
keeper is known and can be located, such animal need not be impounded, but may instead be taken to the
owner or keeper.
7.2 Registry and Notification of Impoundment – When impounding a dog, the ACO or other law
enforcement officer shall, at the time of such impoundment, list the number and description of
violation(s), make a complete registry of the date of impoundment, breed, color, sex and general
condition of the animal as can be reasonably ascertained, if licensed or unlicensed, and the name of the
owner or keeper if known, on a registry form. A copy of this form shall be furnished to the Shelter
together with written instructions setting forth the conditions under which the animal may be released. If
the dog has upon it the name and address of the owner or keeper of the dog, or such name and address is
otherwise known to the enforcement officer, a written notice of the impoundment shall be sent by U.S.
Mail to the owner or keeper within 24 hours of the impoundment of the dog. If a dog has on a license tag,
then the last known licensee of the dog shall be sent a written notice of impoundment by U.S. Mail within
24 hours of the impoundment of the dog. In addition, the enforcement officer may make a reasonable
attempt to give notice by telephone.
7.3 Impoundment Fee – All owners or keepers may reclaim their animal by first licensing the animal, if
applicable, according to this Ordinance and state law, and by paying to the Town of Hampden an
Impoundment Fee in accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance for each offense. The owner
or keeper shall also be responsible for any additional costs incurred on behalf of the animal at the Animal
Shelter prior to reclamation. Fees must be paid at the Town Clerk's Office and a receipt of same presented
to the Animal Shelter prior to the release of the animal. (Amended: 11-17-03)
4
Town of Hampden, Maine
Animal Control Ordinance
5
ARTICLE VIII
ENFORCEMENT
8.1 Penalty – Whoever owns or keeps a dog contrary to any provision of this Ordinance shall be punished
by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $250.00 for each offense. All penalties shall inure to the
benefit of the Town of Hampden.
8.2 Separate Offense – A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
ARTICLE IX
MISCELLANEOUS
9.1 Separability – The invalidity of any provision of this Ordinance shall not invalidate any other part of
the Ordinance.
9.2 Repeal of Prior Ordinance – The Licensing and Control of Dogs Ordinance adopted by the Town on
June 5, 1978, as amended, is hereby repealed as of the effective date of this Ordinance.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY LICENSING ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1. PURPOSE 2
ARTICLE 2. DEFINITIONS 2
ARTICLE 3. LICENSING 3
ARTICLE 4. APPLICATIONS 3
ARTICLE 5. STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 4
ARTICLE 6. PROCEDURES 18
ARTICLE 7. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 21
AND SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS
ARTICLE 8. PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES 21
ARTICLE 9. RIGHT OF ENTRY 22
ARTICLE 10. ENFORCEMENT 23
ARTICLE 11. REVOCATION OF LICENSE 23
ARTICLE 12. PENALTIES 24
ARTICLE 13. SEVERABILITY 24
ARTICLE 14. CONFLICT 24
ARTICLE 15. APPEAL 24
ARTICLE 16. EXISTING FACILITIES 24
ARTICLE 17. APPLICABILITY 25
ARTICLE 18. APPLICABILITY OF AMENDMENTS 25
ADOPTED: Hampden Town Council, January 20, 1990
Effective Date, February 1, 1990
Amended: Hampden Town Council, September 4, 1990
Effective Date, October 4, 1990
Amended: Hampden Town Council, April 3, 1995
Effective Date May 3, 1995
Amended: Hampden Town Council, July 20, 1998
Effective Date, August 19, 1998
Amended: Hampden Town Council, January 25, 1999
Effective Date, February 25, 1999
Amended: Hampden Town Council, February 16, 1999
Effective Date, March 16, 1999
Amended: Hampden Town Council, August 20, 2001
Effective Date, September, 19, 2001
Amended: Hampden Town Council, October 1, 2001
Effective Date, October 31, 2001
Amended: Hampden Town Council, November 17, 2003
Effective Date, December 17, 2003
1
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY LICENSING ORDINANCE
ARTICLE 1
PURPOSE
1.1. To provide the Town of Hampden with a means of overseeing the activities of waste disposal
facilities to ensure that they comply with regulations the Town deems essential to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of its residents, pursuant to Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Sec. 3001 and 38 M.R.S.A. Sec.
1310-U.
1.2. To protect air, surface and groundwater and land resources of Hampden from contaminants which
can reasonably be expected to accompany the activities of waste disposal facilities and thereby to
preserve the quantity and quality of these resources for present and future use.
ARTICLE 2
DEFINITIONS
2.1. Disposal: The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking incineration or placing of any
waste in or on any land or water, except for subsurface wastewater disposal systems regulated under the
State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
2.2. Hazardous waste: As defined in 38 M.R.S.A., Sec. 1303-C (15), means a waste substance or
material, in any physical state, designated as hazardous by the Board of Environmental Protection under
38 M.R.S.A. Sec. 1319-O. It does not include waste resulting from normal household or agricultural
activities.
2.3. Liquid waste: Any waste that is determined to contain free liquids according to the Paint Filter
Liquids Test (Method 9095 of E.P.A. SW-846, 3rd Edition).
2.4. Liquid waste lagoon: A facility or part of a facility which is a natural topographic depression, manmade
excavation, or diked area formed primarily of earthen materials, although it may be lined with manmade
materials, which is designed to hold an accumulation of liquid wastes, special wastes, or wastes
containing free liquids.
2.5. Solid waste: Useless, unwanted or discarded solid material with insufficient liquid content to be free
flowing, including but not limited to: rubbish, garbage, refuse-derived fuel, scrap materials, junk, refuse,
inert fill material, and landscape refuse. The term shall not include septic tank sludge, agricultural wastes,
hazardous waste or biomedical waste.
2.6. Solid waste disposal facility: Any land area, structure, location, equipment or combination thereof
used for the incineration or landfilling of solid waste or refuse-derived fuel.
2.7. Special waste: Any solid waste generated by sources other than domestic and typical commercial
establishments that exists in such an unusual quantity or in such a chemical or physical state, or any
combination thereof, that may disrupt or impair effective waste management or threaten public health,
human safety or the environment and requires special handling, transportation and disposal procedures.
Such waste shall include, but not be limited to, those wastes set forth in 38 M.R.S.A. Sec. 1303-C (34).
2
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
2.8. Undefined Terms: Any undefined term used in this Ordinance shall be given the definition used by
the State of Maine in any statutes or regulations applicable to solid waste disposal facilities. Absent any
such definition, terms not defined shall have their customary dictionary definition.
ARTICLE 3
LICENSING
3.1. No person, firm, or corporation shall locate, establish, construct, expand disposal capacity of or
operate any solid waste disposal facility within the Town of Hampden without obtaining a license from
the Town. Therefore, the disposal of any solid waste, liquid waste, hazardous waste, or special waste,
(hereafter referred to as "waste") is strictly prohibited within the Town except at the site of a solid waste
disposal facility which has secured all necessary state and local licenses and/or permits.
3.2. Said license shall not be transferable without the prior written approval of the Town Council
(hereafter "Council") where the purpose and consequence of the transfer is to transfer any of the
obligations of the developer as incorporated in the license. Such approval shall be granted only if the
applicant or transferee demonstrates to the Council that the transferee has the technical capacity and
financial ability to comply with conditions of the license and with all proposals, plans, and supporting
documents contained in the application for license.
3.3. The license shall be posted on the premises.
3.4. A license issued pursuant to this Ordinance remains in effect unless modified, or unless revoked or
suspended pursuant to Article 11 of this Ordinance. (Adopted: 10/1/01)
3.5. The Council may impose any requirement as a license condition to assure compliance with
this Ordinance. (Adopted: 10/1/01)
ARTICLE 4
APPLICATIONS
4.1. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to demonstrate that the facility will be in full
compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
4.2. An application for a license to locate, establish, or construct a new solid waste disposal facility or to
expand the disposal capacity of an existing, duly licensed, solid waste disposal facility shall be submitted
to the Council, including the following information:
a. The name and address of the applicant.
b. A complete copy of the application(s) and supporting documentation submitted to the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection under the requirements of DEP's Solid Waste Management
Rules (Chapter 400 et seq.), and any amendments thereto or substitutions therefore. This copy shall
include all submissions required under Chapters 400-409 of the Solid Waste Management Rules.
c. Copies of any other applications for state or federal permits required for the proposed new or
expanded facility, and a report on the status of any such applications. A copy of all federal or state
permits issued for the facility shall also be provided to the Council.
d. If not included in 4.2.b, a description of methods to control leachate generation and movement.
3
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
e. Plans for an alternate water supply to replace private wells which could be affected by the solid waste
disposal facility, including proof of the availability of an alternate source of supply, and estimates of
the cost to develop this alternate source of supply (as outlined in Article 8.2).
f. General characterization of wastes proposed for disposal; estimate of the proportions of different
types of waste proposed for disposal; compatibility of different wastes with each other; compatibility
of wastes with the liner.
g. For good cause shown, the Council may, in its sole discretion, waive any or all of the submittal
requirements of this Ordinance, or accept other documentation in lieu thereof.
The Council shall, within 30 days of the first regular Council meeting following the receipt of a license
application, notify the applicant whether the application is complete. This time period may be extended
by the Council for up to an additional 21 days if it is still waiting for a report from its consultant or the
Landfill Oversight Committee. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the Council shall notify
the applicant in writing of the specific information necessary to complete it. In reviewing applications
determined to be complete, the Council may require additional relevant information which is necessary to
determine whether the proposed facility fulfills the purpose of the Ordinance and its specific standards of
review as listed in Articles 5 and 6.
4.3. An application for a license to locate, establish or construct a new solid waste disposal facility, or for
a license to expand disposal capacity (area or volume) of an existing facility beyond that duly licensed by
the State of Maine as of the effective date of this Ordinance, shall be accompanied by a fee paid in
accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance. Such fee shall be deposited in a special account
designated for that application, to be used by the Council for hiring independent engineering, geological,
planning, legal or other consulting services necessary to review the proposal. If the balance in this special
account is drawn down to Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000), the Council shall notify the applicant and the
applicant shall deposit with the Town an additional fee in accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees
Ordinance. The Council shall continue to notify the applicant and the applicant shall deposit an additional
fee in accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance with the Town whenever the balance is
drawn down to Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000). If the applicant fails to deposit the required amounts
with the Town in a timely fashion, the Council may suspend its review of the application until such time
as the amounts are deposited. Town shall notify the applicant in writing of any such suspension of review.
The unexpended balance in the account shall be returned to the applicant after a final decision on the
application is rendered. If the Council and the applicant mutually agree upon the qualifications and
acceptability of all technical experts employed in the design and construction of the facility, the Council
may waive all or part of this requirement, provided the public health, safety, and welfare are protected and
the purposes of these regulations are met. (Amended: 11-17-03)
ARTICLE 5
STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
5.1. Setbacks
A. Standards
1. The solid waste handling area of the landfill shall meet the following setbacks:
(a) 300 feet to an adjoining property line or public street;
(b) 250 feet from a brook or stream; and
4
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
(c) 75 feet from a freshwater wetlands greater than one acre.
2. The setback standard shall not apply to electrical transmission lines, railroad tracks or
underground pipelines, whether these are held in fee or easement. However, activities in close
proximity to these facilities shall not have an adverse impact on the ability to use and maintain
these facilities.
3. The Council may reduce the required setbacks under A(1)(a) for solid waste handling areas where
the applicant has demonstrated no other alternative exists and the existing or proposed setback
will allow for an effective buffer by virtue of the limited height, mass, and visibility to the
abutters or general public of the proposed expansion. In no instance shall the setback be less than
100 (one hundred) feet in width.
4. The Council may reduce the required setbacks for wetlands greater than one acre where the
applicant has demonstrated no other alternative exists and the proposed design will effectively
mitigate any adverse impact on the wetlands and their related habitat by virtue of the proposed
gradient, surface water runoff flow, and existing and/or proposed vegetation or other methods. In
no instance shall the setback be less than 25 (twenty-five) feet.
B. Submissions. Recent aerial photos taken of the site within the last year. Aerial photos shall provide
complete stereo coverage within a minimum of 1,000 feet of the property boundary of the proposed
landfill facility. The scale of the photographs shall be 1 inch equal to or less than 500 feet. The
proposed solid waste boundary and the property boundary shall be clearly outlined on one photo.
Required setback distances shall be included in appropriate site plan drawings.
5.2. Buffers
A. Standards. Vegetated buffers for the landfill shall meet the following standards, at a minimum:
1. All buffers, whether existing, planted or constructed, shall be reviewed by a licensed landscape
architect to ensure they meet the intended purpose, both immediately as well as over the long
term.
2. From all adjacent properties and public street(s): Provide a 200 foot buffer of natural vegetation
consisting of predominantly native trees that will attain a mature height of at least sixty feet in
height. At least 50% of the buffer vegetation shall be evergreen trees which will provide year
round screening. Cleared openings in the buffer area to accommodate access, accessory
structures, and other elements shall be kept to a minimum. Where existing vegetation does not
exist, or does not meet the standards above, a planting plan must be submitted to provide a buffer
not less than 10 (ten) feet in height at the time of planting, to a width of 100 feet, provided that an
internal access roadway serving the landfill may be located within the 100 foot buffer along I-95,
provided that in no event shall said buffer be less than 50 feet, if such location is reasonably
necessary to serve the landfill and provided the applicant demonstrates that the buffer will
provide adequate screening despite the location of the roadway. The foregoing buffer
requirements shall not apply to adjacent properties that are used for railroad purposes. Provided,
however, that the landfill shall be screened from public streets to the greatest extent practicable,
using a combination of vegetation, fences, berms, and other screening devices.
3. From brooks and streams: Provide a 100 foot buffer of natural vegetation consisting of
predominantly native trees and shrubs. Where existing vegetation does not exist, an appropriate
5
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
planting plan shall be submitted to provide for improvement in storm water quantity as well as
wildlife habitat. Disturbance of stream banks is to be avoided.
B. Submissions.
1. A plan of the site which identifies the various elements which require buffers and indicates the
location and quality of the existing buffers. Where existing vegetation does not meet the
standards above, a planting plan shall be submitted to provide buffers that meet the standards.
This plan shall detail the species type, size, designations of number of units and proposed
locations.
2. A narrative by a landscape architect, or similarly qualified professional, describing the existing
vegetation. The description shall include growth rates, physical characteristics, and ability to
provide the required buffer. Where additional plantings are required, the narrative shall detail on
how the proposed plantings will meet the intended buffer purpose, anticipated growth rates, and
other relevant details.
5.3. Site Analysis. The applicant must provide a predevelopment site analysis which describes the
natural characteristics of the site to be developed and its surroundings. The analysis shall be prepared by
professionals qualified in the respective field of evaluation. The analysis, covering the following areas,
will highlight the elements of the proposed site and vicinity which are conducive to the proposed project,
as well as those which are limitations that will require special consideration in the development of the
project. The analysis must describe how the design will compensate for the described limitations. The
analysis should include adjacent features within at least 1/2 mile from the project site.
5.4. Effect on Existing Uses and Scenic Character (Amended: 8/20/01)
A. Standards. The facility may not unreasonable adversely affect existing uses and scenic character.
Specifically, the facility may not:
1. Present a bird hazard to aircraft;
2. Have an unreasonable adverse effect on the preservation of historical sites;
3. Unreasonably interfere with views from established public viewing areas;
4. Generate excessive noise at the property boundary or at any protected location; or
5. Unreasonably adversely affect existing uses of property neighboring the proposed solid waste
facility.
B. Submissions.
1. An analysis of the visual impact of the proposed project on the vicinity. This analysis shall
include presentation of site layout, operations methodology and sequencing options considered
during the design process.
2. The analysis shall include presentation of vistas and views to illustrate the analysis.
6
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
3. A description of the existing condition of the site and the vicinity around it, covering the area
within 1,000 feet of the property boundary. This description shall include, at a minimum, terrain,
vegetation, habitations, existing land uses, and natural resources.
5.5. Geology
A. Standards.
1. The site selected for the project must have suitable geological, geotechnical and ground and
surface water characteristics and the applicant must assess the potential impacts of the project and
show that the engineering of the project will appropriately protect the site and compensate for any
limiting existing conditions.
2. The facility site and design must provide adequate stability, both static and seismic, and account
for settlement.
B. Submissions.
1. A summary of the geological, ground and surface water, and geotechnical investigations
conducted for the MDEP application. The discussion should describe the investigations
conducted and the conclusions, including the limitations they present for the project, and the
engineering proposed to overcome these limitations.
2. A summary of the time of travel calculations required by the MDEP application.
3. Cross-sections of the landfill and the leachate collection and leak detection system showing the
most critical areas for each of the following: bedrock, groundwater (both seasonal high and low
conditions), and overburden soils.
4. A summary of the stability and settlement assessments, and a description of the key elements of
the Stability and Settlement Monitoring plan. This summary must clearly indicate how the
monitoring will be accomplished and by whom, and how results will be analyzed, presented and
mitigated. In particular, the plan must demonstrate how the Town of Hampden will be made
aware when settlement and/or stability issues arise, and how it will be made aware of the
proposed mitigations.
5.6. Natural Environment. (Amended: 8/20/01)
A. Standards. The facility development and operations may not unreasonably adversely affect protected
natural resources and rare, threatened or endangered plant and animal species or habitats in the
vicinity of the facility.
B. Submissions.
1. A narrative by qualified professionals describing wildlife habitat in the development area,
including nesting, foraging, and feeding areas. Wildlife habitats in wetlands and streams should
be included. Mitigation for any adverse impact on those habitats should be specifically described.
2. The narrative should also include descriptions of the flora and fauna of the existing site and the
potential for and nature of impact by the proposed project. The assessment must determine if any
7
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
rare, threatened or endangered species or habitats will be impacted or are threatened by the
project.
5.7. Traffic.
A. Standards.
1. The applicant must demonstrate that the traffic generated and impacted by the facility, both on
and off site, will be safe and uncongested.
2. Haul routes must be on roads that can accommodate the number, weight, and types of vehicles
proposed to use them.
3. On-site roads must provide safe and clearly defined traffic circulation.
4. Facility entrances and exits must have safe sight distances and provisions for safe turning.
5. Analyses must include traffic from both regular operations and construction activity.
B. Submissions.
1. A map clearly indicating the anticipated major haul routes both to and from the facility by
vehicles serving or using the facility, as well as a description of the characteristics of each road
including dimensions, condition, existing usage, weight limits and restrictions.
2. Any sections of roads or intersections on these routes that are congested locations, not rated to
handle the weights or types of vehicles anticipated, or are high accident areas (based on MDOT
inventory and analysis over the most recent three year period) must be identified on the map and
in the description. Actions to mitigate potential problems posed by these restrictions should be
discussed.
3. A description of the traffic to be generated by the facility, including an estimate of the number,
type, weight and schedule (i.e. distribution and time of day) of all vehicles. This discussion
should include the same data for existing uses of the facility, and should compare existing and
proposed conditions.
4. Evidence must be provided that sight distances at the facility's proposed (and existing) entrances
and exits are safe. This can include a description of the sight distances and a copy of the DOT
entrance permit if applicable, or certification by a qualified professional. This review must be in
conformance with Transportation and Land Development ITE, 1988), A Policy on Geometric
Design of Highways and Streets (AASHTO, 1990), and Highway Design Guide (Maine Dept. of
Transportation, 1990).
5. If a full traffic study is required for the project by MDEP, a copy of the study must be submitted,
as well as an explanation for the issue which necessitated the full study.
6. If alternative haul routes are utilized more than occasionally (once per month), these additional
routes must be submitted for review and approval by the Town.
8
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
5.8. Public Safety - Fire and Security.
A. Standards.
1. The proposed landfill shall provide for adequate prevention of fire and unauthorized access.
2. The proposed facility shall provide an adequate plan (equipment, methodologies, and personnel)
to deal with accidental fire or arson as well as unauthorized entry and disposal of unauthorized
materials.
B. Submissions.
1. The applicant must submit a fire safety plan that evaluates the potential ignition sources, their
relative hazard potential, and the on-site means of controlling a fire. The plan should discuss the
availability of on-site equipment, water supply, and warning systems, as well as the planned
coordination with the local fire department. The applicant must obtain and submit a letter from
the Public Safety Director that the proposed fire safety plan is acceptable to the department.
2. The applicant shall provide provisions for on-site security adequate to prevent unauthorized
access to the facility. This plan may include gatehouse personnel, fencing, security patrols, alarm
systems and limited vehicle access points.
5.9. Nuisance Control: The proposed solid waste disposal facility shall not create a nuisance to
properties in the immediate area by way of noise, dust, litter, or odors.
5.9.1. Noise.
A. Standards
1. Sound Level Limits. The following hourly sound levels from routine operation of a solid
waste disposal facility must be less than or equal to:
(a) 75 dBA for daytime and nighttime hours at the facility property boundary;
(b) 60 dBA for daytime hours and 50 dBA for nighttime hours at any protected location in an
area for which the zoning, or, if unzoned, the existing use or use contemplated under a
comprehensive plan, is not predominantly commercial or industrial; or
(c) 70 dBA for daytime hours and 60 dBA for nighttime hours in an area for which the
zoning, or if unzoned, the existing use or use contemplated under a comprehensive plan,
is predominantly commercial or industrial.
2. Alternative levels. If the applicant chooses to demonstrate by measurement that the daytime
or nighttime pre-development ambient sound environment at any protected location exceeds
the daytime or nighttime limits above, by at least 5 dBA, then the daytime or nighttime limits
are 5 dBA more than the measured daytime or nighttime pre-development ambient hourly
sound level at the location of the measurement for the corresponding time period.
3. Existing Facilities. For any protected location near an existing solid waste disposal facility,
the hourly sound level limit for routine operation of the existing facility and all future
expansions of that facility is the hourly sound level written above, or at the applicant's
9
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
election, the existing hourly sound level from routine operation of the facility before any
expansions plus 3 dBA.
4. All equipment used in the construction of and maintenance activities at the solid waste
facility must comply with applicable local and federal noise regulations, and include
environmental noise control devices in proper working condition and maintained as originally
provided with the equipment by its manufacturer.
5. Sounds associated with the following are exempt from the sound level limits of this section:
(a) Routine engine sounds from registered and inspected motor vehicles:
(i) While operating on public ways, or
(ii) That enter the facility to make a delivery or pickup and that are moving, starting or
stopping, but not when they are parked with the engine running for over 60 minutes
in the facility.
(b) The unamplified human voice and other sounds of natural origin.
(c) Emergency maintenance and repairs.
(d) Facility and vehicle warning signals and alarms so long as used in appropriate
circumstances.
(e) Safety and protective devices installed in accordance with the devices' installation
instructions.
(f) Boiler start-up, testing and maintenance operations occurring no more frequently than
once per month.
(g) Major concrete pours that must extend after 7:00 p.m., when started before 3:00 p.m.
(h) Test operations of emergency equipment occurring in the daytime and no more frequently
than once per week.
(i) Snow removal, landscaping and street sweeping activities.
(j) Sound from a regulated development received at a protected location when the
generator of the sound has been conveyed a noise easement for that location. This
exemption shall only be for the specific noise, land and term covered by the
easement.
6. For the purposes hereof, protected locations shall only include those for which the hourly
sound levels from the facility will be greater than 45 dBA.
B. Submissions.
1. Sufficient evidence, including but not limited to the submissions below, which demonstrates
that the proposed facility will not exceed the specified noise standard.
10
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
2. A narrative description, with associated plans, of all noise generating activities on the site
both during construction and during routine operations, including description of the source,
frequency, duration, and hours of occurrence. The magnitude of these noise sources should be
described at the source, at the property line and at any protected location.
3. A description of all mechanisms used to mitigate the noise generated by these sources, and an
analysis of the effect of each mechanism, and all mechanisms combined, on the noise level
generation at the source, at the property line and at any protected location. These mechanisms
may include, but are not limited to, physical barriers, additional setbacks, vegetative buffers,
limitations on operational hours of certain equipment and deliveries.
5.9.2. Odor.
A. Standards.
1. The facility must control nuisance odors.
2. Proposed controls will be included in the Operations Manual, as appropriate.
3. The Response Plan (see B.6 below) shall be included in the Operations Manual and shall
require the elimination or reduction to an acceptable level of nuisance odors at the property
line within 48 hours of receipt of the complaint.
B. Submissions.
1. The applicant shall evaluate all potential odor sources and shall provide an effective means of
reducing the off-site impact of odors generated.
2. The information provided shall include a list of potential landfill materials which have been
known to produce offensive odors and the methodologies used to eliminate the odors.
3. The identification of any possible sources of nuisance odors at the facility, including
frequency and duration of the presence of these sources.
4. An estimation of the area affected by the odor, based on experience in dealing with the
material or process that is the source of the odor.
5. Proposed systems to control, reduce, or eliminate odors. ASTM E 679-79 can be used for
guidance for control of nuisance odors. The effectiveness of these methodologies should be
discussed based on experience. These methods may include prohibitions on accepting certain
materials or seasonal limits.
6. Response plan for handling complaints about nuisance odors.
5.9.3. Lighting.
A. Standards.
1. Lighting at the facility shall not unreasonably alter the lighting conditions in the vicinity of
the facility.
11
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
2. Proposed lighting shall be the minimum necessary to illuminate only those areas which would
be adversely impacted without such illumination. Hours of lighting operation shall be
minimized and all fixtures shall be shielded to allow lighting to be directed toward the desired
targets and away from the surrounding properties or the sky.
3. Light levels at the property lines shall not exceed 0.5 foot candles.
B. Submissions. Location, bulb type, wattage, luminaire type, hours of operation and lighting
diagrams for each proposed fixture in foot candles. The cumulative effect of all on-site fixtures
(existing and proposed) should be analyzed and discussed as well.
5.9.4. Litter, Debris and Dust.
A. Standards.
1. The facility operations will not create litter, debris or dust on the public roads or on the
properties in the vicinity of the proposed facility.
2. Proposed controls will be included in the Operations Manual, as appropriate.
3. The Response Plan (see B.4 below) will be included in the Operations Manual and will
require clean-up or control action within 24 hours of receipt of the complaint.
B. Submissions.
1. The identification of any possible sources of litter, dust and debris at the facility.
2. Proposed specific systems to control, reduce, or eliminate litter, debris and dust. These must
control litter blowing from vehicles or from the facility, debris tracked by vehicles into or out
of the facility and dust generated anywhere on the site or by vehicles associated with the site,
both during construction and during regular site operations.
3. Provisions for prompt clean up of accidental spills and stray cargo.
4. Response plan for handling complaints about litter, debris and dust.
5.10. Design Standards.
5.10.1. General Standards.
A. Standards.
1. The height of the landfill, inclusive of final closure systems, shall not exceed 320 feet in
elevation, based on United States Geological Survey National Geodetic Vertical Datum of
1929. (Amended: 10/1/01)
2. Expansions outside existing disturbed areas shall utilize appropriate grades to transition from
existing landforms to man-made landforms.
3. The working area of the landfill shall utilize the smallest possible working face.
12
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
B. Submissions.
1. An analysis of the visual impact of the proposed project on the vicinity. This analysis shall
include presentation of site layout, operations methodology and sequencing options
considered during the design process, and a discussion of how the proposed design minimizes
the visual impact to the maximum extent possible.
2. The analysis shall include presentation of vistas and views to illustrate the analysis.
3. A description of the existing condition of the site and the vicinity around it, covering the area
within 1,000 feet of the property boundary. This description shall include, at a minimum,
terrain, vegetation, habitations, land use, development patterns, transportation systems,
natural resources, character, etc.
5.10.2. Leachate Management and Groundwater Protection.
A. Standards.
1. Landfills may not contaminate ground water beyond the solid waste boundary.
2.
(a) Time of travel to sensitive receptors must be greater than 6 years as demonstrated by the
time of travel calculations required for the MDEP application. Contaminant releases from
the area within the solid waste boundary must not pose an unreasonable threat to sensitive
receptors.
(b) As an alternative, the applicant may propose, and the Town Council may consider at its
sole discretion, utilization of the Improvement Allowance System set forth in Chapter
401 of MDEP's Solid Waste Management Rules. Subject, however, to the following
requirements:
(i) The applicant shall identify potential sensitive receptors using travel times calculated
for the existing site conditions.
(ii) The total number of offsets under the System shall not exceed 3.
(iii) The allowable offsets shall be subtracted from the 6-year criteria set forth in (a)
above to determine the travel time to sensitive receptors that must be provided by site
conditions and imported soil.
(iv) Additional soil may be imported onto the site to augment the existing site travel
times, as long as one or more of the improvement allowances set forth in the Rules
are utilized.
3.
(a) The liner, leachate collection and leak detection systems must meet the design standards
in Chapter 401 of MDEP's Solid Waste Management Rules.
(b) The applicant may propose, and the Town Council may consider in its sole discretion,
alternatives to the minimum design standards. Provided, however, that the applicant shall
submit to the Town the documentation required by said MDEP Rules for consideration of
13
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
alternatives to the minimum design standards, which documentation must clearly and
convincingly demonstrate technical equivalency of the proposed alternative.
B. Submissions.
1. If not included in the submissions required under Article 4, the application must show the
following elements of the site design:
(a) Leachate collection system
(b) Containment ponds
(c) Storage tanks
(d) Connection to public sewer system, if applicable
(e) Cross sections (sufficient to illustrate landfill design and phase development)
2. The following site grading plans must be submitted:
(a) Existing topography
(b) Proposed stages or phases (1 plan per 2 years minimum)
(c) Final conditions
3. Details of the following must also be provided:
(a) Liners
(b) Cover materials
4. A detailed description of the each component of the base, liner, leachate collection and leak
detection systems including the specifications proposed for the materials and their
installation.
(a) A detailed discussion of how the proposed design meets or exceeds the standards in
Chapter 401 of the MDEP Solid Waste Management Rules.
(b) A summary discussion of the leachate management system, including leachate generation
rate estimates, conveyance and storage system design and capacity, leachate quality
estimates and resultant limitations on disposal options, and contingency plans for
significant failure modes (which can result in the direct discharge of leachate to the
environment).
(c) The Leachate Management Plan submitted under Chapter 401 of the MDEP Solid Waste
Management Rules.
(d) A summary of the Contaminant Transport Analysis required under Chapter 401 of the
MDEP Solid Waste Management Rules.
14
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
5.10.3. Stormwater Management.
A. Standards.
1. The proposed landfill will not increase storm water runoff rates or create adverse storm water
impacts down stream from the proposed project.
2. The storm water plan shall be designed so that there will be no increase in the peak flow in
the post development condition during any storm up to and including the 25 year, 24 hour
storm.
3. The development may not cause or increase the extent, frequency, or duration of flooding at
any downstream control structures (i.e. culverts, bridges, dams, etc.).
B. Submissions.
1. A pre development/post development storm water impact analysis prepared by a professional
engineer. The applicant shall demonstrate that the rate, volume, and velocity of post
development stormwater flows will not create erosion on or off site or cause flooding or
increased peak flows from the watershed.
2. All detailed engineering analyses, including drainage areas, flow paths, hydraulic
calculations, etc. shall be provided to the Town's consulting engineers. All assumptions made
in determining curve numbers, travel times, etc. must be discussed.
3. The analysis shall include the 24 hours, 2, 10, and 25 year storm events. The analysis shall
evaluate the site within the watershed as well to ensure overall flow from the watershed is not
increased, nor is any flooding caused or increased. The storm water system must be sized to
accommodate temporary conditions such as bare ground, stock piled materials, and
temporary service roads.
4. All capacity calculations for any existing and proposed drainage structures.
5. Any retention or detention structures shall be evaluated for stability based on construction
methodology and materials used.
5.10.4. Soils and Erosion Control.
A. Standards.
1. The construction and operation of the facility shall not cause erosion, sedimentation or other
adverse impacts to adjacent surface waters or wetlands.
2. The soils on the facility site shall be suitable for the proposed project to avoid causing
unreasonable sedimentation or erosion impacts.
3. The design and implementation of erosion control measures shall be done in accordance with
Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Construction: Best Management
Practices (March 1991), or any amendments thereto or replacements thereof.
15
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
B. Submissions.
1. A plan showing the locations, calculations, dimensions and installation and removal
schedules for all erosion control measures, both permanent and temporary. Maintenance of
all measures must be specified as well as identification of an individual who will be
responsible for ensuring all erosion control measures are functioning properly.
2. A maintenance plan for all permanent measures which includes measures to ensure that
sediment collected by structures do not become a source of contaminants which can impact
water quality.
5.10.5. Solid Wastes.
A. Standards
1. The design and operation of the landfill must be consistent with the intended waste stream to
be disposed of at the facility. These wastes must be of types which will not cause nuisances
such as those set forth at Section 5.9. The amount and disposal of municipal solid waste
(MSW) and front-end process residue (FEPR) or other putrescible waste at the facility must
be adequately limited and/or controlled so as to not cause nuisances such as set forth in
Section 5.9.
B. Submissions.
1. A description of all waste types to be disposed of at the facility, including the source,
estimated volume from each source, chemical analysis of each waste, including variability
and potential hazard, compatibility with engineered systems and a discussion on the
composition of the leachate to be generated including the potential for "unreasonable threat to
sensitive receptors" from the wastes or the leachate. The leachate quality analysis must
account for the potential reaction products and consequences when wastes are mixed.
5.10.6. Operations Manual.
A. Standards.
1. The Operations Manual must meet all the requirements of Chapter 401 of the MDEP Solid
Waste Management Rules.
2. The manual must adequately describe all procedures and mechanisms incorporated in the
design to monitor, mitigate or improve the performance of the facility and the site and should
include measures to ensure that all such procedures and mechanisms are actually utilized and
maintained by the operations staff.
3. The manual must provide a mechanism to allow the Town to easily assess the status of
required inspections, monitoring, submissions, etc.
4. The operations manual must clarify the portions of the site's operations to which it applies,
updating the operations procedures as necessary for existing facilities on the site that will be
incorporated into the operations of any proposed expansion (including but not limited to such
elements as roads, security, scales, leachate collection, monitoring etc.).
16
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
B. Submissions.
1. The Town of Hampden must be the recipient of one of the certified copies of the Operations
Manual. This copy must be maintained along with all other certified copies throughout the
operational lifetime of the facility.
5.10.7. Water Quality Monitoring.
A. Standards.
1. The Water Quality Monitoring plan must be sufficient to ensure that any contamination
which enters the environment from the facility will be identified in a timely manner so
mitigation methods can be implemented.
B. Submissions.
1. A proposed Water Quality Monitoring plan that meets the requirements of the MDEP Solid
Waste Management Rules.
2. All water quality monitoring reports must be submitted to the Town when they are submitted
to MDEP, as well as all correspondence concerning the Water Quality Monitoring program.
3. Identification of potential sensitive receptors, based on a 6 year travel time for the existing
site conditions.
5.10.8. Final Elevations.
A. Standards.
1. In addition to compliance with the requirements of Section 5.10.1, the solid waste disposal
facility shall be designed and constructed in such a manner so as to minimize the visual
impact of the final landform by creating an undulating final terrain with subtle, rolling peaks
and valleys. Provided, however, that the final terrain of the facility shall not cause or permit
the impoundment or ponding of surface water. The final elevation and shape of the facility
shall conform to the following design parameters:
(a) No more than 25% of the total footprint area of waste placement shall exceed 245 feet in
elevation and no more than 15% of the total footprint area of waste placement shall
exceed 260 feet in elevation, based on United States Geological Survey National
Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. (Amended: 10/1/01)
(b) The top surface of the facility shall be an undulating shape that conforms to the following
requirements:
(i) Minimum of two peaks.
(ii) Intermediate saddle that is at least 25 feet wide and 40 feet lower than the peak
elevation. (Amended: 10/1/01)
(iii) Top slope of not less than 10%.
2. The Council may grant a variance to the foregoing parameters if the applicant can
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Council that the site specific design provides a shape
17
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
that blends naturally with the existing landforms and environment of the area and promotes
runoff.
B. Submissions.
1. Plans showing the final elevations of the solid waste disposal facility, along with sufficient
visual simulation materials from a variety of viewing areas to permit the Council to evaluate
the effectiveness of the undulating design in minimizing the visual impact of the proposed
final landform of the facility.
5.10.9. Closure.
A. Standards.
1. Approval from the Council is required to close a solid waste disposal facility. The applicant
must demonstrate that the closure will be designed, constructed, monitored, and maintained
to: (1) mitigate hazards posed by the facility to public health and safety or to the environment,
(2) monitor the effectiveness of the closure system, and (3) function with a minimum of
maintenance.
B. Submissions.
1. The applicant shall submit to the Town a complete copy of all applications, plans, studies,
reports, or other documentation submitted to MDEP concerning the closure of the facility.
The foregoing materials shall be submitted to the Town contemporaneous with their
submission to MDEP. If not included in the foregoing submissions, the applicant shall submit
plans for the final closure of the facility and post-closure monitoring, care and maintenance of
the site, including information on the timing of closure, cover materials to be used, frequency
and methods for groundwater, surface water, gas leachate, and cover maintenance and
monitoring, and methods to control methane generation and movement post-closure.
ARTICLE 6
PROCEDURES
6.1.
A. Any application to locate, establish, construct, expand disposal capacity of or operate any
solid waste disposal facility within the Town of Hampden shall be reviewed by a Landfill
Oversight Committee ("LOC") consisting of three members. One member shall be appointed
by the applicant, one member shall be appointed by the Town Council, and one neutral
member shall be appointed by the mutual agreement of the applicant and the Town Council.
LOC shall have the authority to engage the services of such professional consultants as it
deems necessary or appropriate to assist it in the review and evaluation of any application.
Upon referral by the Council, LOC shall review any application for completeness and issue a
written recommendation to the Council on the issue of whether the application is complete.
LOC shall review and evaluate any complete application, and may formulate any comments
and/or suggestions concerning the application with regards to its compliance with the
requirements of this Ordinance. Upon the completion of its review and evaluation of a
completed application, LOC shall issue a written report to the Town Council wherein LOC
shall make recommendations to the Town Council as to whether the application should be
approved, denied, or approved with modifications or conditions. Any such report shall be
18
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
based on the licensing requirements of this Ordinance, and the recommendations contained in
the report shall set forth, with reference to the applicable licensing requirement(s), the
rationale and reasons for LOC's recommendations.
B. In addition to reviewing and evaluating applications, LOC shall also have the authority to monitor
and evaluate the construction and operation of any solid waste disposal facility licensed under this
Ordinance to ensure that any such facility is constructed and operated in accordance with the
requirements of this Ordinance and the requirements of any license issued by the Town Council. In
carrying out its duties hereunder, LOC shall be authorized to engage the services of such professional
consultants as it deems necessary or appropriate.
C. The applicant shall bear the costs of the member appointed by the applicant, and the Town shall bear
the costs of the member appointed by the Town Council. The costs of the neutral member and the
costs of the professional consultants retained by LOC shall be borne equally by the applicant and the
Town, and the Town may pay its share of said costs related to the review and evaluation of an
application from the application fee paid under Section 4.3 of this Ordinance. Provided, however, that
nothing contained herein shall prohibit the applicant and the Town from reaching an alternative
financing mechanism by agreement.
6.2. A hearing shall be held by the Council within ninety (90) working days of its determination that an
application is complete for a new license (i.e., a license to locate, establish or construct a new solid waste
disposal facility or to expand the disposal capacity of an existing facility) or thirty (30) working days for a
license renewal. The Council may elect to have a hearing on an application for an original license for an
existing facility, or it may consider such application without a hearing. When considering an application
for a new license or a renewal license, the Council may extend this period to no more than 180 days for a
new license and 60 days for a renewal license if more time is necessary to conduct a thorough review of
the application, or if LOC has not issued its written report to the Town Council. At the hearing, the
Council shall receive evidence on the location and operation of the proposed facility, including but not
limited to location and design, volume of traffic generated, condition of screening, proximity of
residences to the site, proximity of drinking water wells, proximity of aquifers, freshwater wetlands,
rivers, streams or brooks as defined in 38 M.R.S.A. Sec. 480-C (9), adequacy of methods to control
leachate and other factors relevant to the proposed facility and its operation.
6.3. Within thirty (30) working days of the hearing, or within thirty (30) working days after the
application is determined to be complete if there is no hearing, the Council shall issue a license only if it
finds, based on substantial evidence in the record, that:
1. The proposed facility is in compliance with all applicable regulations and ordinances of the Town of
Hampden. (Amended 4-3-95)
2. The proposed facility meets the specific requirements set forth in this Ordinance;
3. The applicant has sufficient right, title or interest in the property for which a license is sought.
4. The applicant has sufficient financial ability to design, construct, operate, maintain, close and
accomplish post-closure care of the solid waste disposal facility.
5. The applicant has sufficient technical ability to design, construct, operate, maintain, close and
accomplish post-closure care of the solid waste disposal facility.
19
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
6. Adequate provision has been made for the containment and treatment of leachate so as to prevent
ground or surface water contamination;
7. Wastes proposed for disposal are compatible with each other and the liner(s);
8. The proposed use will not have a significant detrimental effect on the use and peaceful enjoyment of
abutting property as a result of noise, vibrations, fumes, odor, dust, glare, or other nuisances which
could be avoided by reasonable modification of the plan;
9. The design of the site will not result in significant flood hazards or flood damage and is in
conformance with applicable flood hazard protection requirements;
10. The facility will not have an unreasonable adverse effect on air quality.
11. The facility will not have an unreasonable adverse effect on surface water quality.
12. Adequate provision has been made for the transportation, storage, and disposal of hazardous materials
as defined by state law;
13. The facility will not have an unreasonable adverse effect on other natural resources in the Town.
14. The facility will not create an unreasonable risk that a discharge to a significant ground water aquifer
will occur.
15. The proposed facility will not have an adverse impact upon a classified surface water body, river,
stream or brook as defined in 38 M.R.S.A. Sec. 480-C;
16. The closure and post-closure monitoring and maintenance plans shall provide adequate protection that
the solid waste disposal facility will not create future health or safety hazards, and will meet the
minimum standards contained in Chapters 400-401 of the State Solid Waste Management Rules of
the DEP.
17. Adequate provision has been made for utilities, and the facility will not have an unreasonable adverse
effect on existing or proposed utilities.
18. The applicant and the Town Council have negotiated a host community agreement satisfactory to the
Town Council which, based upon the nature, size and projected impacts of the proposed facility, must
include as a minimum provisions regarding the following:
(a) Improvement, maintenance and repair of local roads directly affected by traffic to and from the
facility and of other infrastructural elements directly affected by the facility;
(b) Development and maintenance of adequate local emergency response capacity to accommodate
the facility;
(c) Financial support for personnel or other means to provide technical assistance to the Town in
interpreting data and to advise the Town on other technical issues concerning the facility; and
(d) Other issues determined on a case-specific basis by the applicant and Town to be appropriate
given the nature of the proposed facility.
20
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
The license is subject to the condition precedent that the applicant actually enter into a host community
agreement with the Town.
The Council shall issue a written report stating its findings of fact and its decision and, if a license is
issued, any conditions attached to the license which the Council finds necessary to fulfill the purposes of
this Ordinance.
6.4. A license for a new solid waste disposal facility or to expand the disposal capacity of an existing,
duly licensed, solid waste disposal facility shall be subject to the condition precedent that said facility
receive approval from the Town's Planning Board under the Zoning Ordinance. Licenses are subject to
the condition that the applicant secure and comply with all applicable federal, state, and local licenses and
permits prior to and during construction and operation of the waste disposal facility.
ARTICLE 7
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS AND SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS
7.1. The facility shall comply with all operational and performance standards included in the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection's Solid Waste Management Rules (Chapter 400 et seq.) and any
amendments thereto or substitutions therefore.
7.2. Access to the disposal site shall be strictly controlled, and all access roads to public or private ways
shall be secured when the facility is not open for operation to ensure that unauthorized or unsupervised
dumping does not occur.
7.3. The operator shall continuously supervise the unloading of waste to ensure that only permitted
wastes are handled at the facility. The operator shall maintain a record of every vehicle which brings
waste to the facility, including the following information: 1) name of driver; 2) name of person, firm, or
corporation which owns the vehicle; 3) license plate of vehicle; 4) type-characterization of waste; 5)
source and origin of waste.
7.4. The owner or operator of the facility shall provide the Town with copies of all reports or other
documentation provided to MDEP pursuant to MDEP's Solid Waste Management Rules during the
construction, operation, closure, and post-closure period of the facility, including but not limited to any
annual report required by said Rules. The foregoing materials shall be submitted to the Town
contemporaneous with their submission to MDEP. In addition, along with the submission of a copy of the
annual report, the owner or operator of the facility shall also provide the Town with updated as-built plans
of the facility prepared by a professional engineer or a professional land surveyor, which plans shall
depict all construction activity that occurred at the facility from the date of the prior annual as-built plans
submitted to the Town. (Amended: 10/1/01)
7.5. The owner or operator of the facility shall provide the Town with copies of all applications to
dispose of special wastes at the facility, which copies shall be submitted to the Town contemporaneous
with their submission to MDEP.
ARTICLE 8
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES
8.1. The Council may, as a condition of the license, establish any reasonable requirements to ensure that
the owner has the ongoing technical ability to meet state air, water, and land pollution control standards,
such as:
21
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
a. Requiring the owner to employ a capable engineer or other professional who is sufficiently
knowledgeable and experienced in the disciplines necessary to ensure that state air, water, and land
pollution control standards are met.
b. Requiring a training program for the appropriate personnel to ensure proper installation, operation,
and maintenance of pollution control equipment, and proper operation of the facility.
c. Requiring on-site inspection during construction by an independent consultant, at the developer's
expense, to ensure proper execution of plans as approved, including any conditions imposed by the
Council.
If an independent consultant is required by the Council the developer shall establish an account, in an
amount to be determined by the Council, to provide for the hiring of engineering, geological, or other
expertise to monitor and inspect construction of the facility. The unexpended balance on the account shall
be returned to the applicant. As an alternative, the Council and the applicant may agree upon who the
applicant will use to monitor construction.
8.2. Liability Insurance. All applicants for a new or expanded solid waste disposal facility license shall
submit with the application, and annually thereafter, proof of liability insurance for sudden and accidental
occurrences for the solid waste disposal facility. Coverage must be provided for bodily injury and
property damage and must be provided for the active life and closure of the solid waste disposal facility.
The policy and the coverage afforded thereby shall comply with the requirements of any applicable State
of Maine statute or regulations, as may be amended. (Adopted: 10/1/01)
8.3. Financial Assurance for Closure and Post-Closure Care. An owner or operator of a solid
waste disposal facility shall provide financial assurance sufficient to ensure that funds are available to pay
for the anticipated costs of compliance with all facility closure, post-closure maintenance, and postclosure
monitoring requirements of any applicable State of Maine statute or regulation, as may be
amended. The financial assurance shall comply with the provisions or requirements of any applicable
State of Maine statute or regulation, as may be amended. The owner or operator shall provide the Town
with copies of all documentation concerning the financial assurance, including but not limited to cost
computations for the amount of financial assurance required by the Department of Environmental
Protection (or its successor), the mechanism(s) used to provide the financial assurance, the annual
calculations of the amount of the amount of the financial assurance, and the calculations for any annual
inflation adjustment. (Adopted: 10/1/01)
8.4. Financial Assurance for Corrective Action. In the event that the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection requires and/or approves a corrective action plan for any known releases,
violations, or environmental damage, the owner or operator of the solid waste disposal facility subject to
such a plan shall provide a copy thereof to the Town, and shall also provide the Town with a copy of the
financial assurance documentation submitted to MDEP for the corrective action activities required under
the corrective action plan. (Adopted: 10/1/01)
ARTICLE 9
RIGHT OF ENTRY
9.1. Any duly authorized representative or agent of the Town may, upon presentation of appropriate
credentials, at any reasonable time, enter and inspect the facility, obtain samples of any waste, inspect and
copy any records, reports, information, or test results relating to the disposal of solid waste, take
photographs, or other actions necessary to ensure compliance with the license.
22
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
9.2. An agent or representative of the Town shall be permitted to independently sample monitoring wells
installed around the waste disposal facility.
ARTICLE 10
ENFORCEMENT
10.1. All provisions of this Ordinance are enforceable by the Code Enforcement Officer, the Council or
its agent.
10.2. Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance is subject to fines, if convicted, as
provided in Article 12.
ARTICLE 11
REVOCATION OF LICENSE
11.1. Any license issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked, subsequent to procedures hereafter set
forth by order of the Council for the following causes:
a. Violation of this Ordinance.
b. Violation of any provision of any state or local law, ordinance, code or regulation which relates
directly to the provisions of this Ordinance.
c. Violation of any license conditions.
d. Falsehoods, misrepresentations, or omissions in the license application.
e. Failure to construct or operate the facility in accordance with the plans.
f. Failure to meet air, water and land pollution control standards.
11.2. Whenever the Council or Code Enforcement Officer determine that there has been a violation by
virtue of one of the conditions listed in 11.1.a - 11.1.f, they shall give written notice of such violation to
the person, firm or corporation responsible.
a. The citation shall include a description of the violation and shall allow reasonable time for remedial
action.
b. The citation may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance.
c. The citation shall state that unless corrections are made within the allotted time, the violator is subject
to prosecution and/or license suspension or revocation pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.
11.3. The Council or the Code Enforcement Officer may institute, or cause to be instituted, any and all
proceedings, either legal or equitable, that may be necessary or appropriate to enforce the provisions of
this Ordinance.
11.4. If the Violator does not meet the terms of the citation issued under 11.2, the Council may, after
written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, suspend or revoke the license. The Council shall notify
the license holder in writing of any such suspension or revocation, setting forth the reasons therefor.
23
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
11.5. Whenever it appears to the Council, after investigation, that there is a violation of this Ordinance or
a condition of the license which is creating or is likely to create a substantial and immediate danger to
public health or safety, the Council may suspend or revoke the license and shall notify the license holder
in writing of any such suspension or revocation, setting forth the reasons therefor. In the event of such an
emergency suspension or revocation, the person, firm or corporation whose license has been
revoked/suspended is entitled to a public hearing conducted by the Council if the licensee requests a
hearing within 7 days of the revocation/suspension. The Council shall schedule the hearing within 14
days of receiving the request. At least 7 days prior public notice of the hearing shall be given.
ARTICLE 12
PENALTIES
12.1. Civil penalties: Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance
or any conditions of the license shall, upon conviction, be subject to a civil penalty of not less than
$100.00 nor more than $10,000.00 for each day of that violation or, if the violation relates to hazardous
waste, of not more than $25,000.00 for each day of violation. The maximum civil penalty may exceed
$10,000.00 for each day of that violation, but shall not exceed $25,000.00 for each day of that violation, if
there has been a previous violation by the same party within the preceding 5 years. All civil penalties
shall inure to the benefit of the Town of Hampden. Reasonable attorney's fees and court costs incurred by
the Town in prosecuting a violation shall be awarded to the Town if the Town is the prevailing party.
ARTICLE 13
SEVERABILITY
13.1. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be severable and if any portion of it shall be held invalid, the
remainder of this Ordinance and its application thereof shall not be affected.
ARTICLE 14
CONFLICT
14.1. If any provision of this Ordinance conflicts with any provisions in another municipal ordinance or
state statute, the stricter provision shall apply.
ARTICLE 15
APPEAL
15.1. An aggrieved party may appeal any decision under these regulations to Superior Court within 30
days after the decision is rendered.
ARTICLE 16
EXISTING FACILITIES
16.1. The council may waive any provision of this Ordinance as it relates to the issuance of an original
license to an existing facility that was duly licensed by the State of Maine as of the effective date of this
Ordinance.
16.2. In the event that a waiver is granted under Section 16.1, the Council may attach reasonable
conditions to the license to ensure compliance with the intents and purposes of this Ordinance. (Amended 9-4-
90)
24
Town of Hampden, Maine
Waste Disposal Facility
Licensing Ordinance
ARTICLE 17
APPLICABILITY
17.1. This Ordinance shall not abrogate the application of any other law, ordinance, or regulation
(including, but not limited to, the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Hampden and any amendments
thereto or replacements therefor) to a waste disposal facility. (Amended 5/3/95)
17.2. It is the intent of this Ordinance that the provisions hereof be construed, to the extent absolutely
necessary, consistent with the provisions of 38 M.R.S.A. § 1310-U. At the time of application, the
applicant shall submit a detailed list identifying any requirements of this Ordinance that the applicant
believes are inconsistent with the provisions of 38 M.R.S.A. § 1310-U, and stating the grounds therefor.
If the Council determines that any requirement of this Ordinance is inconsistent with the provisions of 38
M.R.S.A. § 1310-U, it shall have the authority to waive any such requirements to the extent necessary to
eliminate the inconsistency.
ARTICLE 18
APPLICABILITY OF AMENDMENTS
18.1. The amendments to this Ordinance adopted by the Town Council on January 25, 1999 shall be
applicable to all proceedings, applications, petitions and/or proposals filed, pending, commenced or
reviewed as of January 19, 1999, and to all applications, petitions and/or proposals submitted to the Town
prior to said date, but which are not pending applications within the meaning of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302 as of
January 19, 1999.
18.2. The amendments to this Ordinance adopted by the Town Council on February 16, 1999 shall be
applicable to all proceedings, petitions and/or proposals filed, pending, commenced or reviewed as of
February 1, 1999, and to all applications, petitions and/or proposals submitted to the Town prior to said
date, but which are not pending applications within the meaning of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302 as of February 1,
1999.
18.3. The amendments to this Ordinance adopted by the Town Council on August 20, 2001 shall be
applicable to all proceedings, applications, petitions and/or proposals filed, pending commenced or
reviewed as of May 30, 2001, and to all proceedings, applications, petitions and/or proposals submitted to
the Town on or prior to said date, but which were not pending applications within the meaning of 1
M.R.S.A. § 302 as of July 1, 2001.
18.4. The amendments to this Ordinance, adopted by the Town Council on October 1, 2001 shall be
applicable to all proceedings, applications, petitions and/or proposals filed, pending, commenced or
reviewed on or after May 30, 2001.
25

Town of Hampden, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
ADOPTED: Hampden Town Council, May 17, 2004 (in substitution of January 5, 1988 Ordinance)
Effective Date: June 16, 2004
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, June 19, 2006
Effective Date: July 19, 2006
CERTIFIED BY: Denise Hodsdon
Name
Town Clerk
Title Affix Seal
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
CONTENTS
ARTICLE PAGE
1. PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT 2
2. PERMIT REQUIRED 2
3. APPLICATION FOR PERMIT 2
4. APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE 4
5. REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD 4
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATIONS
6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 6
7. CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE 10
8. REVIEW OF SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS 11
9. APPEALS AND VARIANCES 11
10. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 13
11. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY 14
12. CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES 14
13. DEFINITIONS 14
14. ABROGATION 18
1
Town of Hampden, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance
ARTICLE 1
PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT
Certain areas of the Town of Hampden, Maine are subject to periodic flooding, causing serious damages
to properties within these areas. Relief is available in the form of flood insurance as authorized by the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
Therefore, the Town of Hampden, Maine has chosen to become a participating community in the National
Flood Insurance Program, and agrees to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as delineated in this Floodplain Management Ordinance.
It is the intent of the Town of Hampden, Maine to require the recognition and evaluation of flood hazards
in all official actions relating to land use in the floodplain areas having special flood hazards.
The Town of Hampden has the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures to reduce future
flood losses pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA, Sections 3001-3007, 4352 and 4401-4407.
The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid Act, provides that areas of the Town
of Hampden having a special flood hazard be identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
and that floodplain management measures be applied in such flood hazard areas. This Ordinance
establishes a Flood Hazard Development Permit system and review procedure for development activities
in the designated flood hazard areas of the Town of Hampden, Maine.
The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A and AE are identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency in a report entitled "Flood Insurance Study - Town of Hampden, Maine, Penobscot County,"
dated September 4, 1987 with accompanying "Flood Insurance Rate Map" dated September 4, 1987 and
"Flood Boundary and Floodway Map" dated September 4, 1987, which are hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 2
PERMIT REQUIRED
Before any construction or other development (as defined in Article 13), including the placement of
manufactured homes, begins within any areas of special flood hazard established in Article 1, a Flood
Hazard Development Permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer. This permit shall be in
addition to any other permits which may be required pursuant to the codes and ordinances of the Town of
Hampden, Maine.
ARTICLE 3
APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
The application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement
Officer and shall include:
A. The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and contractor;
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site;
C. A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed development, including but not limited to
structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut and filled, and lot
dimensions;
2
Town of Hampden, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or development;
E. A statement of the cost of the development including all materials and labor;
F. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
G. Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or development;
[Items H-K.2 apply only to new construction and substantial improvements.]
H. The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), or to a locally established
datum in Zone A only, of the:
1. base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved structures, which is
determined:
a. in Zone AE from data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study -Town of Hampden, Maine,"
as described in Article 1; or,
b. in Zone A:
(1) from any base flood elevation data from federal, state, or other technical sources (such
as FEMA’s Quick-2 model, FEMA 265/July 1995), including information obtained
pursuant to Article 6.K. and 8.D.;
(2) from the contour elevation extrapolated from a best fit analysis of the floodplain
boundary when overlaid onto a USGS Quadrangle Map or other topographic map
prepared by a Professional Land Surveyor or registered professional engineer, if the
floodplain boundary has a significant correlation to the elevation contour line(s); or, in
the absence of all other data,
(3) to be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of the floodplain boundary and a line
perpendicular to the shoreline which passes along the ground through the site of the
proposed building.
2. highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the proposed building;
3. lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such structures contain a basement; and,
4. level, in the case of non-residential structures only, to which the structure will be floodproofed;
I. A description of an elevation reference point established on the site of all developments for which
elevation standards apply as required in Article 6;
J. A written certification by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer or architect,
that the base flood elevation and grade elevations shown on the application are accurate;
K. The following certifications as required in Article 6 by a registered professional engineer or architect:
1. a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65, 08/99, as amended), to verify that the
floodproofing methods for any non-residential structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of
3
Town of Hampden, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance
Article 3.H.4.; Article 6.G.; and other applicable standards in Article 6;
2. a Hydraulic Openings Certificate to verify that engineered hydraulic openings in foundation walls
will meet the standards of Article 6.L.2.a.;
3. a certified statement that bridges will meet the standards of Article 6.M.;
4. a certified statement that containment walls will meet the standards of Article 6.N.;
L. A description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development; and,
M. A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each applicable development standard in
Article 6 will be met.
ARTICLE 4
APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE
A non-refundable application fee payable to the Town of Hampden shall be paid in accordance with the
Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance to the Code Enforcement Officer and a copy of a receipt for the same
shall accompany the application. An additional fee(s) may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer
and/or the Zoning Board of Appeals need(s) the assistance of a professional engineer or other expert. The
expert's fee shall be payable to the Town of Hampden in accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees
Ordinance. Failure to pay the bill shall constitute a violation of the ordinance and be grounds for the
issuance of a stop work order. An expert shall not be hired by the municipality at the expense of an
applicant until the applicant has either consented to such hiring in writing or been given an opportunity to
be heard on the subject. An applicant who is dissatisfied with a decision to hire expert assistance may
appeal that decision to the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE 5
REVIEW STANDARDS FOR
FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATIONS
The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
A. Review all applications for the Flood Hazard Development Permit to assure that proposed
developments are reasonably safe from flooding and to determine that all pertinent requirements of
Article 6 (Development Standards) have been, or will be met;
B. Utilize, in the review of all Flood Hazard Development Permit applications:
1. the base flood data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study - Town of Hampden, Maine," as
described in Article 1;
2. in special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data are not provided, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data from federal, state, or other technical sources, including information obtained
pursuant to Article 3.H.1.b.; Article 6.K.; and Article 8.D., in order to administer Article 6 of this
Ordinance; and,
3. when the community establishes a base flood elevation in a Zone A by methods outlined in
4
Town of Hampden, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance
Article 3.H.1.b., the community shall submit that data to the Maine Floodplain Management
Program in the State Planning Office.
C. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas shown on the maps
described in Article 1 of this Ordinance;
D. In the review of Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, determine that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those federal, state, and local government agencies from which prior
approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344;
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Maine
Floodplain Management Program in the State Planning Office prior to any alteration or relocation of a
water course and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
F. If the application satisfies the requirements of this Ordinance, approve the issuance of one of the
following Flood Hazard Development Permits based on the type of development:
1. A two part Flood Hazard Development Permit for elevated structures. Part I shall authorize the
applicant to build a structure to and including the first horizontal floor only above the base flood
level. At that time the applicant shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer with a second
Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional
engineer or architect based on the Part I permit construction , “as built”, for verifying compliance
with the elevation requirements of Article 6, paragraphs F, G, or H. Following review of the
Elevation Certificate data, which shall take place within 72 hours of receipt of the application, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall issue Part II of the Flood Hazard Development Permit. Part II
shall authorize the applicant to complete the construction project; or,
2. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Floodproofing of Non-Residential Structures that are
new construction or substantially improved non-residential structures that are not being elevated
but that meet the floodproofing standards of Article 6.G.1.a.,b., and c. The application for this
permit shall include a Floodproofing Certificate signed by a registered professional engineer or
architect; or,
3. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Minor Development for all development that is not new
construction or a substantial improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or
additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value of the structure. Minor development
also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Article 6.J., mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or
materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or
water supply facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges,
dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves and piers.
G. Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all Flood Hazard Development Permit Applications,
corresponding Permits issued, and data relevant thereto, including reports of the Board of Appeals on
variances granted under the provisions of Article 9 of this Ordinance, and copies of Elevation
Certificates, Floodproofing Certificates, Certificates of Compliance and certifications of design
standards required under the provisions of Articles 3, 6, and 7 of this Ordinance.
5
Town of Hampden, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance
ARTICLE 6
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following applicable standards:
A. All Development - All development shall:
1. be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation (excluding piers and
docks), collapse or lateral movement of the development resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
3. use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage; and,
4. use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and other service
facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during flooding conditions.
B. Water Supply - All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
C. Sanitary Sewage Systems - All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed and
located to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the
system into flood waters.
D. On Site Waste Disposal Systems - On site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during floods.
E. Watercourse Carrying Capacity - All development associated with altered or relocated portions of
a watercourse shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that no reduction occurs in the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse.
F. Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure located
within:
1. Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article 3.H.1.b.; Article 5.B; or
Article 8.D.
G. Non Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any non-residential structure
located within:
1. Zones AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall:
a. be floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood elevation so that below that
elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
6
Town of Hampden, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance
water;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing design
and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for
meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the
application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit, as required by Article 3.K. and shall
include a record of the elevation above mean sea level to which the structure is floodproofed.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article 3.H.1.b.; Article 5.B; or
Article 8.D., or
a. together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities meet the floodproofing standards of
Article 6.G.1.
H. Manufactured Homes - New or substantially improved manufactured homes located within:
1. Zone AE shall:
a. be elevated such that the lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at
least one foot above the base flood elevation;
b. be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured masonry slab or foundation walls, with
hydraulic openings, or may be reinforced piers or block supports, any of which support the
manufactured home so that no weight is supported by its wheels and axles; and,
c. be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to:
(1) over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four corners of the manufactured home,
plus two additional ties per side at intermediate points (manufactured homes less than 50
feet long require one additional tie per side); or by,
(2) frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five additional ties along each side at
intermediate points (manufactured homes less than 50 feet long require four additional
ties per side).
(3) all components of the anchoring system described in Article 6.H.1.c.(1)&(2) shall be
capable of carrying a force of 4800 pounds.
2. Zone A shall:
a. be elevated on a permanent foundation, as described in Article 6.H.1.b., such that the lowest
floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood
elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article 3.H.1.b.; Article 5.B; or Article
8.D.; and
b. meet the anchoring requirements of Article 6.H.1.c.
7
Town of Hampden, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance
I. Recreational Vehicles - Recreational Vehicles located within:
1. Zone AE shall either:
a. be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
b. be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use
if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or,
c. be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured
homes" in Article 6.H.1.
J. Accessory Structures - Accessory Structures, as defined in Article 13, located within Zones AE and
A, shall be exempt from the elevation criteria required in Article 6.F. & G. above, if all other
requirements of Article 6 and all the following requirements are met. Accessory Structures shall:
1. be 500 square feet or less and have a value less than $3000;
2. have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation;
3. have hydraulic openings, as specified in Article 6.L.2., in at least two different walls of the
accessory structure;
4. be located outside the floodway;
5. when possible be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters and be placed further from the source of flooding than is the
primary structure; and,
6. have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electric service disconnect shall be located
above the base flood elevation and when possible outside the Special Flood Hazard Area.
K. Floodways –
1. In Zone AE riverine areas, encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvement, and other development shall not be permitted within a regulatory floodway which
is designated on the community's "Flood Insurance Rate Map" or "Flood Boundary and Floodway
Map," unless a technical evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that such encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
2. In Zones AE and A riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designated,
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other development
shall not be permitted in the floodway as determined in Article 6.K.3. unless a technical
evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing
development and anticipated development:
a. will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point
within the community; and,
8
Town of Hampden, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance
b. is consistent with the technical criteria contained in Chapter 5 entitled "Hydraulic Analyses,"
Flood Insurance Study - Guidelines and Specifications for Study Contractors, (FEMA 37/
January 1995, as amended).
3. In Zones AE and A riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designated, the regulatory
floodway is determined to be the channel of the river or other water course and the adjacent land
areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain as measured from the normal high
water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
L. Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor - New construction or substantial improvement of any
structure in Zones AE and A that meets the development standards of Article 6, including the
elevation requirements of Article 6, paragraphs F, G, or H and is elevated on posts, columns, piers,
piles, "stilts," or crawlspaces may be enclosed below the base flood elevation requirements provided
all the following criteria are met or exceeded:
1. Enclosed areas are not "basements" as defined in Article 13;
2. Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood water. Designs for meeting this requirement must
either:
a. be engineered and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or,
b. meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of the enclosed area;
(2) the bottom of all openings shall be below the base flood elevation and no higher than one
foot above the lowest grade; and,
(3) openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the entry and exit of flood waters automatically without any
external influence or control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical
and other nonautomatic mechanical means;
3. The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and,
4. The enclosed areas are usable solely for building access, parking of vehicles, or storage.
M. Bridges - New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge in Zones AE and A shall be
designed such that:
1. when possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the pilings, or columns) is elevated to at
least one foot above the base flood elevation; and
2. a registered professional engineer shall certify that:
a. the structural design and methods of construction shall meet the elevation requirements of
this section and the floodway standards of Article 6.K.; and
9
Town of Hampden, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance
b. the foundation and superstructure attached thereto are designed to resist flotation, collapse
and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
structural components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood.
N. Containment Walls - New construction or substantial improvement of any containment wall located
within:
1. Zones AE and A shall:
a. have the containment wall elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions
of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the application for a Flood Hazard
Development Permit, as required by Article 3.K.
O. Wharves, Piers and Docks - New construction or substantial improvement of wharves, piers, and
docks are permitted in Zones AE and A, in and over water and seaward of the mean high tide if the
following requirements are met:
1. wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations;
and
2. for commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered professional engineer shall develop or
review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction.
ARTICLE 7.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no structure which is constructed or
substantially improved shall be occupied until a Certificate of Compliance is issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer subject to the following provisions:
A. For New Construction or Substantial Improvement of any elevated structure the applicant shall
submit to the Code Enforcement Officer, an Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional Land
Surveyor, registered professional engineer, or architect, for compliance with Article 6, paragraphs F,
G, or H.
B. The applicant shall submit written notification to the Code Enforcement Officer that the development
is complete and complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
C. Within 10 working days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall:
1. review the Elevation Certificate and the applicant’s written notification; and,
2. upon determination that the development conforms with the provisions of this ordinance, shall
issue a Certificate of Compliance.
10
Town of Hampden, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance
ARTICLE 8.
REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed developments that require
review under other federal law, state law or local ordinances or regulations and all projects on 5 or more
disturbed acres, or in the case of manufactured home parks divided into two or more lots, assure that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in a riverine floodplain, floodway
data. These determinations shall be based on engineering practices recognized by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
E. Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan approval requiring that structures
on any lot in the development having any portion of its land within a Special Flood Hazard Area, are
to be constructed in accordance with Article 6 of this ordinance. Such requirement will be included in
any deed, lease, purchase and sale agreement, or document transferring or expressing an intent to
transfer any interest in real estate or structure, including but not limited to a time-share interest. The
condition shall clearly articulate that the municipality may enforce any violation of the construction
requirement and that fact shall also be included in the deed or any other document previously
described. The construction requirement shall also be clearly stated on any map, plat, or plan to be
signed by the Planning Board or local reviewing authority as part of the approval process.
ARTICLE 9.
APPEALS AND VARIANCES
(Amended: 06-19-06)
Compliance With Board of Appeals Ordinance. All appeals and variances shall be subject to the
provisions of the Town of Hampden Board of Appeals Ordinance including but not limited to filing
deadlines, application requirements, fees, appeal procedures, decisions of the Board of Appeals and
subsequent appeals to Superior Court. (Amended: 06-19-06)
The Town of Hampden Board of Appeals of the may, upon written application of an aggrieved party, hear
and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board in the
administration or enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance.
The Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the requirements of this Ordinance consistent with state
law and the following criteria:
A. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge would result.
B. Variances shall be granted only upon:
1. a showing of good and sufficient cause; and,
11
Town of Hampden, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance
2. a determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood occur, the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, public expense, or
create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances; and,
3. a showing that the issuance of the variance will not conflict with other state, federal or local laws
or ordinances; and,
4. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in "undue hardship," which in this
subsection means:
a. that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted; and,
b. that the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the
general conditions in the neighborhood; and,
c. that the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and,
d. that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and the Board of Appeals may impose such conditions
to a variance as it deems necessary.
D. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements, or other development for
the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
1. other criteria of Article 9 and Article 6.K. are met; and,
2. the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during
the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
E. Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of Historic
Structures upon the determination that:
1. the development meets the criteria of Article 9, paragraphs A. through D. above; and,
2. the proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
F. Any applicant who meets the criteria of Article 9, paragraphs A. through E. shall be notified by the
Board of Appeals in writing over the signature of the Chairman of the Board of Appeals that:
1. the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in greatly
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 per $100 of insurance
coverage;
2. such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property; and,
12
Town of Hampden, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance
3. the applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of all the risks inherent in the use
of land subject to flooding, assumes those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the
municipality against any claims filed against it that are related to the applicant's decision to use
land located in a floodplain and that the applicant individually releases the municipality from any
claims the applicant may have against the municipality that are related to the use of land located
in a floodplain.
G. Appeal Procedure for Administrative and Variance Appeals
1. An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an aggrieved party
within thirty days after receipt of a written decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning
Board.
2. Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as
appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the
decision appealed from.
3. Deleted. (Amended: 06-19-06)
4. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
5. Deleted. (Amended: 06-19-06)
6. The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer a report of all variance
actions, including justification for the granting of the variance and an authorization for the Code
Enforcement Officer to issue a Flood Hazard Development Permit, which includes any conditions
to be attached to said permit.
7. Deleted. (Amended: 06-19-06)
ARTICLE 10.
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance
pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA § 4452.
B. The penalties contained in Title 30-A MRSA § 4452 shall apply to any violation of this Ordinance.
C. In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer, upon determination that a violation
exists, shall submit a declaration to the Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration
requesting a denial of flood insurance. The valid declaration shall consist of;
1. the name of the property owner and address or legal description of the property sufficient to
confirm its identity or location;
2. a clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a cited State or local law,
regulation, or ordinance;
3. a clear statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to do so and a citation
to that authority;
13
Town of Hampden, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance
4. evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation and the prospective
denial of insurance; and,
5. a clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section 1316 of the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
ARTICLE 11.
VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
If any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not
invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 12.
CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
This Ordinance shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other
applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw, permit, or provision of law. Where this Ordinance imposes
a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings, or structures, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
control.
ARTICLE 13.
DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have the same meaning
as they have at common law and to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application. Words used in the
present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes
the singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
Accessory Structure - means a small detached structure that is incidental and subordinate to the principal
structure.
Adjacent Grade - means the natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Area of Shallow Flooding - means a designated AO and AH zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and
where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of Special Flood Hazard - means the land in the floodplain having a one percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year, as specifically identified in the Flood Insurance Study cited in Article I of this
Ordinance.
Base Flood - means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year, commonly called the 100-year flood.
Basement - means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building - see Structure.
Certificate of Compliance - A document signed by the Code Enforcement Officer stating that a structure
14
Town of Hampden, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance
is in compliance with all of the provisions of this Ordinance.
Code Enforcement Officer - any person or board responsible for performing the inspection, licensing, and
enforcement duties required by a particular statute or ordinance.
Development - means any change caused by individuals or entities to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to the construction of buildings or other structures; the construction of additions
or substantial improvements to buildings or other structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials; and the storage, deposition, or
extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
Elevated Building - means a non-basement building
a. built, in the case of a building in Zones AE or A, to have the top of the elevated floor elevated
above the ground level by means of pilings, columns, post, piers, or "stilts;" and
b. adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of
up to one foot above the magnitude of the base flood.
In the case of Zones AE or A, Elevated Building also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid
foundation perimeter walls with hydraulic openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
flood waters, as required in Article 6.L..
Elevation Certificate - An official form (FEMA Form 81-31, 07/00, as amended) that:
a. is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program; and,
b. is required for purchasing flood insurance.
Flood or Flooding - means:
a. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
b. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of
erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical
levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in
flooding as defined in paragraph a.1. of this definition.
Flood Elevation Study - means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if
appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - means an official map of a community, on which the Federal
Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study - see Flood Elevation Study.
Floodplain or Flood-prone Area - means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source (see flooding).
Floodplain Management - means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
15
Town of Hampden, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance
control works, and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations - means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes,
health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and
erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing - means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property,
water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents.
Floodway - see Regulatory Floodway.
Floodway Encroachment Lines - mean the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state, and
local floodplain maps.
Freeboard - means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of
floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors, such as wave
action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed, that could
contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions.
Functionally Dependent Use - means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located
or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Historic Structure - means any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Locally Established Datum - means, for purposes of this ordinance, an elevation established for a specific
site to which all other elevations at the site are referenced. This elevation is generally not referenced to
the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or any other established datum and is used in areas where
Mean Sea Level data is too far from a specific site to be practically used.
Lowest Floor - means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or
flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built
so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements described in
16
Town of Hampden, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance
Article 6.L. of this ordinance.
Manufactured Home - means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term manufactured home also includes park
trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level - means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate map are referenced.
Minor Development - means all development that is not new construction or a substantial improvement,
such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value
of the structure. It also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Article 6.J.,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or
materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply
facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing,
pipelines, wharves, and piers.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) - means the national vertical datum, whose standard was
established in 1929, which is used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). NGVD was based
upon mean sea level in 1929 and also has been called “1929 Mean Sea Level (MSL)”.
New Construction - means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
100-year flood - see Base Flood.
Recreational Vehicle - means a vehicle which is:
a. built on a single chassis;
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, not including
slideouts;
c. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor vehicle; and
d. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory Floodway -
a. means the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot, and
b. when not designated on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map, it is considered to be the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent
land areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain, as measured from the normal high
water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
Riverine - means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
17
Town of Hampden, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance
Special Flood Hazard Area - see Area of Special Flood Hazard.
Start of Construction - means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of
piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, or modification of any construction element, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Structure - means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building. A gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground is also a structure.
Substantial Damage - means, damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring
the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement - means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
b. Any alteration of a Historic Structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure, and a variance is obtained from the community’s
Board of Appeals.
Variance - means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.
Violation - means the failure of a structure or development to comply with a community's floodplain
management regulations.
ARTICLE 14.
ABROGATION
This ordinance repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously enacted to comply with the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended).
18




Town of Hampden, Maine
Junked Vehicle Ordinance
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
JUNKED VEHICLE ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1 - SHORT TITLE 2
SECTION 2 - DEFINITIONS 2
SECTION 3 - PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES 2
SECTION 4 - ENFORCEMENT 3
SECTION 5 - RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL 3
SECTION 6 - LEGAL ACTIONS 3
SECTION 7 - SEVERABILITY 3
SECTION 8 - PENALTIES 3
ADOPTED: Hampden Town Council August 15, 1988
Effective: September 13, 1988
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council March 18, 1996
Effective: April 14, 1996
1
Town of Hampden, Maine
Junked Vehicle Ordinance
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
JUNKED VEHICLE ORDINANCE
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Town of Hampden by virtue of 30 M.R.S.A. § 1917, THE TOWN
OF HAMPDEN HEREBY ORDAINS:
Section 1. Short Title. This ordinance is hereby enacted by the Town of Hampden and shall be known as
the "Junked Vehicle Ordinance of the Town of Hampden."
Section 2. Definition. For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. All other terms, phrases, and words shall be given their
customary meanings such as the context shall imply. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words
in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
2.1. Motor Vehicle is any vehicle which is selfpropelled and designed to travel along the ground and shall
include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motorscooters, trucks,
tractors, campers, all-terrain vehicles, and snowmobiles.
2.2. Person shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization
of any kind.
2.3. Private property shall mean any real property within the Town of Hampden which is privately
owned.
2.4. Public property shall mean any street or highway which shall include the entire width between the
boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of vehicular travel, and shall also mean
any other publicly owned property or facility.
2.5. Structure shall mean a permitted building meeting all building codes associated with its use. (Amended:
3/18/96)
2.6. Unserviceable shall mean a motor vehicle which does not have a current vehicle inspection sticker
and/or registration.
Section 3. Prohibited Activity.
3.1. No person shall park, store, leave, or permit the parking, storing, or leaving of more than one motor
vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned, unserviceable, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted,
junked, partially dismantled, stripped, or disrepaired condition upon any public or private property within
residential zones A and B within the Town of Hampden. The one motor vehicle permitted must be located
at least fifteen feet (15') from any property line. ( Amended : 3/18/96)
3.2. No more than one motor vehicle of any type shall at any time undergo major overhaul, including
body work, within residential zones A and B within the Town of Hampden, under the Hampden Zoning
Ordinance unless such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and
approved for such purposes.
2
Town of Hampden, Maine
Junked Vehicle Ordinance
3.3. Sections 3.2 and 3.1 shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a structure on private property or
to any vehicle present on the property in connection with a business enterprise which is lawfully in
existence and properly operated in accordance with all other laws and ordinances applicable thereto.
3.4. The presence of any prohibited motor vehicle left on private or public property in violation of this
ordinance is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
Section 4. Enforcement. This ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
Section 5. Responsibility For Removal. The owner of any motor vehicle parked, stored, or left on private
or public property in violation of this ordinance shall remove it from said property within sixty (60) days
from receipt of a notice from the Code Enforcement Officer notifying them of the existence of the
nuisance. In addition, the owner or occupant of private proprety shall remove such vehicle from the
premises within sixty (60) days from receipt of a notice from the Code Enforcement Officer notifying
them of the existence of the nuisance.
Section 6. Legal Actions. The Code Enforcement Officer, and/or the Town Attorney, is hereby authorized
and directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings, either in law or in equity, that may be
appropriate or necessary to obtain compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.
Section 7. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid, or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such determination shall not
affect the validity of the remainder of this ordinance.
Section 8. Penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of the ordinance, or fails to comply
with the requirements hereof, shall be guilty of a civil violation and upon conviction thereof shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. Each day any violation continues to exist
after notification shall constitute a seperate offense. All civil penalties imposed shall inure to the
the Town of Hampden.
3











































































































The Town of Hampden hereby ordains:
TOWN OF HAMPDEN
Code of Ethics
Section 1. Declaration of Policy.
The proper operation of democratic government requires that Town Councilors and their
appointees be fair, impartial and responsive to the needs of the people and each other
in the performance of their respective functions and duties; that decisions and policy be
made in proper channels of the Town’s governmental structure; that public office not be
used for personal gain; and that such Councilors and their appointees maintain a
standard of conduct that will inspire public confidence in the integrity of the Town’s
government. In recognition of these goals, a Code of Ethics is hereby established for all
Town Councilors and all members and associate members of any Board or Committee
appointed by the Town Council. This Code of Ethics is not intended to deny Council
members, nor Board or Committee members, their constitutional rights nor violate their
civil rights.
Section 2. Definitions.
As used in this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated.
Business: Any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint venture, or
any other legally recognized entity, organized for the purposes of making profit.
Censure: A judgment or resolution condemning a person for misconduct.
Confidential Information: Any information, whether oral, written, digital or electronic,
which comes to the attention of, or is available to, a Town Official only because of his or
her position with the Town and which is not a matter of public record. Information
received or discussed during an executive session called pursuant to 1 M.R.S. §405
shall be considered confidential information, and shall not be disclosed to any third party
unless permitted by affirmative vote of the body which held the executive session.
Council Appointee: Any sworn member or associate member of any board or
committee appointed by the Town Council, including but not limited to appointed Board
members, Committee members, and Commission members.
Financial Interest: a direct or indirect interest having monetary or pecuniary value,
including but not limited to the ownership of stock.
Immediate Family – Spouse, children, parents, brothers, and sisters. This includes
family members related by marriage and adoption.
Special Interest: A direct or indirect interest having value peculiar to a certain individual
or group, whether economic or otherwise, which value may accrue to such individual or
group as a result of the passage or denial of any order, ordinance or resolution, or the
Town of Hampden, Maine
Code of Ethics Ordinance
2
approval, approval with conditions or denial of any application by the Town Council or
Council Appointees, and which interest is not shared by the general public.
Town Councilor: Sworn member of the Hampden Town Council
Town Employee: Any individual working for, on a permanent or temporary basis, and
drawing a salary, wages or stipend from the Town of Hampden. The term “Town
Employee” shall not include consultants or professional personnel providing services to
the Town as independent contractors under a written professional services contract or
other similar engagement.
Town Official: A member of the Town Council or a member of any appointed
committee, board or commission of the Town Council.
Sec 3. Standards of Conduct.
The purpose of this Code of Ethics is to establish standards of conduct for all Town
Councilors and Council Appointees by setting forth those acts or actions deemed to be
in conflict or incompatible, or to create the appearance of conflict or incompatibility, with
the best interests of the Town of Hampden.
3.1 Statutory Standards: There are certain provisions of the general statutes of the
State of Maine, which should, while not set forth herein, be considered an integral
part of this Ordinance. Accordingly, the provisions of the following sections of the
general statutes of the State of Maine, as may be amended, are hereby
incorporated by reference and made a part of this Code of Ethics, and shall apply to
all Town Councilors or Council Appointees whenever applicable, as if more fully set
forth herein, to wit:
17 MRSA §3104 Conflicts of Interest; Purchases by the State
17-A MRSA §456 Tampering with Public Records or Information
17-A MRSA §602 Bribery in Office with Political Matters
17-A MRSA §603 Improper Influence
17-A MRSA §604 Improper Compensation for Past Action
17-A MRSA §605 Improper Gifts to Public Servants
17-A MRSA §606 Improper Compensation for Services
17-A MRSA §607 Purchase of Public Office
17-A MRSA §608 Official Oppression
17-A MRSA §609 Misuse of Information
17-A MRSA §903 Misuse of Entrusted Property
21-A MRSA §504 Persons Ineligible to Serve
30-A MRSA §2605 Conflicts of Interest
30-A MRSA §5122 Interest of Public Officials, Trustees of Employees
3.2 Disclosure of Confidential Information: No Town Councilor or Council Appointee
shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning
the property, employees or applicants for employment, government or affairs of the
Town of Hampden, Maine
Code of Ethics Ordinance
3
Town, nor shall he or she use such information to advance the financial or private
interest of him or herself or others. Information received and discussed during an
executive session of the Hampden Town Council or any Town Board, Committee, or
Commission pursuant to 1 M.R.S. §405 shall be considered within the constraints of
this subsection, and shall not be disclosed to any third party unless permitted by
affirmative vote of such body.
3.3 Gifts and Favors: No Town Councilor or Council Appointee shall solicit or accept
any gift, favor or thing of value, whether in the form of service, loan, thing or
promise, from any person or business which to his or her knowledge is interested
directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the Town;
nor shall any Town Councilor or Council Appointee: 1) solicit or accept any gift,
favor or thing of value that tends to influence that individual in the discharge of his or
her official duties or 2) solicit or grant in the discharge of his or her official duties any
improper favor, service or thing of value. The foregoing is not intended to prohibit
normal social practices where gifts from friends, associates, and relatives are
appropriate for certain occasions.
3.4 Use of Town Property: No Town Councilor or Council Appointee shall use, or
permit the use of, any Town-owned property including, but not limited to, motor
vehicles, equipment and buildings, for any private purposes. Nothing herein shall
prohibit the use of Town buildings and equipment at rates and/or on terms as may
be established for the public at large.
3.5 Conflicts of Interest.
A. Deliberation and Vote Prohibited
1. No Town Councilor or Council Appointee shall participate directly or indirectly
by means of deliberation, voting, approval or disapproval, or
recommendation, or otherwise take part in the decision making process, on
any agenda item before the body of which he or she is a member if he or
she, or a member of his or her immediate family, has a financial or special
interest, other than that possessed by the public generally, in such purchase,
award, or approval, held by:
a. The Town Councilor or Council Appointee, or a member of their
immediate family; or
b. A business in which the Town Councilor or Council Appointee, or a
member of their immediate family, serves as an officer, director,
trustee, partner or employee in a supervisory or management position;
or
c. Any other person or business with whom the Town Councilor, or
Council Appointee, or a member of their immediate family, are in
Town of Hampden, Maine
Code of Ethics Ordinance
4
business or are negotiating, or have an arrangement concerning future
employment.
2. No Town Councilor or Council Appointee shall participate directly or indirectly
by means of deliberation, approval or disapproval, or recommendation of an
application, purchase, contract, or other legal matter, or in the decision to
hire, promote, discipline, lay off or to take any other personnel action in
respect to any applicant for employment or employee, where said applicant
or employee is:
a. A member of their immediate family; or
b. A person with whom either the Town Councilor or Council Appointee, or
his or her immediate family, are in business.
B. Disclosure of Conflict. Any Town Councilor or Council Appointee who
believes he or she, or a member of his or her immediate family, has a financial
or special interest, other than an interest held by the public generally, in any
agenda item before the body on which he or she serves shall disclose the nature
and extent of such interest, and the Town Clerk or his or her designee shall
make a record of such disclosure. Such disclosure shall be made no later than
the date of the first meeting of the Town Council, Committee, Board, or
Commission at which the agenda item concerned is to be taken up for
consideration, recommendation, discussion or vote and at which the Town
Councilor or Council Appointee is present. Additionally, any Town Councilor or
Council Appointee who believes that any fellow Town Councilor or Council
Appointee, or a member of such fellow Town Councilor’s or Council Appointee’s
immediate family, has a financial or special interest, other than an interest held
by the public generally, in any agenda item before his or her collective body shall
disclose the nature and extent of such agenda item before his or her collective
body shall disclose the nature and extent of such interest, and the Town Clerk or
his or her designee shall make a record of such disclosure.
C. Determination of Conflict. In the event that a conflict has been raised relative
to an individual Town Councilor or Council Appointee, and disclosure has been
made as described above, such individual’s fellow Town Councilors or Council
Appointees shall review the facts as disclosed to them and shall vote on whether
or not such individual has a financial or special interest with respect to the
agenda item concerned. All conflict of interest questions relating to a particular
agenda item shall be resolved prior to any consideration of the item concerned,
and each Town Councilor or Council Appointee present shall be entitled to vote
on all conflict of interest questions except those questions pertaining to that
individual Councilor’s or Appointee’s alleged conflict of interest.
1. All votes of conflicts of interest questions shall be recorded. A majority vote
shall determine the question; but a vote by Boards, Committees, and
Town of Hampden, Maine
Code of Ethics Ordinance
5
Commissions may later be reviewed by Town Council upon the Town
Council’s consideration of the same agenda item.
2. Upon determination that a conflict of interest in fact exists, the Town
Councilor or Council Appointee concerned shall be excused from
participating in discussion, deliberation or vote on the relevant agenda item.
3. In lieu of the vote required by this subsection, the Town Council, upon
motion and by majority vote may refer the conflict of interest question to the
Town Attorney for a legal opinion, or may table its consideration of the
relevant agenda item. In the event a majority of the Town Council, Board,
or Commission concerned, or Committee thereof, shall require disclosure of
further information not immediately available, or shall require confirmation of
the information disclosed, consideration of the relevant agenda item shall be
postponed to an appropriate time.
D. Avoidance of Appearance of Conflict: To avoid the appearance of a violation
of this Section, once any individual Town Councilor, committee member, board
member or commission member is determined to have a conflict of interest in
respect to any agenda item and once all conflicts of interest questions relating to
the agenda item concerned have been determined as provided in Subsection C
above, said individual shall immediately remove him or herself from the meeting
room or to the area of the room occupied by the general public. He or she shall
not return to his or her regular seat as a member of the body until deliberation
and action on the item is completed. Nothing herein shall require an individual
councilor, committee member, board member or commission member to remove
himself or herself for any item contained on a consent agenda on which there is
no deliberation, the individual’s conflict has been determined by other members
and the right to abstain from voting on the item has been granted.
E. Personal Interest. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit any Town
Councilor or Council Appointee from representing his or her own personal
interest by appearing before his or her collective body on any such agenda item,
as long as the representation occurs in the area of the meeting room occupied
by applicants or members of the general public.
F. Disclosure Statement. By no later than January 15th of each year, or within
fifteen (15) days of being sworn in for a Town Councilor elected at a special
election to fill a vacancy, every Town Councilor shall file a completed disclosure
form with the Town Clerk. Within thirty (30) days after his or her appointment,
every Council Appointee shall file a completed disclosure form with the Town
Clerk. Such forms shall be under oath and shall contain the following information
to the best of the disclosing party’s knowledge and belief:
1. The name of each person or entity whether incorporated or not, doing
business with the Town in an amount in excess of $1000 during the
preceding calendar year from which such disclosing party or member of his
Town of Hampden, Maine
Code of Ethics Ordinance
6
immediate family has received money or other thing of value in an amount in
excess of $1000 during the preceding fiscal year, including, but not limited to
campaign contributions, where applicable.
2. The name of each entity, whether incorporated or not, doing business with
the Town in an amount in excess of $1000 for the preceding calendar year in
which such disclosing party or member of his/her immediate family has a
financial interest in an amount in excess of $1000 , including, but not limited
to, the ownership of shares of stock.
3. The name of each nonprofit and/or for profit entity, whether incorporated or
not, for which such disclosing party or member of his/her immediate family
holds a position of officer or member of any board which does business or
may potentially do business with the Town. For such entity, such disclosing
party shall provide the following information:
a. A brief description of the purpose of each board and/or office;
b. A short summary of such disclosing party’s or family member’s duties
relative to any such board and/or office;
c. The term of service on each such board and/or office; and
d. Whether or not such disclosing party or family member receives
compensation for service on such board and/or office and the extent to
which such compensation exceeds $100 in the aggregate annually.
For purposes of this section “compensation” shall include, but not be
limited to, monetary compensation, gifts, gratuities, perks, fringe benefits,
services and any other thing of value.
4. Every Town Councilor or Council Appointee shall amend his or her annual
disclosure statement as may be required from time to time to ensure the
continued accuracy thereof. Each amendment shall be made within fifteen
days following the occurrence which requires the amendment.
5. The Town Clerk shall deliver a copy of each completed disclosure statement
to every fellow member of the Town Council/Board/Committee of each
disclosing party within thirty days of filing.
6. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a list prepared by the Treasurer of those
persons or entities doing business with the Town in an amount in excess of
$1000 for the preceding year shall be determinative for purposes of reporting
under this section. Income from and financial investments in, policies of
insurance, and deposits from accounts from commercial or savings banks,
savings and loan associations, or credit unions and the ownership of less
Town of Hampden, Maine
Code of Ethics Ordinance
7
than 5% of the outstanding shares of stock in a publicly held corporation shall
not be considered a financial interest within the meaning of this section.
Sec 4. Political Activities.
No Town Employee, Town Councilor or Council Appointee shall participate in any
political activity which would be in conflict or incompatible with the performance of his or
her official functions and duties of the Town. In conjunction therewith, no Town
Councilor or Council Appointee may use his or her official authority or position for the
purposes of influencing or interfering with or affecting the results of any election for
public office, nor shall he or she solicit funds or contributions or accept or receive funds
or contributions from Town Employees for political purposes. No Town Councilor or
Council Appointee may distribute handbills or pamphlets while he or she is performing
official functions or duties on behalf of the Town, unless such distribution has been
authorized by the body of which he or she is a member. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit any Town Councilor or Council Appointee from participating in the
political process in their private capacity as candidates for elected office or as private
citizens.
Sec 5. Incompatible Employment or Office.
No Town Councilor or Council Appointee shall occupy any other office, elected or
appointed, in another governmental entity when the duties of such office are
incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties with the Town. For
purposes of this section, the occupancy of any office, elected or appointed, with any
other governmental entity by any Town Council or Council Appointee is hereby
prohibited in the following circumstances:
A. Where the duties of the other office make it a physical impossibility to
discharge the duties of the Town position; or
B. Where one office is subordinate to the other; or
C. Where one office carries the power of removal of the other; or
D. Where the occupancy of both offices is prohibited by the Town Charter or by
other provisions of law.
Sec 6. Violations of Ethical Standards by Councilors.
When any Councilor believes there has been a breach of the ethical standards set forth
herein by another Town Councilor, he or she may ask to enter into executive session
pursuant to 1 M.R.S. §405 for purposes of informal discussion of and resolution of an
ethical issue. During such session, the Councilor shall specify which area(s) of this
Ordinance he or she feels have been breached and by whom. After discussion among
all Councilors, the Town Council shall leave executive session, and may proceed with
Town of Hampden, Maine
Code of Ethics Ordinance
8
formal action only by majority vote of the Councilors not alleged to have breached the
ethical standards.
A. Based on information provided in said executive session, the Town Attorney
shall provide the Council with an opinion on whether the cited matter(s)
constitute a violation of this Ordinance.
B. All procedures under this section shall be in accord with due process
requirements, including, but not limited to, a right to notice and hearing.
C. The Council may elect to give written warning in lieu of any other remedy or
civil penalty available under this Ordinance or any other law or ordinance.
Sec 7. Ethics in Contracting.
The provisions of this Section shall apply to all persons doing business with the Town of
Hampden as vendors, suppliers and contractors submitting bids or proposals in
response to a Town solicitation or advertisement.
7.1 Gratuities and Kickbacks
A. Gratuities. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for any person to offer,
give, or agree to give any Town Councilor or Council Appointee a gratuity
or an offer of employment in connection with any decision, approval,
disapproval, recommendation, or award pertaining to a Town purchase
order, contract, construction contract, or professional services contract, or
with respect to any solicitation, advertisement, request for bids, request for
proposals, or any bid, proposal, or other response thereto.
B. Kickbacks. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for any person to solicit,
offer, give, accept, or receive any undisclosed gratuity or offer of
employment in connection with the award or potential award of any
subcontract or contract modification or change order under a Town of
Hampden contract for construction, procurement or professional services.
To be valid, any disclosure under this paragraph must be made in writing
to the Town of Hampden Town Manager prior to the date of opening of
any proposals or bids on the prime contract concerned. Notwithstanding
an otherwise valid written disclosure, it shall be a violation of this
Ordinance to solicit, offer, give, accept, or receive any such gratuity or
offer of employment in violation of applicable State or Federal Law.
7.2 Prohibition against Contingent Fees
It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for a person to be retained, or to
retain a person, to solicit or secure a Town contract upon an agreement or
Town of Hampden, Maine
Code of Ethics Ordinance
9
understanding for a commission, percentage, brokerage, or contingent fee,
except for retention of bona fide employees or bona fide established
commercial selling agencies for the purpose of securing business.
7.3 Recovery of Value Transferred or Received in Breach of Ethical
Standards.
The value of anything transferred or received in breach of the ethical
standards of this Ordinance by a Town Councilor or a Council Appointee or
other person may be recovered from both the Town Councilor or Council
Appointee concerned and from the other person concerned.
7.4 Recovery of Kickbacks by the Town
Upon a showing that a subcontractor made a kickback to a prime contractor
or a higher tier subcontractor in connection with the award of a subcontract
or modification or change order, it shall be conclusively presumed that the
amount thereof was included in the price of the subcontract, modification or
change order and ultimately borne by the Town and such amount shall be
recoverable hereunder from the recipient. In addition, that amount may also
be recovered from the subcontractor making such kickbacks. Recovery from
one offending party shall not preclude recovery from other offending parties.
7.5 Penalties and Sanctions
A. In addition to the recoveries provided in Subsections 7.3 and 7.4 above,
any violation of Section 7 shall be a civil violation. Upon conviction, any
person, firm or corporation found to be in violation of this Section 7 shall
be fined not less than three times the value of any improper gift or
kickback paid, solicited, or received, or $500, whichever is greater. The
penalties provided in this paragraph shall be in addition to any penalties
imposed under State or Federal Law.
B. Upon conviction of a violation of this Section 7 or upon finding a violation
by the Town Council or any Council Appointee following written notice and
hearing, the Town Council may impose one or more of the following
sanctions on the person, firm, or corporation convicted or found to be in
violation:
i. written warnings or reprimands
ii. termination of contracts
iii. debarment or suspension of Town purchasing
C. Termination of a contract under this Section 7.5 shall also terminate the
contractor’s right to receive further payment thereunder.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Code of Ethics Ordinance
10
D. The provisions of this Section 7 shall be provided to all interested bidders
or proposers and shall be incorporated by reference as agreed terms in
any Town of Hampden construction, procurement, or professional services
contract with a base bid in excess of $10,000. In the case of a
professional services contract, the ‘base bid price’ shall be the expected
value of services to be billed during the contract term, or on an annual
basis if the contract is of indefinite duration.
Sec 8. Penalties for Town Council or Town Council Appointees.
Any Town Councilor or Council Appointee who violates a provision of this Ordinance
shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00 for
each offense, which civil penalty shall inure to the benefit of the Town. In addition,
violation of this Ordinance shall constitute cause for censure by the Town Council after
notice and hearing conducted by that body.
Sec 9. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall
not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this Ordinance.
Sec 10. Repeal of Prior Ordinance
The existing Code of Ethics Ordinance adopted on May 15, 2000 is hereby repealed in
its entirety.
Sec 11. Effective Date
Pursuant to Section 213(c) of the Town Charter, the foregoing provisions shall be
effective 30 days after the adoption of this Ordinance by the Town Council.
ADOPTED BY TOWN COUNCIL: May 7, 2012
Effective Date: June 6, 2012
TOWN OF HAMPDEN
ELECTED / APPOINTED OFFICIAL DISCLOSURE FORM
Date: __________________________
Last name: ________________________ First name: __________________
Address: _________________________________
_________________________________
Telephone: ________________________________
Email Address: _____________________________
1. List of entities doing business with the Town from which the person named on
this form or any member of his/her immediate family received more than $1,000
during the preceding fiscal year.
_______________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
2. List of entities doing business with the Town that the person named on this form
or any member of his/her immediate family has an ownership interest in that
exceed $1,000, including, but not limited to the ownership of shares of stock.
_______________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
3. List of any non-profit or for-profit entities which does business or may potentially
do business with the Town for which the person named on this form or a member
of his/her immediate family holds a position of officer or board member. Please
include the name of position served, the term of service, and compensation
received (if it is more than $1,000 per year in the aggregate.)
_______________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
____________________________________________
Signature of Town Councilor / Council Appointee

Town of Hampden
Conservation/Recreation Fund Policy
Whereas, the Town of Hampden has received, over the course of years, funds in lieu of open
space that would otherwise have been required pursuant to Town Ordinances. Said funds are
held in a Conservation/Recreation (C/R) General Ledger Account.
Whereas, the Town Council desires to maximize the potential public benefit that may result from
expenditure of said funds in a manner that is not inconsistent with the purposes for which the
funds were provided.
The Town Council hereby establishes the following policy for use of Conservation/Recreation
funds from the C/R General Ledger Account:
1. The policy of the Town Council is that funds may be properly expended toward the
purchase of land, or for the development or improvement of conservation or recreational
land or facilities already owned by the Town.
2. Some portion of the C/R funds was provided pursuant to Sec. 544(3) of the Subdivision
Ordinance which applies a standard that “Land purchased or developed with these funds
shall be located to serve the needs of the residents of the subdivision.”
3. Funds expended toward the purchase or development or improvement of land or
facilities that are open to the general public shall be considered to benefit all Hampden
residents, including those residing in any particular subdivision.
4. Expenditure of funds from the C/R Account shall follow the same procedures as those
followed for Reserve Accounts: namely, that the Town Council shall authorize in
advance any such expenditure.
5. Expenditure of funds from the C/R Account shall be governed by all other policies and
procedures applicable to expenditure of Town funds, including but not limited to the
Hampden Town Council Bid Procedure Guidelines.
Adopted by Town Council March 21, 2016
1
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
CONSUMER FIREWORKS ORDINANCE
ADOPTED: Hampden Town Council, June 3, 2013
Effective Date: July 3, 2013
CERTIFIED BY: _______________________________________
Denise Hodsdon, Town Clerk
Affix Seal
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article 1: Purpose ...................................................................................................................2
Article 2: Title and Authority ................................................................................................ 2
Article 3: Definitions ............................................................................................................. 2
Consumer Fireworks...................................................................................................2
Display …………….................................................................................................. 2
Fireworks................................................................................................................... 2
Red Flag Warning ..................................................................................................... 3
Article 4: Use of Consumer Fireworks Restricted................................................................. 3
Article 5: Violation and Enforcement ....................................................................................4
Article 6: Exceptions.............................................................................................................. 5
Article 7: Severability ............................................................................................................ 5
2
ARTICLE 1:
PURPOSE
1.1 Purpose. This Ordinance regulates the use of consumer fireworks to ensure the public health,
safety and welfare of the residents and property owners of the Town of Hampden and of the general
public.
ARTICLE 2:
TITLE AND AUTHORITY
2.1 Title and Authority. This Ordinance shall be known as the "Town of Hampden Consumer
Fireworks Ordinance." It is adopted pursuant to the enabling provisions of the Maine Constitution,
the provisions of 30-A M.R.S. § 3001, and the provisions 8 M.R.S. § 223-A.
ARTICLE 3:
DEFINITIONS
3.1 Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Ordinance, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
Consumer Fireworks – "Consumer fireworks" has the same meaning as in 27 Code of Federal
Regulations, Section 555.11 or subsequent provision, but includes only products that are tested
and certified by a 3rd-party testing laboratory as conforming with United States Consumer Product
Safety Commission standards, in accordance with 15 United States Code, Chapter 47.
"Consumer fireworks" does not include the following products:
A. Missile-type rockets, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule;
B. Helicopters and aerial spinners, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule; and
C. Sky rockets and bottle rockets. For purposes of this definition, "sky rockets and bottle
rockets" means cylindrical tubes containing not more than 20 grams of chemical
composition, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule, with a wooden stick attached for
guidance and stability that rise into the air upon ignition and that may produce a burst of
color or sound at or near the height of flight.
Display – means an entertainment feature where the public or a private group is admitted or
permitted to view the display or discharge of fireworks or special effects. “Display” includes a
“special effects display” as defined in 8 M.R.S. §221-A(10).
Fireworks – means any:
A. Combustible or explosive composition or substance;
B. Combination of explosive compositions or substances;
3
C. Other article that was prepared for the purpose of producing visible or audible effect by
combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, including blank cartridges or toy
cannons in which explosives are used, the type of balloon that requires fire underneath to
propel it, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, bombs, rockets, wheels,
colored fires, fountains, mines, serpents, and other fireworks of like construction;
D. Fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound;
E. Tablets or other device containing any explosive substance or flammable compound.
The term “fireworks” does not include consumer fireworks or toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or
other devices in which paper caps or plastic caps containing 25/100 grains or less of explosive
compound are used if they are constructed so that the hand can not come in contact with the cap
when in place for the explosion, toy pistol paper caps or plastic caps that contain less than 20/100
grains of explosive mixture, sparklers that do not contain magnesium chlorates or perchlorates or
signal, antique or replica cannons if no projectile is fired.
Red Flag Warning – A term designated by the NOAA’s National Weather Service
(www.weather.gov) and used by fire-weather forecasters to call attention to limited weather
conditions of particular importance that may result in extreme burning conditions. The warning is
issued when it is an ongoing event or the fire weather forecaster has a high degree of confidence
that the Red Flag criteria will occur within 24 hours of issuance. Red Flag criteria occurs whenever
a geographical area has been in a dry spell for a week or two, or for a shorter period, if before
spring green-up or after fall color, and the National Fire Danger Rating System (NFDRS) is high
to extreme and the following forecast weather parameters are forecasted to be met: 1) a sustained
wind average 15 miles per hour or greater, 2) a relative humidity less than or equal to 25 percent
and 3) a temperature of greater than 75 degrees F. In some states, dry lightning and unstable air
are criteria. A Fire Weather Watch may be issued prior to the Red Flag Warning.
ARTICLE 4:
USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS RESTRICTED
4.1 Limits on Hours and Dates. A person shall not use, display, fire, or cause to be exploded
consumer fireworks within the Town of Hampden or in or from any watercraft within waters of
the Town except during the following times:
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., except that on the following dates they may be
used between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:30 a.m. the following days:
a) July 4th;
b) December 31st; and
c) The weekends immediately before and after July 4th and December 31st.
4
4.2 Limits on Locations. A person may use, display, fire, or cause to be exploded consumer
fireworks only on that person’s property or on the property of a person who has consented to the
use of consumer fireworks on that property.
4.3 Cessation After Multiple Complaints. Upon complaints from multiple households to
Hampden’s Public Safety Department, the Public Safety Director or designee shall have the
authority to require that the person(s) complained about immediately cease the use, display, firing,
or explosion of consumer fireworks for a 12 hour period from the time of notification to cease if
the official determines that any such activity disturbs the quiet, comfort or repose of any reasonable
person located within or upon any residential premises.
4.4 Cessation After Single Complaint. Upon complaint from a single household to Hampden’s
Public Safety Department, the Public Safety Director or designee shall have the authority to require
that the person(s) complained about cease the use, display, firing, or explosion of consumer
fireworks if in the judgment of the official the complainant has special aggravating circumstances
such as a sick family member or the presence of animals in the area and the propensity of such
animals to suffer adverse health effects from exposure to the noise accompanying fireworks, or, as
a result of fear resulting from exposure to such noise, may endanger others. The length of the
cessation required will be at the discretion of the Public Safety Director or designee. In instances
where the required cessation extends beyond the 12 hour period from the time of notification to
cease, the person(s) complained about will be provided with the cessation order in writing.
4.5 Red Flag Warning. A person may not use, display, fire or cause to be exploded consumer
fireworks on days that are designated by the Maine Forest Service and or NOAA as Red Flag
Warning days. It is the sole responsibility of persons using consumer fireworks to ascertain the
fire danger rating for the day that the consumer fireworks are used.
4.6 Collateral Debris on Neighboring Properties and Right of Ways. A person may not use,
display, fire or cause to be exploded consumer fireworks in a manner that does not contain all
falling debris from the fireworks to the user’ s property.
4.7 Visible Intoxication or Impairment. A person may not use, display, fire or cause to be
exploded consumer fireworks while intoxicated or impaired due to use of alcohol or drugs.
ARTICLE 5:
VIOLATION AND ENFORCEMENT
5.1 Penalty For Violation. Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance shall commit
a civil violation punishable by a penalty of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus attorney’s fees and costs to be recovered by the
Town of Hampden for its use. Each day such violation occurs or continues to occur shall constitute
a separate violation.
5.2 Enforcement. This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Town of Hampden Police Department.
5
5.3 Injunction. In addition to any other remedies available at law or equity, the Town of
Hampden, acting through its Town Manager, may authorize an attorney apply to any court of
competent jurisdiction to enjoin any planned, anticipated or threatened violation of this Ordinance.
5.4 Seizure & Disposal Of Consumer Fireworks. The Town may seize consumer fireworks that
the Town has probable cause to believe are used or sold in violation of this Ordinance and shall
forfeit seized consumer fireworks to the State for disposal.
ARTICLE 6:
EXCEPTIONS
6.1 Exceptions. This Ordinance does not apply to any person(s) who has obtained a permit under
8 M. R. S. §227-A to conduct a display of fireworks.
ARTICLE 7:
SEVERABILITY
7.1 Severability. In the event that any section, subsection or portion of this Ordinance shall be
declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, such decision shall
not be deemed to affect the validity of any other section, subsection or portion of this Ordinance.

Municipal Street List - HAMPDEN SA512
Street # Low
Range
Street # High
Range Side Street Name Ward/Precinct
10 88 ALL AARONS WAY 4-1
1 34 ALL ACORN DR 4-1
1 614 ALL AMMO PARK 2-1
1 1 ALL BABCOCK RD 4-1
1 569 ALL BACK WINTERPORT RD 3-1
210 242 ALL BAKER RD 3-1
1 100 ALL BALLFIELD RD 1-1
1 296 ALL BOG RD 4-1
1 68 ALL BOWEN DR 4-1
1 1 ALL BRYER LN 2-1
1 30 ALL BUTTERNUT LN 4-1
25 384 ALL CANAAN RD 4-1
1 64 ALL CANOE CLUB RD 2-1
1 209 ALL CAREY CIR 2-1
1 2025 ALL CARMEL RD N 4-1
20 240 EVEN CARMEL RD S 4-1
21 239 ODD CARMEL RD S 3-1
4 17 ALL CARRIAGE LN 1-1
9 39 ODD CARVER RD 2-1
10 40 EVEN CARVER RD 1-1
6 23 ALL CHARLES ST 1-1
1 76 ALL CHICKADEE LN 1-1
1 62 ALL CLARK CIR 3-1
1 101 ODD COLDBROOK RD 2-1
2 102 EVEN COLDBROOK RD 1-1
103 500 ALL COLDBROOK RD 2-1
1 14 ALL COMMERCE CT 2-1
1 84 ALL CONSTITUTION AVE 2-1
6 57 ALL COOLIDGE AVE 1-1
5 73 ALL COTTAGE ST 2-1
1 40 ALL COUNTRY MEADOW DR 3-1
11 22 ALL CROSS ST 3-1
1 62 ALL DAISEY LN 1-1
1 46 ALL DEER HILL LN 4-1
3 18 ALL DEWEY ST 2-1
1 81 ALL DUDLEY RD 2-1
1 206 ALL DUNTON CIR 4-1
1 1 ALL EDGEWOOD RD 1-1
3 34 ALL ELM ST E 2-1
1 55 ALL ELM ST W 2-1
5 95 ALL EMERALD DR 3-1
9 23 ALL EMERSON DR 2-1
1 358 ALL EMERSON MILL RD 4-1
24 48 ALL EMERSON MILL RD S 4-1
Municipal Street List - HAMPDEN SA512
Street # Low
Range
Street # High
Range Side Street Name Ward/Precinct
13 35 ALL EVERGREEN DR 2-1
11 30 ALL FERRY ST 3-1
1 178 ALL FOSTER AVE 3-1
1 167 ALL FOWLER RD 4-1
1 159 ALL FOWLERS LANDING RD 4-1
1 50 ALL FOXGLOVE DR 2-1
1 48 ALL FRANCES DR 1-1
1 1 ALL GALWAY ST 1-1
6 37 ALL GEORGE ST 1-1
1 1 ALL GOODELL FARM RD 4-1
1 85 ALL GRAYSTONE DR 4-1
14 111 ALL GRIFFIN AVE 4-1
2 27 ALL HAMEL AVE 1-1
47 56 ALL HATCH LN 3-1
100 123 ALL HEATHER WAY 2-1
1 100 ALL HIGHLAND RIDGE DR 3-1
1 41 ALL HILLSIDE DR 1-1
1 124 ALL HOPKINS RD 3-1
2 27 ALL HORSESHOE LN 1-1
9 107 ALL HUGHES BLVD 3-1
1 7 ALL HUNTING LN 1-1
1 172 ALL ICHABOD LN 3-1
1 23 ALL INDEPENDENCE AVE 2-1
1 44 ALL JAYS WAY 2-1
1 20 ALL JEWELL DR 4-1
1 85 ALL JOHNS WAY 4-1
1 10 ALL KELLY LN 1-1
1 1223 ODD KENNEBEC RD 3-1
2 176 EVEN KENNEBEC RD 2-1
178 562 EVEN KENNEBEC RD 3-1
588 1230 EVEN KENNEBEC RD 4-1
1242 1420 ALL KENNEBEC RD 4-1
1 56 ALL KINCAID RD 3-1
10 76 ALL LASKEY LN 2-1
5 33 ALL LEDGEWOOD DR 4-1
1 34 ALL LIBBY LN 3-1
2 37 ALL LIBERTY AVE 2-1
1 11 ALL LINDEN ST 1-1
5 28 ALL LINDSEY WAY 2-1
80 155 ALL LITTLEFIELD AVE 2-1
1 1 ALL LONG WHARF RD 2-1
101 103 ALL LUPINE TRL 2-1
1 140 ALL MAIN RD N 2-1
159 305 ODD MAIN RD N 2-1
166 812 EVEN MAIN RD N 1-1
Municipal Street List - HAMPDEN SA512
Street # Low
Range
Street # High
Range Side Street Name Ward/Precinct
311 811 ODD MAIN RD N 1-1
1 59 ODD MAIN RD S 2-1
61 583 ODD MAIN RD S 3-1
2 102 EVEN MAIN RD S 2-1
104 612 EVEN MAIN RD S 3-1
1 125 ALL MAIN TRL 2-1
3 165 ALL MANNING MILL RD 4-1
1 108 ALL MARINA RD 1-1
1 50 ALL MARION DR 1-1
7 199 ODD MAYO RD 3-1
8 218 EVEN MAYO RD 2-1
1 83 ODD MEADOW RD 4-1
2 82 EVEN MEADOW RD 3-1
84 679 ALL MEADOW RD 4-1
60 115 ALL MECAW RD 2-1
1 1399 ALL MERCHANT RD 4-1
11 136 ALL MILLER RD 4-1
1 473 ALL MONROE RD 3-1
4 31 ALL MOUNTAIN VIEW DR 1-1
1 28 ALL MURPHY LN 1-1
1 93 ALL N COUNTY RD 4-1
1 54 ALL NADINES WAY 2-1
10 39 ALL NORTHERN AVE 1-1
10 38 ALL NORWAY DR 3-1
5 25 ALL OLD COLDBROOK RD 2-1
1 421 ALL OLD COUNTY RD 1-1
4 38 ALL OLD EMERSON MILL RD 4-1
1 10 ALL ORIENT AVE 3-1
1 275 ALL PAPERMILL RD 2-1
276 321 ALL PAPERMILL RD 4-1
1 72 ALL PARTRIDGE RD 3-1
14 220 EVEN PATTERSON RD 4-1
15 219 ODD PATTERSON RD 3-1
5 47 ALL PATTERSON ST 1-1
2 28 ALL PENOBSCOT MEADOW DR 1-1
1 121 ALL PERKINS DR 3-1
6 49 ALL PERRY RD 1-1
14 87 ALL PIPER WOODS RD 4-1
1 63 ALL PLEASANT ST 3-1
27 151 ALL POND RD 4-1
1 39 ALL RAE WAY 4-1
1 90 ALL RAWLEY DR 3-1
1 40 ALL RIVERVIEW RD 1-1
1 28 ALL ROWELL RD 2-1
2 78 ALL RUTH AVE 2-1
Municipal Street List - HAMPDEN SA512
Street # Low
Range
Street # High
Range Side Street Name Ward/Precinct
6 505 ALL SAWYER RD 4-1
6 29 ALL SCHOOLHOUSE LN 1-1
8 16 ALL SEVERANCE ST 2-1
1 303 ALL SHAW HILL RD 4-1
1 12 ALL SHORT WHARF RD 2-1
1 155 ALL SIDNEY BLVD 2-1
1 78 ALL SILVER DRIFT TRL 4-1
1 39 ALL SOPHIE LN 1-1
1 6 ALL SOUTHGATE DR 4-1
1 51 ALL STETSON DR 4-1
1 54 ALL STONEYBROOK RD 1-1
1 105 ALL SUMMER ST 3-1
2 3 ALL SUMMIT DR 1-1
5 48 ALL SUNRISE LN 2-1
1 84 ALL SUNSET AVE 1-1
1 59 ALL SURREY LN 2-1
1 8 ALL SWAN DR 3-1
100 119 ALL THISTLE LN 2-1
1 25 ALL THOMAS RD 4-1
5 129 ALL TOWN FARM RD 3-1
10 20 ALL TRIANGLE RD 1-1
1 1 ALL VFW RD 2-1
1 12 ALL VICTORIA WAY 2-1
17 83 ALL WESSNETTE DR 3-1
6 27 ALL WESTBROOK TER 1-1
1 237 ODD WESTERN AVE 2-1
261 435 ODD WESTERN AVE 3-1
437 1311 ODD WESTERN AVE 4-1
2 278 EVEN WESTERN AVE 2-1
288 1298 EVEN WESTERN AVE 4-1
10 52 ALL WHEELDEN HTS 1-1
1 30 ALL WILBUR DR 2-1
6 29 ALL WILLIAMS ST 1-1
100 118 ALL WINTERGREEN CT 2-1













1
ARTICLE 1.
TITLE
1.1 Title. This Ordinance shall be known as the "Addressing Ordinance."
ARTICLE 2.
PURPOSE
2.1 Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to enhance the easy and rapid location of
structures by law enforcement, fire, rescue, and emergency medical services personnel in the
Town of Hampden.
ARTICLE 3.
AUTHORITY
3.1 Authority. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to and consistent with Municipal Home Rule
Powers as provided for in Article VIII, Part 2, Section 1 of the Constitution of the State of Maine
and Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 3001.
ARTICLE 4.
DEFINITIONS
4.1 Construction Language. In this Ordinance, certain terms or words shall be interpreted as follows:
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation or
other legally recognized entity, as well as an individual; the present tense includes the future tense, the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory; the
word "structure" includes the word "building" and the word "dwelling" includes the word "residence", the
word "parcel" includes the words "lot" or "plot". In case of any difference of meaning or implication
between the text of this Ordinance and any map or illustration, the text shall control.
Terms not defined shall have the customary dictionary meaning.
4.2 Definitions. In this Ordinance the following terms shall have the following meanings unless a contrary
meaning is required by the context or is specifically prescribed:
Road: A "road" refers to any highway, road, street, avenue, lane, private way, or similar paved,
gravel, or dirt thoroughfare serving three or more structures. A road name assigned by the
municipality in accordance with this ordinance shall not constitute or imply Town acceptance of
the road as a public way or Planning Board approval as a feature of a subdivision plan.
2
ARTICLE 5.
ADMINISTRATION
5.1 Administration. This Ordinance shall be administered by the designated e911 Addressing
Officer who is authorized to and shall assign and/or approve road names and numbers to all
properties, both on existing and proposed roads, in accordance with the criteria in Articles 6 and
7. The Addressing Officer shall be responsible for maintaining the following official records of
this ordinance:
a) A municipal map(s) for official use showing road names and numbers.
b) An alphabetical list of all property owners as identified by current tax records, by
last name, showing the assigned numbers.
c) An alphabetical list of all roads with property owners listed in order of their
assigned numbers.
The Town Manager shall designate an Addressing Officer, who is responsible for and authorized
to provide all required addressing and database information to the state agency responsible for
the implementation of Enhanced 9-1-1 service.
ARTICLE 6.
ROAD NAMING SYSTEM
6.1 Road Naming System. All roads that serve three or more structures shall be named
regardless of whether the ownership is public or private. A road name assigned by the
municipality shall not constitute or imply acceptance of the road as a public way.
The following criteria shall govern the naming system:
a) No two roads shall be given the same name (ex. Pine Road and Pine Lane).
b) No two roads shall have similar-sounding names (ex. Beech Lane and Peach
Lane).
c) Each road shall have the same name throughout its entire length located within
the boundaries of Hampden. Roads that continue through into an adjacent town
may change names at the town border.
ARTICLE 7.
NUMBERING APPLICATION PROCESS AND NUMBERING SYSTEM
7.1 Numbering Criteria. The following criteria shall govern the numbering system:
7.1.1 Numbers shall be assigned to structures only. This includes but is not limited to:
single or multi-family dwellings, camps, businesses, apartments, mobile homes,
construction site office trailers. This process is initiated when a building permit
application is pulled, so that numbers are assigned to structures being built, and not at the
end of the construction period.
3
7.1.2 Numbers shall be assigned every 50 (fifty) feet along both sides of the road
regardless of zone or location in town, with even numbers appearing on the right side of
the road and odd numbers appearing on the left side of the road, as the numbers ascend.
7.1.3 All number origins shall begin from the intersection of Route 9 (Western
Avenue) and Route 1A (Main Road North) or that end of a road closest to the
designated origin. For dead end roads, numbering shall originate at the
intersection of the adjacent road and terminate at the dead end.
7.1.4 The number assigned to each structure shall be that of the numbered interval
falling closest to the driveway of said structure.
7.1.5 Every structure with more than one principle use or occupancy shall have a
separate number for each use or occupancy, i.e. duplexes will have two separate
numbers; apartments will have one road number with an apartment number, such
as 235 Maple Road, Apt 2.
7.1.6 Parcels with more than one structure, such as a mobile home park or group
development, shall be assigned unique addresses that make the most logical sense
to each situation. Each structure shall be identified by a unique number. For
example, 235 Maple Road, Lot 1 or 235 Maple Road, Unit 1.
7.2 Numbering Application Process. Numbers will be assigned when an applicant fills out and
submits a “Driveway Entrance/e911 Address” application available at the town office. This
application can be completed as a stand-alone application for an already-existing structure, or as
part of the building permit application process for new structures. Applicants must adhere to all
terms of the application, including staking and flagging the proposed or existing driveway
entrance. The Addressing Officer will then GPS the staked/flagged location, process the GPS
data, and scale out and assign an appropriate number.
ARTICLE 8.
COMPLIANCE
8.1 Compliance. All owners of structures shall display and maintain in a conspicuous place,
assigned numbers in the following manner:
a) Number at the Road Line. The assigned number shall be displayed on a post,
fence, wall, mail box, or on some structure adjacent to the walk or access drive to
the residence or structure.
b) Size, Color, and Location of Number. Numbers shall be of a color that contrasts
with their background color and shall be a minimum of four (4) inches in height.
Numbers shall be located to be visible from the road at all times of the year.
c) Proper number. Every person whose duty is to display an assigned number shall
remove any different number which might be mistaken for, or confused with, the
number assigned in conformance with this Ordinance.
4
d) Interior location. All residents and other occupants are requested to post their
assigned number and road name adjacent to their telephone for emergency
reference.
ARTICLE 9.
NEW CONSTRUCTION, NEW SUBDIVISIONS, AND NEW ROADS
9.1 New Construction. Whenever any residence or other structure is constructed or developed, it
shall be the duty of the new owner to obtain an assigned number from the Addressing Officer.
This shall be done at the time of the issuance of the building permit.
9.2 New Subdivisions. Any prospective subdivider shall show a proposed road name system on
the pre-application submission to the Planning Board. Approval by the Planning Board, after
consultation with the Addressing Officer, shall constitute the assignment of road names in the
subdivision. On the final plan showing proposed roads, the applicant shall mark on the plan, lines
or dots, in the center of the streets every 50 feet so as to aid in the assignment of numbers to
structures subsequently constructed.
9.3 New Roads. Any prospective new roads not serving a new subdivision shall show a proposed
road name on the pre-application submission to the Planning Board. Approval by the Planning
Board, after consultation with the Addressing Officer, shall constitute the assignment of road
names. On the final plan showing proposed roads, the applicant shall mark on the plan, lines or
dots, in the center of the streets every 50 feet so as to aid in the assignment of numbers to
structures subsequently constructed.
ARTICLE 10.
EFFECTIVE DATE
10.1 Effective Date. This Ordinance is not retroactive. Pursuant to Section 213(c) of the Town
Charter, this Ordinance shall become effective at the expiration of 30 days after its adoption by
the Town Council. It shall be the duty of the Addressing Officer to notify each property owner
and the U.S. Postal Service of any new addresses assigned after the effective date of this
ordinance.
ARTICLE 11.
ENFORCEMENT AND CIVIL PENALTY
11.1 Enforcement. The Addressing Officer has the authority to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance, as well as any officer of the Public Safety Department. If the Addressing Officer
finds that any provision of this Ordinance has been violated, the Officer shall notify the property
owner(s), or other person(s) responsible, in writing of the nature of the violation and the
corrective action required. If the corrective action is not completed within 15 days of the
issuance of the notice, the Town Manager, upon notice from the Addressing Officer, may
authorize any and all actions and proceedings that may be available or necessary to enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance.
5
11.2 Civil Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance commits a civil
violation, and shall be subject to relief and a civil penalty in accordance with 30-A M.R.S. A.
§4452, as may be amended or replaced from time to time. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation. If the Town is the prevailing party in an enforcement action,
it shall be entitled to its costs, expert witness fees, and reasonable attorney’s fees.
ARTICLE 12.
SEVERABILITY
12.1 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such provision shall be deemed as a separate, distinct and independent provision and
such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Edythe L. Dyer Library Ordinance
TOWN OF HAMPDEN
EDYTHE L. DYER COMMUNITY LIBRARY ORDINANCE
Adopted
May 16, 1983
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
EDYTHE L. DYER COMMUNITY LIBRARY ORDINANCE
CERTIFIED BY:
_________________________
Paula Scott, Town Clerk
Town Clerk
Affix Seal
Town of Hampden
Edythe L. Dyer Community Library Ordinance
ADOPTED: Hampden Town Council, May 16, 1983
Effective Date, June 15, 1983
AMENDED: October 20, 1986 Section: 2.2.a
Effective Date, November 20, 1986
AMENDED: October 02, 2017 Section: 2.1a, 2.1b, 2.1c
November 01, 2017 Section: 2.2a, 2.2b
Town of Hampden
Edythe L. Dyer Community Library Ordinance
ENACTMENT ……………………………………………………1
SECTION I ESTABLISHMENT ………………………………………………1
SECTION II ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION …………………. 1
SECTION III VALIDITY; REPEALER AND EFFECTIVE DATE …………….3
Town of Hampden
Edythe L. Dyer Community Library Ordinance
EDYTHE L. DYER COMMUNITY LIBRARY ORDINANCE
Enactment: Pursuant to the provisions of the charter of the Town of Hampden, Article II, Section
212, and Article III, Section 302, THE TOWN OF HAMPDEN HEREBY ORDAINS that there is
established a public library, to be known as the Edythe L. Dyer Community Library, to be organized,
administered and governed in accordance with the following provisions:
SECTION I - ESTABLISHMENT
The Edythe L. Dyer Community Library is established as a department of the town, and shall be
administered consistent with its role as such.
SECTION II - ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION
Section 2.1 Library Director
a. Position - There is hereby authorized and established the position of Library Director.
This position shall be included in the Personnel Classification and Compensation Plan
for the Town of Hampden.
b. Appointment – The Library Director shall be appointed by the Town Manager in
consultation with the Board of Trustees, subject to confirmation by the Town Council
and consistent with the personnel rules of the Town and the Town Charter.
c. Duties – The Library Director shall have the responsibility for the daily operation and
management of the Library as a department of the Town and consistent with the
personnel rules of the Town and the Town Charter. The Library Director shall make a
periodic report to the Town Manager at such frequency as s directed as to the business
of the Library for the period since the last report. The Library shall be operated and
managed subject to the directives of the Town Manager and consistent with the policies
and rules and regulations promulgated by the Board of Trustees.
The Library Director shall be a member, ex-officio of the Board of Trustees.
Section 2.2 - Board of Trustees
a. Appointment Term - The Board of Trustees of the library shall consist of 9 persons, ,
appointed by the Town Council. The trustees shall serve staggered three (3) year terms
No member of the Town Council may serve on the Board of Trustees.
b. Duties; Function - The Board of Trustees shall have the responsibility for establishing
Library policies, authorizing the expenditures of Library funds and, consistent with the
position of the Library as a town department, shall otherwise assume responsibility for
operation and administration of the Library. The Board of Trustees shall have the power
to adopt such reasonable rules and regulations for the management and administration
of the Library as it deems appropriate, including the power to establish fines and
penalties for violation of said rules and regulations. The Board shall meet regularly.
The Board shall adopt its own bylaws and at an annual meeting shall elect a Chair, Vice-
Chair, and Treasurer. The Board may also create an Executive Committee, consisting
of three members of the Board of Trustees, one of which shall be Chair, to which certain
of the responsibilities of the Board may be delegated. Such rules or regulations for
Town of Hampden
Edythe L. Dyer Community Library Ordinance
management and administration of the Library as the Board adopts shall be promptly
reported to the Town Manager. The Town Manager and Town Mayor are members exofficio
of the Board of Trustees, and in the event the Board chooses to create an
Executive Committee, the Town Manager shall be an ex-officio member of said
committee. The Board of Trustees shall also make recommendations to the Town
Manager as to nominations for membership to the Board. The Board of Trustees shall
have the authority to name various persons to the Board of Trustees as honorary
members of the Board as it deems appropriate, but only by a majority vote of the
membership of the entire Board. Honorary Trustees may participate in meetings of the
full Board of Trustees but may not vote and shall have no authority as to the
administration of the Library, which is hereby granted to the Board of Trustees. The
Board of Trustees may also accept gifts and donations to the Library either in trust or
outright, and may act as trustee of any donations or gifts in trust. In the event the Board
accepts any gifts or donations in trust it shall at all times be consistent with the terms of
the trust or gift. The responsibility of the Board for gifts or donations in trust may not
be delegated to a lesser committee of the Board.
SECTION III - VALIDITY, REPEALER AND EFFECTIVE DATE
Section 3.1 - Validity; Conflict of Laws; Effective Date
a. Validity - Should any section or provisions of this ordinance be declared by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such determination of invalidity shall not invalidate
or affect any other section or provision of this ordinance, and to that end the provisions
of this ordinance are declared to be severable.
b. Repealer - All ordinances, resolutions, orders and votes of the Town of Hampden, by
whatever governing body enacted, and which relate to the creation of a public library in
the Town of Hampden, are hereby repealed to the extent they are inconsistent with this
ordinance.
c. Effective Date - The effective date of this ordinance shall be thirty (30) days after
adoption by the Town Council.
{R2144812.1 57398-071112 }
Town of Hampden
EMERGENCY ORDINANCE REGARDING MEDICAL MARIJUANA REGISTERED
CAREGIVER OPERATIONS
WHEREAS, the legislative body of the Town of Hampden (the “Municipality”) makes the
following findings:
(1) The Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act (the “Act”) was passed by the Maine Legislature in
2009 and has been codified in the Maine Revised Statutes ("M.R.S.A.") in Title 22, Chapter 558-C
and amended in 2018; and
(2) The Act (22 M.R.S.A. § 2430-D(3)) and the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Program Rules
promulgated pursuant thereto (10-144 CMR Ch. 122, § 6(K)), permit an unlimited number of
medical marijuana registered caregivers to operate on a single parcel, which raises legitimate and
substantial questions about the impact of properties where multiple registered caregivers operate in
the Municipality, including questions as to compatibility with existing land uses and developments;
potential adverse health and safety effects on the community; and potential impacts on the value of
abutting properties; and
(3) The Act permits a municipality to regulate registered caregivers provided they are not prohibited and
there is no limitation on the number operating in the municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 2429-D); and
(4) As a result of the foregoing issues, the operation of multiple medical marijuana registered
caregivers on a single parcel within the Municipality has potentially serious implications for
the health, safety and welfare of the Municipality and its residents; and
(5) The Municipality currently has no regulations governing medical marijuana registered caregivers,
and existing ordinances are insufficient to prevent serious public harm that could result from the
unregulated development of properties with multiple registered caregivers; and
(6) The Municipality intends to draft and adopt a new section of the Town of Hampden Maine
Marijuana Ordinance to regulate medical marijuana registered caregivers within the Municipality,
which process will take time to ensure appropriate regulation of this use; and
(7) In the judgment of the Hampden Town Council, the foregoing findings and conclusions constitute
an emergency within the meaning of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4356 and Section 214 of the Hampden
Town Charter requiring immediate legislative action.
NOW THEREFORE, pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A § 4356, be it ordained by the Municipality as follows:
Section 1. Limitation. The Municipality does hereby declare that to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare, that to the extent authorized by the Act, there shall be allowed to operate on a single
property, as that term is defined in the Town of Hampden Maine Marijuana Ordinance, no more than
one medical marijuana registered caregiver within the Residential A, Residential B, and Town Center
zoning districts, and no more than three medical marijuana registered caregivers within any other
zoning districts.
{R2144812.1 57398-071112 }
No person or organization shall exceed these limits on or after the effective date of this Ordinance.
During the time this Emergency Ordinance is in effect, no officer, official, employee, office,
administrative board or agency of the Municipality shall approve any application for an operation
exceeding these limits.
Section 2. Pending Proceedings. Notwithstanding 1 M.R.S.A. § 302 or any other law to the contrary,
this Emergency Ordinance shall govern any proposal for multiple medical marijuana registered
caregivers that exceeds the limits set forth in Section 1 for which an application for a building permit,
certificate of occupancy, site plan or any other required approval has been submitted to the Municipality,
prior to the enactment of this Emergency Ordinance, whether or not it is a pending proceeding.
Section 3. Medical Use of Marijuana Act. This Ordinance will not limit any other privileges or
rights afforded by the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act (22 M.R.S.A. Chapter 558-C). This
Ordinance shall not be construed as a vote to allow caregiver retail stores, registered dispensaries,
testing facilities, or manufacturing facilities pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 2429-D(3), except to the
extent such uses are already allowed under the Town of Hampden Zoning Ordinance.
Section 4. Personal Use of Marijuana. This Ordinance will not limit the privileges or rights
concerning the personal use of marijuana afforded by the Maine Adult Use Marijuana Law (28-B
M.R.S.A. Chapter 3).
Section 5. Conflicts/Savings Clause. Any provisions of the Municipality’s ordinances that are
inconsistent or conflicting with the provisions of this Emergency Ordinance are hereby repealed to the
extent applicable for the duration of this Emergency Ordinance. If any section or provision of this
Emergency Ordinance is declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such a
declaration shall not invalidate any other section or provision.
Section 6. Violations. If any property is found to be in violation of this Emergency Ordinance, each day
of any continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation of this Emergency Ordinance and the
Municipality shall be entitled to all rights available to it pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452, including,
but not limited to, fines and penalties, injunctive relief, and its reasonable attorney’s fees and costs in
prosecuting any such violations.
Section 7. Effective Date. This Emergency Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its
adoption and shall remain in full force and effect for a period of 60 days thereafter, unless extended
pursuant to law by the Municipality.
Adopted: __September 16, 2019___
Effective: _ September 16, 2019___
__________________________________
Certified by: Paula Scott, Town Clerk



Town of Hampden, Maine
Fees Ordinance
Dec. 4, 2019
1
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
FEES ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1 – ADMINISTRATION 4
ARTICLE 2 – FEES FOR ACTIVITIES REGULATED BY TOWN ORDINANCE 6
ARTICLE 3 – FIRE DEPARTMENT 11
ARTICLE 4 – POLICE DEPARTMENT 12
ARTICLE 5 – PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 13
ARTICLE 6 – RECREATION 14
ARTICLE 7 – LIBRARY 15
ARTICLE 8 – POOL 16
ARTICLE 9 – ANNUAL REVIEW BY TOWN COUNCIL 18
APPENDIX A – SEWER CONNECTION FEE CALCULATION WORKSHEET 19
APPENDIX B – SEWER CONNECTION FEE SCHEDULE 20
ADOPTED: Hampden Town Council October 20, 1986
Effective: November 19, 1986
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council December 7, 1987
Effective: January 5, 1988
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council March 21, 1991
Effective: April 21, 1991
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council July 6, 1993
Effective: August 5, 1993
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council December 20, 1993
Effective: January 19, 1994
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council May 6, 1996
Effective: June 6, 1996
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council February 7, 1998
Effective: March 18, 1998
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council November 17, 2003
Effective: December 17, 2003
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council March 21, 2005
Effective: April 20, 2005
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council April 4, 2005
Effective: May 4, 2005
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council October 6, 2008
Town of Hampden, Maine
Fees Ordinance
Dec. 4, 2019
2
Effective: November 5, 2008
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council June 15, 2009
Effective: July 15, 2009
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council August 3, 2009
Effective: September 2, 2009
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council January 19, 2010
Effective: February 18, 2010
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council September 19, 2011 8.8.4, 8.9, 8.10, 8.11, 8.15, 8.16.1, 8.16.3,
Effective: October 19, 2011 8.16.5 (new 8.11 added and remainder of
Article 8 re-numbered)
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council April 23, 2012 New 1.13 added and remainder of Article 1
Effective: May 23, 2012 re-numbered, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7, 3.8, 7.2, 7.3,
added 7.4 and 7.5
AMENDED: Hampden Town Staff, November 27, 2012 Deleted Article 8.12 and 8.13
Effective: December 27, 2012
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, April 22, 2014 Articles 6.2, 6.3 and 6.4
Effective: May 22, 2014
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, September 2, 2014 Articles 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6, 8.7, 8.8,
Effective: October 2, 2014 8.9, 8.10, and 8.16
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, December 1, 2014 Articles 3.1, 3.3, 3.5, 3.7 and 3.8; 3.9 and
Effective: December 31, 2014 corrected numbering of Article 3; and
Articles 4.2, and 4.4
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, February 16, 2016 Article 2.9
Effective March 17, 2016
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, April 19, 2016 Articles 1.8, 1.9, 1.15 (new), 2.3, 2.5, 2.7,
Effective May 19, 2016 2.8, 2.13, 5.1, 5.2, 8.1, 8.3, 8.4, 8.6, 8.7,
8.10, 8.14, and 8.16
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, May 16, 2016 Articles 2.6, 2.12.2, 2.12.4, 2.16.2, 2.16.4,
Effective June 16, 2016 2.16.5, and 2.16.8
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, September 8, 2016 Article 6.3.8, 6.3.9, and 6.4.4
Effective October 8, 2016
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, February 21, 2017 Articles 6.2.1- 6.2.7, 6.3.1 – 6.3.4, 6.3.11
Effective March 21, 2017
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, May 15, 2017 Preamble, Articles 1.2, 1.6, 1.10, 1.16, 1.17
Effective June 14, 2017 2.9.1, 2.9.3, 2.9.4, 2.9.5, 2.12, 2.12.4 –
2.12.6, Footnote 1, 2.15, 2.16.2.1 – 2.16.2.5,
2.16.4, 2.16.4.1 – 2.16.4.3, 2.16.5, 2.16.9,
2.16.9.1 – 2.16.9.2, 2.16.10.4, Footnote 2,
2.16.10.4.1 – 2.16.10.4.4, 2.16.11.1, 2.16.12,
2.16.12.1 – 2.16.12.3, 5.2.5

Town of Hampden, Maine
Fees Ordinance
Dec. 4, 2019
4
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
FEES ORDINANCE
The Town of Hampden hereby ordains:
In addition to those Town fees and charges, the authorization of which is provided for by Town
Ordinances, the following schedule of fees for Town services is approved:
Exemptions: All Town Government activities and projects shall be exempt from these fees except in the
case where Maine Statutes dictate otherwise. Organizations located in Hampden with a not-for-profit
status recognized by the Internal Revenue Service pursuant to 501(c)(3) shall be exempt from building
permit fees (2.16.1), demolition fees (2.16.2(1-3)), sign permit fees (2.16.3), fees for certificates of
occupancy and compliance (2.16.4) and additional inspection fees (2.16.5) (Amended 11/6/17)
ARTICLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
Amended 11-17-03, 3-21-05, 6-15-09, 4-23-12, 4-19-16, 5-15-17
Please note: Fees for items which are state regulated are subject to change without notice
1.1. Certificate of Sole Proprietor filing (Amended 10/15/2018) $10.00 (State Regulated)
Certificate of Partnership filing (Amended 11/4/2019) $10.00 (State Regulated)
1.2. Copy of Vital Record (Amended 5/15/17) (Amended 10/15/2018)
1.2.1. Certified Copy (Amended 10/15/2018) $15.00 (State Regulated)
1.2.2. Each additional copy purchased the same day $ 6.00 (State Regulated)
(Amended 10/15/2018)
1.2.3. Attested Copy (Amended 10/15/2018) $10.00 (State Regulated)
1.3. Copy of Subdivision Ordinance At Cost
1.4. Copy of Zoning Ordinance At Cost
1.5. Copy of other ordinances
1.5.1. up to 20 pages $0.25/page
1.5.2. and a page after that $0.15/page
1.6. Photocopies
1.6.1. 81/2 inch x 11 inch or smaller (B&W) $0.25/page
1.6.2. 81/2 inch x 14 inch (B&W) $0.50/page
1.6.3. 11 inch x 17 inch (B&W) $0.75/page
1.6.4. 81/2 inch x 11 inch or smaller (color) (Amended 5/15/17) $1.00/page
1.6.5. 81/2 inch x 14 inch (color) (Amended 5/15/17) $1.25/page
1.7. Marriage License (Amended 10/15/2018) $40.00 (State Regulated)
1.8. Notary Fee Free for Hampden residents
$3.00 for non-residents
Town of Hampden, Maine
Fees Ordinance
Dec. 4, 2019
5
1.9. Record Search $15.00/hour (for hours over 1)
1.10. Recording of Pole Permits (Amended 5/15/17) $4.00
1.11. Tax Maps
1.11.1. (11 inch x 17 inch) $50.00/complete set
1.11.2. (24 inch x 36 inch) (Amended 05/15/17) $8.00 map
1.12. Compact Disk copies of ordinances, documents or $5.00
recorded meetings (audio only) (Amended 11/6/17)
1.13. DVD copies of video recorded meetings (Added 4/23/12) $5.00
(Amended 11/6/17)
1.14. Liquor License (Amended 6/15/09)
New or renewal (State Regulated by type, paid directly to the State)
Cost for public notices and mailings – (new license only) $At cost
(Amended Nov. 4, 2019)
1.15. Incoming Faxes $1.00/page
1.16. Hunting on Town Land Authorization and Map Book $12.00 (resident)
(Amended 5/15/17) (Amended 11/6/17) $17.00 (non-resident)
1.17. Dog Licensing:
1.17.1. Spayed/Neutered dog (Amended 5/15/17) (Amended 10/15/18) $ 6.00 (State Regulated)
1.17.2. Male/Female dog (Amended 5/15/17) (Amended 10/15/18) $ 11.00 (State Regulated)
1.17.3. Late Fee (Amended 5/15/17) (Amended 10/15/18) $25.00 (State Regulated)
Town of Hampden, Maine
Fees Ordinance
Dec. 4, 2019
6
ARTICLE 2
FEES FOR ACTIVITIES REGULATED BY TOWN ORDINANCE
Amended 11-17-03, 3-21-05, 6-15-09, 8-3-09, 4-19-16, 05/15/17
2.1. Animal Control Ordinance
2.1.1. Animal Impoundment Fee (Amended 8/7/17) $35.00 First offense
$45.00 Second offense
$55.00 Third offense
2.2. Cable Television Ordinance
2.2.1. Initial Franchise Application Filing Fee $500.00
2.2.2. Renewal Franchise Application Filing Fee $500.00
2.2.3. Modification of a Franchise Agreement $500.00
2.2.4. Combined Filing Fee for participating towns $7,000.00
2.3. Cemetery Ordinance
2.3.1. Lot Fees including perpetual care.
2.3.1.1. Resident – Adult, Infant, or Cremation $325.00
2.3.1.2. (Deleted 11/4/2019)
2.3.1.3. Non-Resident – Adult, Infant, or Cremation $450.00
2.3.1.4. (Deleted 11/8/2019)
2.3.2. Interment fees
2.3.2.1. Grave Openings Weekdays Adult $400.00
2.3.2.2. Grave Openings Weekdays Infant or Cremation $150.00
2.3.2.3. Grave Openings Weekends or Holidays Adult $600.00
2.3.2.4. Grave Openings Weekends or Holidays $300.00
Infant or Cremation
2.3.3. Town Crypt Fees
2.3.3.1. Resident Free
2.3.3.2. Non-Resident $50.00
2.3.4. Disinterment $1,000.00
2.3.5. Vault Cremation $400.00
2.3.6. Cemetery Crew Labor After 3:00 PM $35.00/hour/person
2.4. Concourse Gathering Ordinance
2.4.1. Concourse Gathering Permit Fee $100.00
2.5. Floodplain Management Ordinance
2.5.1. Application Fee $100.00
2.5.2. Experts Fee $500.00 horizontal review
$1,000.00 vertical review and
horizontal review.
This is a draw account
established for a professional to
establish flood elevation data
where possible. Any unspent
funds are to be returned to the
applicant
2.5.3. Cost for public notices and mailings At cost
(Any “at cost” fee must be paid to the Town before the issuance of
approved permits or variances, or action on a board order is undertaken).
Town of Hampden, Maine
Fees Ordinance
Dec. 4, 2019
7
2.6. Harbor Ordinance
2.6.1. Private mooring $100.00 annual fee.
2.6.2. Unattended tie-ups (Added 10/15/2018) $25.00 - $100.00/day
2.6.3. Moorings violation (Added 10/15/2018) $25.00 - $100.00/violation
2.6.4. Willful destruction of channel marker/buoy (Added 10/15/18) $100.00 - $200.00/violation
2.7. Historic Preservation Ordinance
2.7.1. Certificate of Appropriateness Application Fee $75.00
2.7.2. Historic Site or Landmark Designation Application Fee $150.00
2.7.3. Cost of public notices and mailings At cost
2.8. Mobile Home Park Ordinance
2.8.1. Annual Mobile Home Park License $200.00
(This includes application review, initial
inspection of premises and a follow-up
inspection).
2.8.2. Additional Inspection Fee $200.00
(If the town needs to perform additional inspections
as a result of applicant deficiencies, each inspection
will be charged prior to the inspection).
2.9. Sewer Ordinance (Amended 8/3/09, 2/16/16)
2.9.1. Sewer Service Charge Rate (Amended 8/3/09) (Amended 5/15/17) $12.00 per 100 cubic
(Amended 05/20/2019) feet of water (c.f.w.) consumed
as indicated by consumer’s
water meter.
2.9.1.1. Sewer Charge Flat Rate Town Water No Meter $0.00
(Amended 5/15/17) (Deleted 10/15/2018)
2.9.1.2. Sewer Charge Flat Rate Well Water No Meter $182.66
(Amended 5/15/17)
2.9.2. Sewer Service Capital Charge (Deleted 10/15/2018) $0.00
2.9.2.1. (Deleted 10/15/2018) $0.00
2.9.2.2. (Deleted 10/15/2018) $0.00
2.9.2.3 (Deleted 10/15/2018) $0.00
2.9.2.4. (Deleted 10/15/2018) $0.00
2.9.3. Sewer Service Minimum Charge Rate $36.00
(Amended 5/15/17) (Amended 05/20/2019)
2.9.4. Sewer Service “Ready to Serve” Charge $36.00
(Amended 5/15/17) (Amended 05/20/2019)
2.9.5. Special Sewer Service Charge (Sewer Ord. Sec. 10.4) As determined by
(Amended 5/15/17) Town Council.
2.9.6. Sewer Service Charge Rate Outside Town Limits As determined by
Town Council.
2.10. Solid Waste Flow Control Ordinance
2.10.1. License Application Fee (initial one-time fee, Per $200.00
Company, up to 4 Vehicles) (Amended 5/15/17)
(Amended 11/6/17)
2.10.2 License Application Fee (initial one-time fee, Per $250.00
Company, more than 4 Vehicles) (Amended 11/6/17)
2.10.3. Annual License Fee Per Vehicle $ 50.00
(Amended 5/15/17) (Amended 11/6/17)
Town of Hampden, Maine
Fees Ordinance
Dec. 4, 2019
8
2.11. Special Amusement Ordinance (Amended 11/6/17)
2.11.1. Permit Application Fee (Public Hearing Required) $150.00
(Amended 11/4/2019)
2.11.2 Cost for public notices and mailings At cost
(Added 11/4/2019)
2.12. Subdivision Ordinance
2.12.1. Subdivision Sketch Plan No Charge
2.12.2. Minor Subdivision (Amended 5/15/17) $100.00 plus $20.00/lot
2.12.3. Minor Subdivision Review/Inspection Draw Not required
2.12.4. Major Subdivision Preliminary Plan
2.12.4.1 on existing road (Amended 5/15/17) $150.00 plus $50.00/lot
2.12.4.2 with new road $500.00 plus $50.00/lot
2.12.4.3 Draw Account Deposit (for technical review)1, 2, 3 $2,000.00
(Amended 5/15/17)
2.12.4.4 Draw Account Deposit (for review of construction cost estimate for improvement
guarantee, due prior to Final Plan submittal)1, 2, 3 $1,000.00
(Added 11/4/2019)
2.12.5 Major Subdivision Final Plan (Amended 5/15/17)
2.12.5.1 Following Preliminary Plan $150.00 plus $20.00 per lot
2.12.5.2 If no Preliminary Plan $500.00 plus $50.00 per lot
2.12.5.3 Draw Account Deposit (for technical review)1, 2, 3 None if Preliminary Plan
completed and no significant
modifications to infrastructure
made; otherwise $2,000.00.
2.12.6. Draw Account Deposit for Construction Inspections2, 3 $5,000.00
(Required prior to the start of construction
for any subdivision with infrastructure that
is proposed to be accepted by the Town of Hampden.)
(Amended 7/2/18)
2.12.7 Cost for public notices and mailings (Amended 5/15/17) At cost
2.13. Victualers Ordinance (Amended 6/15/09, 4/19/16)
2.13.1. Victualers License Application
2.13.1.1. Public hearing not required $100.00
2.13.1.2. Public hearing is required $150.00
2.13.1.3. Cost for public notices and mailings At cost
The above fees include all inspections required by Town of Hampden Victualers Ordinance. If an
inspection is performed and the Code Enforcement Officer or Fire Inspector, or their alternate,
believe a reinspection is needed because of a fault of the applicant or agent then a fee per 2.16.5
will be charged and due prior to the issuance of the Victualers License.
2.14. Waste Disposal Facility Licensing Ordinance
2.14.1. Application Fee $50,000.00
Town of Hampden, Maine
Fees Ordinance
Dec. 4, 2019
9
This is a draw account to be used by the Council to hire
consultants as necessary to review the proposal. If at any time
balance drops to $10,000.00 the applicant shall deposit an
additional $10,000.00. Any unexpended balance shall be
returned after a final decision on the application is rendered.
2.15. Zoning Ordinance
2.15.1. Building Permit Applications (deleted 11/04/2019)
2.15.1.1 Residential/Commercial - new construction $25.00 plus $0.40 per sq. ft. of
total building area
2.15.1.2 Other Residential permits $25.00 plus $0.25 per sq. ft.
including but not limited to
garages, additions, etc
2.15.1.3 Decks – not attached & over 200 sq.ft. $25.00 plus $0.15 per sq.ft.
2.15.1.4 Sheds – over 200 sq. ft. $25.00 plus $0.10 per sq.ft.
2.15.1.5 Residential Interior Alterations $25.00 plus $0.15 per sq.ft.
2.15.1.6 Commercial Interior Alterations $25.00 plus $0.25 per sq.ft.
(Amended 11/04/2019)
Plumbing permit application State regulated
2.15.2. Demolition/Earth Moving Permit Application
2.15.2.1 Demolition (residential-with sewer connection) $100.00
(Amended 5/15/17)
2.15.2.2 Demolition (residential-no sewer connection) $50.00
(Amended 5/15/17)
2.15.2.3 Demolition (commercial) $150.00
(Amended 5/15/17)
2.15.2.4 Earth Moving (Code Enforcement Issued) $100.00
(Amended 5/15/17)
2.15.2.5 Earth Moving (Planning Board Issued) $200.00
(Amended 5/15/17)
2.15.3. Sign Permit Application $25.00 per sign
2.15.4. Certificate of Compliance or Occupancy
2.15.4.1 Certificate of Compliance Application $100.00
(Amended 5/15/17)
2.15.4.2 Certificate of Occupancy Application $100.00
(Amended 5/15/17)
2.15.4.3 Dual applications (filed together) $150.00
(Amended 5/15/17)
2.15.5. Additional Inspections $35.00 per hour per inspector
(If the town needs to perform additional inspections as
a result of applicant deficiencies). (Amended 5/15/17)
2.15.6. Zoning Board of Appeals Variance Application
2.15.6.1 General Variance $250.00
Town of Hampden, Maine
Fees Ordinance
Dec. 4, 2019
10
2.15.6.2 Dimensional Variance $250.00
2.15.6.3 Disability Variance Free
2.15.6.4 Administrative Appeal Application $250.00
2.15.6.5 Cost for public notices and mailings At cost
2.15.7. Zoning Ordinance Map Amendment Request (Amended 5/15/17)
2.15.7.1 Amendment Application $650.00
(Amended 5/15/17)
2.15.7.2 Cost for public notices and mailings At cost
2.15.8. Site Plan Review Applications (Amended 7/2/18)
2.15.8.1 Minor Revision $75.00
2.15.8.2 Minor Site Plan $150.00
2.15.8.3 Major Site Plan
2.15.8.3.1 Less than 1 acre of land disturbance $300.00
2.15.8.3.2 1 to < 3 acres of land disturbance $600.00
2.15.8.3.3 3 to < 5 acres of land disturbance $850.00
2.15.8.3.4 5 to < 8 acres of land disturbance $1,200.00
2.15.8.3.5 8 acres or more of land disturbance $1,500.00
2.15.8.4 Draw Account Deposit (for technical review) 1, 2,3
(Amended 5/15/17)
2.15.8.4.1 General Engineering $800.00
(Amended 5/15/17)
2.15.8.4.2 Stormwater Analysis $600.00
(Where proposed use disturbs more
than 20,000 sq. ft. of land).
(Amended 5/15/17, 7/2/18)
2.15.8.4.3 Traffic Analysis $1,000.00
(Where proposed use will generate
at least 350 average daily trip ends).
(Amended 5/15/17)
2.15.8.4.4 Construction Inspections2, 3 $5,000
(Where proposal includes any infrastructure
proposed to be accepted by the Town of Hampden.)
(Amended 7/2/18)
2.15.8.5 Cost for public notices and mailings At cost
(Amended 5/15/17)
2.15.9 Conditional Use Applications (Amended 7/2/18)
2.15.9.1 Conditional Use without site plan $75
2.15.9.2 Conditional Use with site plan $50
1 In addition to the Planning Board application fees the applicant must make a deposit for a Peer Technical Review
draw account when the nature of the review exceeds the technical capability of Town personnel. Applications which
require subsequent re-review of additional information, or amended submittals shall be responsible to provide
additional funds to cover the full peer review costs. (Amended 5/15/17)
2 Upon exhausting in excess of 75% of the funds in the original deposit, the applicant shall provide additional
funding in increments of 50% of the original deposit. (Amended 5/15/17)
3 Any remaining funds held in the draw account upon endorsement of the plan (for technical review accounts) or
issuance of a certificate of compliance (for construction inspections), after all invoices are paid, shall be returned to
the applicant. (Amended 5/15/17, 7/2/18)
Town of Hampden, Maine
Fees Ordinance
Dec. 4, 2019
11
(This is in addition to the site plan review
application fee)
2.15.9.3 Cost for public notices and mailings At Cost
2.16 Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance (added 11/4/2019)
2.16.1 Administrative Fee (initial approval) $50
2.16.2 Draw Account Deposit (for technical review)1, 2, 3 $1,000
2.16.3 Annual Certification Review Fee (paid each year with the annual report) $150
2.17 Private Event Venue Licensing Ordinance (added 11/4/2019)
2.17.1 Private Event Venue License – Initial Application $200
2.17.2 Private Event Venue License – Renewal Application $100
2.17.3 Cost for public notices and mailings At Cost
Town of Hampden, Maine
Fees Ordinance
Dec. 4, 2019
12
ARTICLE 3
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Amended 11-17-03, 4-4-05; 4-23-12; 12-1-14
3.1. DELETED (Amended 12-1-14)
3.2. Report Copies $10.00
3.3. DELETED (Amended 12-1-14)
3.4. Fee for pumping: 1 time emergency Free
3.5. DELETED (Amended 12-1-14)
3.6. Advanced Life Support 1 Rates (Amended 4-23-12)
3.6.1. ALS 1 Base Rate $685.00
3.6.2. ALS 2 Base Rate $885.00
3.6.3. ALS Non-Emergency Rate $475.00
3.6.4. ALS Mileage $ 17.00
3.6.5. ALS Backup Fee $200.00
3.7. Basic Life Support Rates (Amended 4-23-12; 12-1-14)
3.7.1. BLS Base Rate $550.00
3.7.2. BLS Non-Emergency Rate $450.00
3.7.3. DELETED (Amended 12-1-14)
3.7.4. BLS Mileage $ 17.00
3.8. Ambulance Stand-by fee for special events As determined by the Collective
(Amended 4-23-12; 12-1-14) (Amended 11/04/2019) Bargaining Unit 1
3.9. DELETED (Amended 12-1-14)
___________________________________
1 Rate includes the cost of all employee benefits
Town of Hampden, Maine
Fees Ordinance
Dec. 4, 2019
13
ARTICLE 4
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Amended 11-17-03; 12-1-14
4.1. Report Copies (accident or criminal) $10.00 for the first page
plus .25 per page
thereafter
4.2. Special Detail (Dances, games, guard duty, etc.) (Amended 12-1-14)
(Amended 11/04/2019) $As determined by the
Collective Bargaining Unit 1
4.3. Concealed Weapons (Hand Gun) Permit
4.3.1. First Permit - State Maximum $35.00
4.3.2. Renewal $20.00
4.4. DELETED (Amended 12-1-14)
__________________________________
1 Rate includes the cost of all employee benefits
Town of Hampden, Maine
Fees Ordinance
Dec. 4, 2019
14
ARTICLE 5
PUBLIC WORKS
Amended 11-17-03, 4-19-16
5.1. Additional Fees
5.1.1. Public Works Dept. Labor After 3:00 PM $200.00 per person (up to 4
hours); $50.00 per person per
hour for every hour above 4.
5.1.2. Street Opening/Utility Connection Permit $50.00
5.1.3. Sewer Connection Determined based on proposed
use and flow in accordance with
Sewer Connection Fee
Calculation Worksheet and
Sewer Connection Fee
Schedule.
5.2. Solid Waste Fees
5.2.1. (DELETED 11/6/17) Refer to Article 2
5.2.2. (DELETED 11/6/17) Refer to Article 2
5.2.3. (DELETED 11/6/17) Refer to Article 2
5.2.4. Resident Transfer Station Decal $10.00
5.2.5. Replacement of lost Transfer Station Decal $5.00
(Amended 5/15/17)
5.2.6. Resident Demo/Transfer Station Decal $100.00
(Amended 11/04/2019)
Town of Hampden, Maine
Fees Ordinance
Dec. 4, 2019
15
ARTICLE 6
RECREATION
Amended 11-17-03, 4-22-14
6.1. Recreation Fee Waiver Policy: Any person interested in any Hampden Recreation program that
feels they do not have the financial means to afford the full fee shall receive a waiver at the sole
discretion of the Recreation Director. Full or partial fee waivers may be given as determined by
financial need and the recreation program for which the waiver is requested.
6.2. Program Fees:
6.2.1. Kids Kamp (full week) (Amended 2-21-17) $140.00-$160.00
6.2.2. Kids Korner AM Program (day) (Amended 2-21-17) $ 8.00-$11.00
6.2.3. Kids Korner PM Program (day) (Amended 2-21-17) $12.00-$15.00
6.2.4. Kids Korner Half Day Program (12-6 PM) (day) $25.00-$30.00
6.2.5. Kids Korner Full Day Program (7 AM-6 PM) (day) $40.00-$45.00
6.2.6. Team Sport-Resident (depend on session length) $35.00-$40.00
6.2.7. Team Sport-Non Resident (depend on session length) $40.00-$45.00
6.7.8. Program Registration Late Fee (per person, per program) $10.00
6.3. Skehan Recreation Center Fees:
(all requests are subject to availability and require advance written reservation contract and payment)
6.3.1. Gymnasium Rental-1/2 Gym (Amended 2-21-17) $25.00-$40.00/hour
6.3.2. Gymnasium Rental-Full Gym (Amended 2-21-17) $50.00-$75.00/hour
6.3.3. Allen Fitness Room Rental (Amended 2-21-17) $25.00-$40.00/hour
6.3.4. Interior Classroom Rental (Amended 2-21-17) $25.00-$40.00/hour
6.3.5. Gymnasium Rental Full Day negotiated at contract
6.3.6. Allen Fitness Room Rental Full Day negotiated at contract
6.3.7. Interior Classroom Rental Full Day negotiated at contract
6.3.8. Affiliated Program Rental 1/2 Gym negotiated at contract
6.3.9. Affiliated Program Rental Full Gym negotiated at contract
6.3.10. Gymnasium Rental-Multi Day/Multi Week negotiated at contract
6.3.11. Private Party Rental (Amended 2-21-17) $100.00-$150.00
2 hours full gym includes classroom for any food consumed
6.4. RESERVED Outdoor Play Field/Space Rental Fees: Ball Field or Soccer Field
(all requests are subject to availability and require advance written reservation contract and payment)
6.4.1. Single Field/Single Game-Resident $25.00
6.4.2. Single Field/Full Day-Resident $50.00
6.4.3. Single Field-Multi Day/Multi Week-Resident negotiated at contract
6.4.4. Affiliated Program Rental negotiated at contract
6.4.5. Single Field/Single Game-Non Resident $50.00
6.4.6. Single Field/Full Day- Non Resident $100.00
6.4.7. Single Field-Multi Day/Multi Week-Non Res. negotiated at contract
6.4.8. Single Field-Light Use $15.00 per event
Town of Hampden, Maine
Fees Ordinance
Dec. 4, 2019
16
ARTICLE 7
LIBRARY
Amended 11-17-03, 1-19-10; 4-23-12
7.1. Library Fees
7.1.1. Resident Annual Fee Free
7.1.2. Non-Resident Annual Fee $35.00/year
7.1.3. Overdue Fees
7.1.3.1. Books and Periodicals $0.10/day
7.1.3.2. Audio or Video $0.10/day
7.1.3.3. Maximum Overdue Fee $3.00/item
7.2 Self-service Photocopies (Amended 4/23/12) $0.25/page
7.3 Self-service Printer Pages (Amended 4/23/12) $0.25/page
7.4 Self-service Sending of Faxes (Added 4/23/12)
7.4.1. Within United States $1.00/page
7.4.2. International $2.00/page
7.5 Receiving of Faxes (Added 4/23/12) Not Allowed
7.6 Meeting Room Use (Added 10/15/2018)
7.6.1 Non-profit organizations during business hours No Charge
7.6.2 For-profit organizations during business hours $50.00/up to three hours
7.6.3 Any use outside of business hours $50.00/hour
Town of Hampden, Maine
Fees Ordinance
Dec. 4, 2019
17
ARTICLE 8
POOL
Amended 11-17-03, 4-4-05, 10-6-08, 9-19-11, 11-27-12, 9-2-14, 4-19-16
8.1. Susan G. Abraham Memorial Endowed Scholarship provides the opportunity to learn to swim
(see 8.9 & 8.10) to those who could not otherwise afford it. The scholarship is based on
individual assessment of financial need and recipient must be resident of RSU #22 District.
(Amended 9/19/2011; 9/2/2014)
8.2. Annual Resident Membership Fees: (Amended 9/2/2014) (Amended 11/6/17)
8.2.1. Family $276.00
8.2.2. Single Adult $168.00
8.2.3. Youth/Teen $130.00
8.2.4. Senior $157.00
8.3. Six Month Resident Membership Fees: (Amended 9/2/2014; 4/19/16) (Amended 11/6/17)
8.3.1. Family $173.00
8.3.2. Single Adult $106.00
8.3.3. Youth/Teen $ 83.00
8.3.4. Senior $101.00
8.4. Three Month Resident Membership Fees: (Amended 9/2/2014; 4/19/16) (Amended 11/6/17)
8.4.1. Family $106.00
8.4.2. Single Adult $ 67.00
8.4.3. Youth/Teen $ 57.00
8.4.4. Senior $ 62.00
8.5. Annual Non-Resident Membership Fees: (Amended 9/2/2014) (Amended 11/6/17)
8.5.1. Family $309.00
8.5.2. Single Adult $198.00
8.5.3. Youth/Teen $160.00
8.5.4. Senior $188.00
8.6. Six Month Non-Resident Membership Fees: (Amended 9/2/2014; 4/19/16) (Amended 11/6/17)
8.6.1. Family $193.00
8.6.2. Single Adult $125.00
8.6.3. Youth/Teen $103.00
8.6.4. Senior $119.00
8.7. Three Month Non- Resident Membership Fees: (Amended 9/2/2014; 4/19/16) (Amended 11/6/17)
8.7.1. Family $119.00
8.7.2. Single Adult $ 80.00
8.7.3. Youth/Teen $ 68.00
8.7.4. Senior $ 74.00
8.8. Daily Swim Fee for non-members (Amended 9/19/2011; 9/2/2014) (Amended 11/6/17)
8.8.1. Single Swim - Resident $ 5.00
8.8.2. Single Swim – Non-Resident $ 6.00
8.8.3. Resident 12 Use Punch Card $ 48.00
8.8.4. Non-Resident 12 Use Punch Card $ 60.00
Town of Hampden, Maine
Fees Ordinance
Dec. 4, 2019
18
8.9. Resident Swim Lessons (Amended 9/19/2011; 9/2/2014) (Amended 11/6/17)
8.9.1. Members $5.00 per class
8.9.2. Non-Members $6.50 per class
8.10. Non-Resident Swim Lessons (Amended 9/19/2011; 9/2/2014; 4/19/16) (Amended 11/6/17)
8.10.1. Members $7.00 per class
8.10.2. Non-Members $9.00 per class
8.11. Private Swim Lessons (Amended 9/19/2011) (Amended 11/6/17)
8.11.1 Resident Member (Amended 11/04/2019) $16.00 per person, per class
8.11.2. Resident Non-member (Amended 11/04/2019) $21.00 per person, per class
8.11.3 Non-resident Member (Amended 11/04/2019) $21.00 per person, per class
8.11.4 Non-resident Non-member (Amended 11/04/2019) $26.00 per person, per class
8.12. Deleted November 27, 2012
8.13. Deleted November 27, 2012
8.14. Adult Aqua Fitness: (Amended 4/19/16) (Amended 11/6/17)
8.14.1. Residents $5.00/class
8.14.2. Non-Residents $6.00/class
8.15. Gentle Aerobics (deleted 9/19/2011)
8.16. Pool Party Package (Limited Availability): (Amended 9/19/2011; 9/2/2014; 4/19/16)
(Amended 11/6/17)
8.16.1. Resident Pool/Lounge Rental (up to 50 total guests) $100.00/hour
8.16.2. (DELETED 11/6/17)
8.16.3. Non-Resident Pool/Lounge Rental (up to 50 total guests) $125.00/hour
8.16.4. (DELETED 11/6/17)
8.16.5. (DELETED 11/6/17)
Note: Pool Party Package payments due in full at time of rental. Payments may be made online
or in person, and may be paid by cash, check or credit card.
8.17. Swim Diaper $1.00
ARTICLE 9
ANNUAL REVIEW BY TOWN COUNCIL
9.1 An itemized listing of fees for each town department will be submitted to the Town Council by
the Town Manager on or before October of each year for the Council’s review, revision, and
approval.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Fees Ordinance
19
Appendix A: Town of Hampden
Sewer Connection Fee Calculation Worksheet
Date: ______________________
Sewer Connection Location: ________________________
Address: ________________________________________
Contractor Name & Address
Name: _________________________________________ Paid:
Address: ________________________________________ Check Number:
________________________________________ Eng Receipt:
Phone: ________________________________________ Date:
Owner Name & Address
Name: _________________________________________
Address: ________________________________________
_________________________________________
Phone: _________________________________________
Property Use: If applicable
Food Service Provided Y N
Grease Interceptor Y N
Oil/Sand Separator Y N
Area 1: gpd/unit $/gpd Fee Category
Square feet 1.06 $
Units 1.06 $
Seats 1.06 $
Beds 1.06 $
Other 1.06 $
Area 2: gpd/unit $/gpd Fee
Square Feet 1.06 $
Units 1.06 $
Seats 1.06 $
Beds 1.06 $
Other 1.06 $
Area 3: gpd/unit $/gpd Fee
Square Feet 1.06 $
Units 1.06 $
Seats 1.06 $
Beds 1.06 $
Other 1.06 $
Total Connection Fee: $____________
(minimum Fee for Sewer Connection $50.00)
Town of Hampden, Maine
Fees Ordinance
20
Appendix B: Town of Hampden
Sewer Connection Fee Schedule
Amusement Park Determined by Public Works Director
Apartment Building 185 gpd/unit
Auto Body Shop 0.05 gpd/ft²
Auto Sales Garage 0.05 gpd/ft²
Bakery 0.15 gpd/ft²
Bank 0.1 gpd/ft²
Barber Shop 0.35 gpd/ft²
Beauty Salon 0.75 gpd/ft²
Boarding House 50 gpd/bed
Bowling Alley 75 gpd/lane
Car Wash Determined by Public Works Director
Church (sanctuary) 185 gpd
Day Care 10 gpd/child
Dry Cleaners 0.15 gpd/ft²
Duplex, any Combination 270 gpd/unit
Fast Food Restaurant (no table service) 20 gpd/seat
Funeral Home 0.05 gpd/ft²
Government Building 0.1 gpd/ft²
Health Club 0.15 gpd/ft²
Hospitals 150 gpd/bed
Hotels/Motels 100 gpd/unit
Industrial (process flow) Determined by Public Works Director
Laundry 2.0 gpd/20lb machine
Lodge 0.25 gpd/ft²
Medical/Dental 0.15 gpd/ft²
Mobile Homes 270 gpd
Nursing 100 gpd/bed
Offices 0.06 gpd/ft²
Restaurant 35 gpd/seat
Retail 0.05 gpd/ft²
Retirement 120 gpd/unit
Schools 10 gpd/student
Senior Housing Facility 65 gpd/island
Single Family Homes 270 gpd
Supermarket 0.05 gpd/ft²
Taverns, Bars, Lounges 0.09 gpd/ft²
Theater 3 gpd/seat
Train/Bus Stations 0.075 gpd/ft²
Utilities 0.01 gpd/ft²
Veterinarians 0.65 gpd/ft²
Warehouse 0.05 gpd/ft²


Town of Hampden, Maine
Fire Prevention Ordinance
1
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
ADOPTED: Hampden Town Council, April 5, 1993
Effective Date: May 5, 1993
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, June 19, 2006
Effective Date: July 19, 2006
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, March 19, 2007
Effective Date: April 18, 2007
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, April 6, 2015
Effective Date: May 6, 2015
CERTIFIED BY: ___________________________
Town Clerk
Affix Seal
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
CONTENTS
SECTION PAGE
1. FIRE PREVENTION CODE ADOPTED 2
2. AMENDMENTS TO PUBLISHED VERSION 2
3. AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION 2
4. CIVIL PENALTIES 2
5. APPEALS 3
6. EFFECTIVE DATE 3
Town of Hampden, Maine
Fire Prevention Ordinance
2
TOWN OF HAMPDEN
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Sec. 1. Fire Prevention Code Adopted.
In accordance with 30-A M.R.S. Section 3003, as amended, NFPA 1, Uniform Fire Code, of
the National Fire Protection Association, 2006 Edition, as adopted and amended by the State
of Maine by 16-219 C.M.R. ch 3 (effective 9/3/07), be and is hereby adopted as the Fire
Code of the Town of Hampden.
Sec. 2. Amendments to Published Version.
The Uniform Fire Code NFPA 1-2006 Edition is adopted in its published form, as
amended by the State of Maine by 16-219 C.M.R. ch 3 (effective 9/3/07), as if fully set
forth herein except as follows:
Section 1.10 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Sec. 3. Authority Having Jurisdiction.
The authority having jurisdiction in this Code shall be defined as the Town of Hampden
Code Enforcement Officer, Building/Fire Inspector, Public Safety Director or other
person designated by the Public Safety Director or Town Manager.
Sec. 4. Civil Penalties.
a) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the Code, or failing to
comply with any order issued pursuant to any section thereof, shall be guilty of a civil
violation and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a civil penalty. The requirements
of Title 30-A M.R.S. Section 4452 shall apply to the determination of penalties for
violations of this Ordinance. The minimum penalty for a specific violation of this
Ordinance shall be $100 and a maximum of $2,500; provided, however, the maximum
penalty may exceed $2,500, but shall not exceed $25,000, when it can be shown that
there has been a previous conviction of the same party within the past two (2) years for
violation of the same ordinance provision. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense. All penalties shall inure to the benefit of the Town of Hampden.
b) The imposition of the penalties herein described, shall not prevent the legal officer of the
Town from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain,
correct, or abate a violation; or prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises; or stop an illegal act, conduct of business or use of a building or structure in or
about any premises.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Fire Prevention Ordinance
3
Sec. 5. Appeals
a) Except as expressly provided in this Ordinance, all appeals shall be subject to the
provisions of the Town of Hampden Board of Appeals Ordinance, including but not
limited to filing deadlines, application requirements, fees and appeal procedures. Any
aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Appeals from a decision of
the authority having jurisdiction. This right of appeal does not include the right to appeal
enforcement decsions. Any appeal shall be commenced on a form provided by the
authority having jurisdiction.
b) The Board of Appeals may modify or reverse the decision of the authority having
jurisdiction upon making a determination that: (1) the true intent of this Code or the rules,
regulations, or ordinances adopted by the Town have been incorrectly interpreted, (2) the
provisions of this Code do not fully apply, or (3) an equally good or better method of
providing for fire prevention can be used. The Board of Appeals may only modify or
reverse the decision of the authority having jurisdiction upon a concurring vote of at least
four members.
Sec 6. Effective Date.
In accordance with Section 213 of the Town Charter, this Ordinance shall become
effective at the expiration of thirty (30) days after the date of adoption by the Town
Council.

















































































Town of Hampden, Maine
Harbor Ordinance
1
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
HARBOR ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I BOUNDARIES AND JURISDICTION 2
ARTICLE II HARBOR MASTER 2
ARTICLE III CHANNELS 2
ARTICLE IV FLOATS 2
ARTICLE V LAUNCHING RAMPS 3
ARTICLE VI MOORINGS 3
ARTICLE VII GENERAL REGULATIONS 4
ARTICLE VIII NUISANCE AND POLLUTION 5
ADOPTED: Hampden Town Council: August 20, 1984
Effective date: September 19, 1984
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council April 20, 1992
Effective: May 20, 1992
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council November 17, 2003
Effective: December 17, 2003
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council October 1, 2018
Effective October 31, 2018
Town of Hampden, Maine
Harbor Ordinance
2
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
HARBOR ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I
BOUNDARIES AND JURISDICTION
The rules and regulations contained herein shall govern water recreation, navigation, and all boating
activities on the Penobscot River and its estuarine tributaries, extending from the Bangor City Line to the
Winterport Town Line, to the thread of the river channel. The Hampden Marina area shall include that area
on Turtle Head extending from the property line between land now or formerly owned by the City of Bangor
and land now or formerly owned by the Lane Construction Corporation, southwest to a point 100 feet
downriver from Turtle Head Point, extending to the thread of the river; also including Turtle Head Cove,
from Turtle Head to the head of tide.
ARTICLE II
HARBOR MASTER
The Harbor Master shall be appointed annually by the Town Council and shall have the authority to enforce
the rules and regulations of the Statutes of the State of Maine relating to the operation of vessels, as
contained in Title 38 M.R.S.A., Chapter 1; and also shall have the authority to enforce applicable land use
laws and ordinances as may be applicable, as contained in Title 30-A M.R.S.A., Chapter 187: §4452; other
rules and regulations as contained herein. (Amended 10-01-2018)
ARTICLE III
CHANNELS
The main channel at the Hampden Marina shall extend in a southerly direction from the boat launching
ramps approximately 400 feet to the main channel of the Penobscot River, to be marked by buoys from
May 15th to October 15th of each year. The channel shall be kept clear for the passage of boats to the public
landing float and the boat launching ramps. (Amended 10-01-2018)
There shall be no anchoring allowed within 100 feet of the channel lines, and tenders or dinghies shall not
be allowed to encroach into the area of the channel outlined by the channel buoys.
ARTICLE IV
LAUNCHING RAMPS
The Harbor Master shall have jurisdiction over the public boat launching ramps. Boats and cradles shall
not be left on the ramps at any time. Vehicles, trailers, and boats shall be parked or stored in designated
areas only. No vehicles or boats shall be left unattended on the approach to the launch ramps.
No unattended tie-up of boats to the grounding floats will be allowed, nor will boats be allowed to tie up in
any manner so as to interfere with the launching or retrieval of boats on the launch ramps. Any violation
shall be fined for each violation in the sum of not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00 to be recovered
on complaint by the Harbor Master before District Court. Each day shall be considered a separate violation.
(Amended 10-01-2018)
Town of Hampden, Maine
Harbor Ordinance
3
ARTICLE V
MOORINGS
A mooring area shall be established on the upriver side of the entrance channel to the boat launch ramps,
extending upriver to an extension of the property line between land now or formerly owned by the City of
Bangor and now or formerly owned by the Lane Construction Corporation. The maximum offshore
distance for mooring shall be 350 feet from the mean highwater line.
Installation of private moorings will be subject to the approval of the Harbor Master upon payment of an
annual fee in accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance. (Amended: 11-17-03)
Said moorings shall be placed only in the precise areas designated by the Harbor Master. Residents of the
Town of Hampden and the City of Bangor will be given priority with regard to the placement of private
moorings. (Amended 4/20/92)
The Harbor Master shall register all moorings with the following information:
1. Name and address of the owner, and number of the vessel.
2. Location of the mooring.
3. Size and type of the mooring and chain.
All moorings shall be registered at the Town Office each year before May 1st. Each private mooring shall
be assigned a number, which shall be displayed on the buoy in permanent letters at least 2½ inches high.
The maximum mooring scope from staple to bit shall be forty feet. The minimum mooring weight shall be
one ton for stone or other bulk moorings, or the equivalent for swing-around moorings. The minimum
bottom chain size shall be 3/8 inch. In addition to the foregoing specifications for moorings, the Harbor
Master may enforce additional written specifications, to be conveniently available to the public upon
request. (Amended: 4-20-92)
No changes in the location of moorings will be allowed without the approval of the Harbor Master.
Moorings not registered by May 1st of each year shall become the property of the Town. Ownerships of
private moorings are not transferable without the written permission of the Harbor Master. Moorings shall
be inspected at least once every five years at the owner’s expense, either by pulling or by underwater
investigation. If, upon inspection, the mooring is considered by the Harbor Master to be unsafe, then it
shall be repaired or replaced within a period of ten days at the expense of the owner.
Whoever violates any of the above conditions pertaining to moorings shall be liable upon complaint of the
Harbor Master in the District Court for a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00. Whoever
willfully destroys any channel marker or buoy shall be liable upon complaint of the Harbor Master for a
fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $200.00
The anchoring of boats will not be allowed within the limits of the entrance channel or the mooring area.
All boats shall be anchored downriver from the mooring area. The lower limit of anchored area shall be
100 feet downriver from Turtle Head. (Amended: 4-20-92)
Whoever anchors a boat in an improper location or manner shall be liable upon complaint of the Harbor
Master in District Court for a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00. (Amended 10-01-2018)
Town of Hampden, Maine
Harbor Ordinance
4
ARTICLE VI
GENERAL REGULATIONS
Any use of the public facilities mentioned above, i.e., public floats, boat launching ramps, parking areas,
moorings and ground floats shall be at the user’s risk, and the Town of Hampden will not be liable for any
damage or injury resulting from the use of said facilities. Boats and/or trailers will not be stored on the
premises within the parking area for more than twenty-four (24) hours without the permission of the Harbor
Master. (Amended: 4-20-92)
Swimming and or wading in or around the boat launch area is not permitted. All children under the age of
12 shall wear a life preserver at all times while on the floating dock. Dogs are allowed on the beach south
of the launch ramp provided that they are under the owners control but are not allowed on the boat launch
ramp. (Amended 10-01-2018)
The Harbor Master shall be responsible for carrying out the provisions of this Ordinance as well as the
provisions of Title 38 M.R.S.A., Chapter 1. He/she shall keep a log of all activities within the harbor area
and shall collect all fees as hereinafter established to be turned over daily to the Town Clerk. The Harbor
Master shall be subject to the authority and direction of the Town Manager.
ARTICLE VII
NUISANCE AND POLLUTION
No watercraft shall be used or operated within the harbor area so as to cause danger, annoyance, disturbance
or inconvenience to the public. Motorboats without suitable mufflers will be prohibited.
All watercraft operating within the Hampden Marina limits shall maintain a speed of not more than five
knots.
No person or vessel shall dump or dispose of any refuse or garbage upon the shore of the Penobscot Rover
of its tributaries, or upon the waters of the river. No vessel shall deposit, throw, sweep or cause to be
deposited or swept into the waters of the Penobscot River or its tributaries any gasoline, oil, fuel or sewage,
or any floating objects which may cause obstruction or danger to navigation.
Any master or owner of any vessel or boat, or any other person who shall violate any of the provisions of
any rules or regulation contained herein to which a specific penalty is not annexed or otherwise provided
by law, shall forfeit and pay a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00, to be recovered upon
complaint by the Harbor Master before District Court. (Amended 10-01-2018)









Town of Hampden, Maine
Life Safety Code Ordinance
1
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
LIFE SAFETY CODE ORDINANCE
ADOPTED: Hampden Town Council, April 5, 1993
Effective Date: May 5, 1993
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, February 12, 2001
Effective Date: March 14, 2001
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, October 3, 2005
Effective Date: November 2, 2005
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, June 19, 2006
Effective Date: July 19, 2006
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, April 6, 2015
Effective Date: May 6, 2015
CERTIFIED BY: _________________________________
Denise Hodsdon
Town Clerk
Affix Seal
LIFE SAFETY CODE ORDINANCE
CONTENTS
SECTION PAGE
1 LIFE SAFETY CODE ADOPTED 2
2 DEFINITIONS FOR THE LIFE SAFETY CODE. 2
3. AMENDMENTS TO THE LIFE SAFETY CODE. 2
4. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 2
5. CIVIL PENALTIES 4
6. APPEALS 4
7. EFFECTIVE DATE 5
Town of Hampden, Maine
Life Safety Code Ordinance
2
TOWN OF HAMPDEN
LIFE SAFETY CODE
Section 1. Life Safety Code Adopted.
In accordance with 30-A, M.R.S.A., Section 3003, the Town of Hampden hereby ordains that
NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 2009 Edition, published by the National Fire Protection
Association, Inc., as adopted and amended by the State of Maine by 16-220 C.M.R. ch 20
(effective 7/27/11), be and is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference for the purpose of
establishing minimum requirements to provide a reasonable degree of safety from fire and other
emergencies in new and existing buildings and structures.
Section 2. Definitions for the Life Safety Code.
2.1. The term "authority having jurisdiction" used in the Life Safety Code and this ordinance
shall mean the Town of Hampden Building/Fire Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, Public
Safety Director or other person designated by the Public Safety Director or Town Manager.
2.2. The term "legal counsel" used in the Life Safety Code shall mean the Town Attorney.
Section 3. Amendments to the Life Safety Code.
3.1. The NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 2009 Edition is adopted in its published form, as amended
by the State of Maine by 16-220 C.M.R. ch 20 (effective 7/27/11), as if fully set forth herein
except as follows:
i. Provisions of the Life Safety Code shall not apply to one- and two-family
dwellings existing prior to adoption of this amendment, unless the dwellings are
being used for a purpose which requires a State of Maine License.
Section 4. Administration and Enforcement.
4.1 It shall be the duty and responsibility of the authority having jurisdiction to enforce the
provisions of the Life Safety Code as herein set forth. The designated enforcement officer of this
code is herein referred to as the authority having jurisdiction.
4.2. The authority having jurisdiction shall have the legal authority to inspect all structures and
premises, except existing owner occupied single family dwellings, for the purpose of
ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions that endanger life from fire, smoke,
fumes, panic or any violations of the provisions or intent of this Code, or any other ordinance
affecting fire and life safety.
4.3. In cases where new construction or change of use of an existing building is proposed, the
authority having jurisdiction shall require plans prepared and certified by a registered State of
Maine Architect or registered State of Maine Professional Engineer, be submitted to the Office
of State Fire Marshal for review. Once reviewed by the Office of State Fire Marshal the
Town of Hampden, Maine
Life Safety Code Ordinance
3
applicant shall submit a copy of said plans bearing the stamp of the Office of State Fire Marshal
with application for either a building permit or certificate of compliance. The requirements of
this section shall not pertain to one- and two-family dwellings.
4.4. Whenever necessary for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Code, or whenever
the authority having jurisdiction has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure
or premises unsafe conditions, the authority having jurisdiction shall be permitted to enter such
structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed
upon the authority having jurisdiction by this Code; provided that if such structure or premises
be occupied, the authority having jurisdiction shall first present proper credentials and request
entry. If such entry is refused, the authority having jurisdiction shall have recourse to every
remedy provided by law to secure entry.
4.5. The authority having jurisdication, duly authorized representative or employee charged with
enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable
personally and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damages to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties. Any suit
instituted against any employee because of an act performed in the lawful discharge of duties and
under the provisions of this Code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction
until the final termination of the proceedings. The authority having jurisdiction or any
subordinates of the authority having jurisdiction shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit or
proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code; any employee acting in
good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its
provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of the official duties in
connection therewith.
4.6. The authority having jurisdiction, and the Town of Hampden, shall not be liable under this
Code for damage to persons or property, by reason of the inspection or reinspection of buildings,
structures or equipment authorized herein, or failure to inspect or reinspect such buildings,
structures or equipment by reason of the approval or disapproval of any building, structure or
equipment authorized herein.
4.7. The Municipal Officers shall have the authority as necessary in the interest of public safety,
health and the general welfare to promulgate rules and regulation, to interpret and implement the
provisions of this Code, to secure the intent thereof and to designate requirements applicable
because of climatic or other conditions. Such rules shall not have the effect of waiving any life
safety requirements specifically provided in this Code, or violating accepted engineering practice
involving public safety.
4.8. Whenever the authority having jurisdiction observes an apparent or actual violation of a
provision of this Code or other codes or ordinances under the authority having jurisdiction, the
authority having jurisdiction shall prepare written notice of violation describing the condition
deemed unsafe and specifying time limits for the required repairs or improvements to be made to
render the building, structure or premises safe and secure. The written notice of violation of this
Code shall be served upon the owner, a duly authorized agent, or upon the occupant or other
party responsible for the conditions under violation. Such notice of violations shall be served
Town of Hampden, Maine
Life Safety Code Ordinance
4
either by delivering a copy of same to such person or persons by ordinary mail to the last known
post office address, delivery to a person in charge of the premises, or by posting a copy of the
notice in a conspicuous place at the entrance door or avenue of access; and such procedure shall
be deemed the equivalent of personal notice.
4.9. If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time specified by the authority
having jurisdiction, the authority having jurisdiction shall request the legal counsel of the
jurisdiction to institute the appropriate legal proceedings to restrain, correct or abate such
violation or to require removal or termination of the unlawful use of the building or structure in
violation of the provisions of this Code or any of order or direction made pursuant thereto.
Section 5. Civil Penalties.
5.1. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the Code, or failing to
comply with any order issued pursuant to any section thereof, shall be guilty of a civil violation
and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine. The requirements of 30-A, M.R.S.A.,
Section 4452 shall apply to the determination of penalties for violations of this Ordinance. The
minimum penalty for a specific violation of this Ordinance shall be $100 and a maximum of
$2,500; provided, however, the maximum penalty may exceed $2,500, but shall not exceed
$25,000, when it can be shown that there has been a previous conviction of the same party within
the past two (2) years for violation of the same ordinance provision. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense. All penalties shall inure to the benefit of the Town of Hampden.
5.2. The imposition of the penalties herein described, shall not prevent the legal officer of the
jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain,
correct, or abate a violation; or prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises; or
stop an illegal act, conduct of business or use of a building or structure in or about any premises.
Section 6. Appeals.
6.1. Except as expressly provided in this Ordinance, all appeals shall be subject to the provisions
of the Town of Hampden Board of Appeals Ordinance including but not limited to filing
deadlines, application requirements, fees, appeal procedures. Any aggrieved person shall have
the right to appeal to the Board of Appeals from a decision of the authority having jurisdiction.
The right of appeal does not include the right to appeal enforcement decisions. Any appeal shall
be commenced on a form provided by the authority having jurisdiction.
6.2. The Board of Appeals may modify or reverse the decision of the authority having
jurisdiction upon making a determination that: (1) the true intent of this Code or the rules,
regulations, or ordinances adopted by the Town have been incorrectly interpreted, (2) the
provisions of this Code do not fully apply, or (3) an equally good or better method of providing
for life safety can be used.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Life Safety Code Ordinance
5
Section 7. Effective Date.
In accordance with Section 213 of the Town Charter, this Ordinance shall become effective at
the expiration of thirty (30) days after the date of adoption by the Town Council.







TOWN OF HAMPDEN
IN THE TOWN COUNCIL
Adoption: December 7, 2015
MAILBOX POLICY FOR THE TOWN OF HAMPDEN
ORDERED, that the Town Council hereby approves a Mailbox Policy for mailbox
installations within the right-of-way of Hampden’s public streets.
For convenience and practicality, mailbox installations are allowed within the right-ofway
of Maine’s public highways; however such installations have two conditions:
1) The mailbox must be installed in accordance with applicable standards (See
Attachment) to ensure that mail can be delivered and that the mailbox does
not create an obstacle or safety hazard to those that use or maintain the
highway, and
2) The mailbox is installed entirely at the owner’s risk. In other words, if the
mailbox incurs damage during any sort of highway operations or
maintenance, the property owner is not entitled to replacement or
compensation. In fact, if the mailbox was not installed in accordance with the
applicable standards as stated above, the owner may be held liable for
injuries or damages that may have been incurred as a result.
Mailbox design and installation standards are available from several sources, and
mailbox owners are expected to consult this information prior to undertaking any
mailbox installation or replacement. The following standards have nationwide relevance
and were developed in cooperation with one another:
• The United States Postal Service (USPS) Mailbox Guidelines. The USPS
defines the standards for mailbox construction, as well as the placement
tolerance that must be met to accommodate postal operations. Specifics may
be obtained from your local post office or online at:
https://www.usps.com/manage/mailboxes.htm
• American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
(AASHTO) Roadside Design Guide. The AASHTO Roadside Design Guide,
Chapter 11: Erecting Mailboxes on Streets and Highways deals with the
safety and construction of privately owned mailboxes, mailbox supports, and
mailbox turnout designs and is less focused on postal operations. This
publication may be obtained online through the AASHTO Bookstore at:
https://bookstore.transportation.org/Item_details.aspx?id=1807
David I. Ryder (Mayor, Dist. 4)
Stephen L. Wilde (1)
Dennis R. Marble (2)
Terry McAvoy (3)
William W. Shakespeare (A/L)
Gregory J. Sirois (A/L)

Attachment to Town of Hampden Mailbox Policy:
Mailbox Installation Standards
General Location:
Whenever possible, mailboxes should be located after your driveway opening.
This location placement improves visibility, minimizes the amount of snow that comes
off of the snow plow, and improves the approach for the mail carrier. The diagram
below further clarifies this preferred placement:
Mailbox Support Design:
It is best to use an extended arm type of
post with a free-swinging suspended mailbox.
This allows snowplows to sweep near or under
boxes without damage to supports and provides
easy access to the boxes by carrier and
customers. The picture to the right shows a freeswinging
suspended mailbox:
Offset:
Mailboxes should be set back from the edge of the shoulder – regardless of
whether the shoulder is gravel or paved. In other words, the face of the mailbox should
be at least one foot (1’) back from the edge of the normally plowed surface of the
highway or the face of curb. Greater offset distances are encouraged whenever
possible to allow the mail carrier to get further out of traffic and to minimize potential
damage to your mailbox. The following picture shows a mailbox with a reasonable
offset:
Height:
According to USPS
standards, a mailbox must be
installed with the bottom of the
mailbox located between 41” and 45”
high above the surface of the
highway shoulder. We recommend
that this height be closer to the 45”
measurement to minimize conflict
with the height of the plow truck wing
when snow is being pushed back
during, or between, winter storms.
The picture to the right further
clarifies the height considerations:
Post Size, Type and Embedment:
Mailbox posts must be sturdy enough to hold up the mailbox in all types of
weather conditions. However they cannot be so rugged that they present a hazard to
vehicles that inadvertently leave the road. If a mailbox support is struck by a vehicle, it
must easily break away. Therefore, the following types of posts are acceptable:
• 4” x 4” wooden posts embedded 2 feet into the ground. Larger wooden posts
may be used only if the post is drilled through with an appropriate spade bit to
create a shear plane that is no higher than 6” above the surface of the
surrounding ground. The number and size of the drilled holes depends upon
what is necessary to bring the cross-section of the larger post down to the
equivalent cross-sectional area of a standard 4” x 4” post. (MaineDOT
Standard Specification 606.06)
• 1” to 2” round diameter steel or aluminum pipe or standard U-channel
post embedded 2 feet into the ground.
• Unacceptable mailbox supports include: anything that is filled with concrete,
masonry and stone structures, heavy steel structures, and most objects that
were intended for other uses (e.g. antique plows, I-beams, and various other
household tools and objects).

Town of Hampden, Maine
Marijuana Ordinance
2 Effective 9/19/2018
Article 4 – Severability.
If any section or provision of this ordinance is declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision will
not invalidate any other section or provision of this ordinance.
Article 5 – Definitions
5.1 Construction Language. In this Ordinance, certain terms or words shall be interpreted as follows:
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or
corporation as well as an individual; the present tense includes the future tense, the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular.
5.2 As used in this ordinance, unless the context indicates otherwise, the following terms have the
following meanings. Terms not specifically listed here which are listed in MRSA Title 28-B
have the meanings provided in those laws. Terms not defined shall have the customary
dictionary meaning in the Merriam-Webster print or online dictionary.
Domicile: A person's fixed, permanent, and principal home.
Property: A parcel or tract of land including all contiguous land in the same ownership, except
that lands located on opposite sides of a public or private road are considered each a separate
tract or parcel of land unless the road was established by the owner of land on both sides of the
road after September 22, 1971.
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
MOBILE HOME PARK ORDINANCE
ENACTED DATE: October 12, 2004
EFFECTIVE DATE: November 12, 2004
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, June 19, 2006
Effective Date, July 19, 2006
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, January 5, 2009
Effective Date, February 4, 2009
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, August 20, 2018
Effective Date, September 19, 2018
CERTIFIED BY: Paula Scott
Name
??a??
Town Cl.erk
Title Affix Seal
ARTICLE
MOBILE HOME PARK ORDINANCE
CONTENTS
Town of Hampden, Maine
Mobile Home Park Ordinance
PAGE
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS_ __· ----------------------------------------·----------·----------·-·------·--·-----------------·2
2. ANNUAL MOBILE HOME PARK LICENSE REQUIRED ______________________________________________ 4
3. MOBILE HOME LOT IDENTIFICATION _______________________________________________________________________ 5
4. MOBILE HOME PARK STRE ET IDENTIFICATION---------------------------------------------------- 6
5. OBLIGATIONS OF PARK OWNERS_ _____________________________________________________________________________ 6
6. OBLIGATIONS OF MOBILE HOME OWNERS OR OCCUPANTS _______________________________ 7
7. RESTRICTIONS ON THE SALE, LEASE, TRANSFER, OCCUPANCY OR
LOCATION OF MOBILE HOMES IN A MOBILE HOME PARK __________________________________ 8
8. SAFETY STANDARDS ___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 9
9. VIOLA TIO NS AND ENFORCEMENT ____________________________________________________________________________ 14
10. APPEALS _________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 14
Effective 9-19-2018
Town of Hampden, Maine
Mobile Home Park Ordinance
2 Effective 9-19-2018
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.1. Title. This Ordinance shall be known as the "Mobile Home Park Ordinance of the Town of
Hampden, Maine," and shall be referred to herein as the "Ordinance."
1.2. Authority. This Ordinance is enacted under the authority granted to the Town by the constitution
and statutes of the State of Maine.
1.3. Purposes. The purposes of this Ordinance are:
1. To promote the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town;
2. To establish standards for mobile homes located in mobile home parks;
3. To establish standards for the maintenance and operation of mobile home parks;
4. To establish standards for the maintenance and occupancy of mobile homes and mobile home lots
located in mobile home parks; and
5. To establish a licensing and enforcement mechanism for mobile home parks.
1.4. Applicability. The provision of this Ordinance shall apply to all mobile home parks, and the mobile
homes located within mobile home parks, as defined by this Ordinance and by Title 30-A M.R.S.A. §
4358, located within the Town of Hampden on or after May 1, 2004.
1.5. Conflict With Other Ordinances. Whenever the requirements of this Ordinance are in conflict with
the requirements of any other rule, regulation, ordinance, or statute, the more restrictive requirement shall
prevail, unless otherwise prohibited by state law or expressly provided for in this Ordinance.
1.6. Definitions. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:
Accessory Structure: A structure of a nature customarily incidental or subordinate to the principal
structure.
Code Enforcement Officer: A person or persons appointed by the Town Manager to administer and
enforce Town Ordinances. The term shall also include Building Inspector, Fire Inspector, Local
Plumbing Inspector and the like, if applicable.
Licensee: The mobile home park owner or the applicant for a mobile home park license.
Mobile Home: Two types of mobile homes are included in this definition:
1. Certified mobile home. Those units constructed after June 15, 1976, which the manufacturer certifies
are constructed in compliance with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
standards, meaning structures transportable in one or more sections, that in the traveling mode are
fourteen (14) body feet or more in width and are seven hundred fifty (750) or more square feet, and
that are built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as dwellings, with or without permanent
foundations, when connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, airconditioning
and electrical systems contained therein. This term shall also include any structure that
meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which
Town of Hampden, Maine
Mobile Home Park Ordinance
3 Effective 9-19-2018
the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban
Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 United States Codes 5401, et seq.
2. Non-certified mobile homes: Those units constructed prior to June 15, 1976, meaning structures,
transportable in one (1) or more sections, which are eight (8) body feet or more in width and are
thirty-two (32) body feet or more in length, and which are built on a permanent chassis and designed
to be used as dwellings, with or without permanent foundations, when connected to the required
utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning or electrical systems contained therein.
Mobile Home Owner: A person having ownership and/or legal control of a mobile home herein after
referred to as home owner.
Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land under unified ownership approved by the Town for the placement
thereon of three or more mobile homes.
Mobile Home Park Lot: The area of land on which an individual mobile home is situated within a mobile
home park and which is reserved for use by the occupants of that mobile home.
Mobile Home Park Owner: A person having ownership and/or legal control of a mobile home park
herein after referred to as Park Owner.
Mobile Home Stand: The part of an individual mobile home lot which has been constructed and reserved
for the placement thereon of a mobile home.
Person: An individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership,
trust or any other form of legal entity recognized under the laws of the State of Maine.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground or
attachment to something located on the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings and mobile homes.
Utility Structure: A structure located on a mobile home lot which is designated and used for the storage
and use of personal property of the mobile home occupants.
1.7. Conversion of Mobile Home Park. No individual mobile home lot in a mobile home park may be
sold or conveyed, unless said lot meets all of the minimum requirements for a lot in the zoning district in
which it is located.
1.8. Administration. It shall be the responsibility of the Code Enforcement Officer to approve, approve
conditionally, or disapprove mobile home park licenses, to issue certificates of compliance where
warranted, to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance, and to carry out the inspections required by this
Ordinance.
1.9. Transition Provisions. All mobile home parks that had a mobile home park license under the
Zoning Ordinance as of April 30, 2004 may continue to operate under said license. Provided, however,
that any such park and the mobile homes contained therein shall be governed by the provisions of this
Ordinance. The owner or operator of a mobile home park shall apply for a license under this Ordinance
by not later than April 1, 2005, and the Park shall be licensed under this Ordinance by not later than
August 1, 2005. Failure to make application within the time specified shall constitute a violation of this
Ordinance. In addition, the continued operation or maintenance of a mobile home park without a license
and/or in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance after August 1, 2005 shall constitute a violation of
Town of Hampden, Maine
Mobile Home Park Ordinance
4 Effective 9-19-2018
this Ordinance. Any non-certified mobile home located in a mobile home park on the date of adoption of
this Ordinance shall be brought into compliance with the requirements of Article 8 by not later than
August 1, 2005.
1.10. Separability. In the event that any provision of this Ordinance is declared to be invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such action shall not be deemed to affect the validity of any other provision of
this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 2
ANNUAL MOBILE HOME PARK LICENSE REQUIRED.
2.1. No person shall establish, operate, or maintain a mobile home park in the Town of Hampden without
first obtaining an annual license issued in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
2.2. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the review of license applications, and shall
approve, approve with conditions, or deny any license application. The applicant has the burden to
demonstrate that the application complies with the provisions of this Ordinance, as well as all applicable
laws, ordinances, statutes, or regulations.
2.3. Each license shall expire on the first day of August next following the date of issuance. Applications
for license renewal shall be submitted no later than the first day of June in order to be acted upon by the
first day of August.
2.4. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections of mobile
home parks and the mobile homes located therein to determine the condition of the parks and mobile
homes in order to safeguard the health and safety of the occupants of mobile home parks. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the park and if the Code Enforcement Officer deems it to be necessary
or appropriate, the individual mobile homes within the park prior to making a decision on a license
application. The Code Enforcement Officer, or a duly authorized representative, shall have the authority
to enter upon any private or public property at reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting and
investigating conditions relating to the administration or enforcement of this Ordinance. Amended: 01-05-2009
2.5. A license application shall be in writing, and shall contain the following:
1. Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. If the applicant is not the mobile home Park
Owner, the applicant must also provide the name and address of the Park Owner, as well as the legal
relationship of the applicant to the Park Owner and documentation evidencing the applicant's legal
authority to operate or maintain the mobile home park.
2. A register containing the record of all mobile home owners and occupants located within the park.
The register shall contain the following information:
1. The name of the owner of each mobile home in the park.
2. The manufacturer's name, model number, year, and serial number of each mobile home.
3. The lot location by number of each mobile home.
4. If not owner-occupied, the names of the occupants of each mobile home.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Mobile Home Park Ordinance
5 Effective 9-19-2018
5. The Park Owner shall keep the register up to date, and available for inspection at all times by law
enforcement officers, emergency services personnel, code enforcement officials, and other
officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register.
3. A mobile home park plan, prepared and / or certified by a professional land surveyor, drawn at a scale
of not less than one inch equals 40 feet, depicting the boundaries of the park, the streets within the
park, the common areas within the park, the mobile home lots within the park, and the location of
each mobile home within the park. For emergency purposes, the lot numbering required by Article 3
shall be shown on the plan.
4. The name of the mobile home park.
5. The license application shall also be accompanied by the application fee established by the Hampden
Fees Ordinance.
6. A park management plan, including a 24 hour contact person, rules of the park, schedule for park
maintenance, trash removal, and road maintenance for the park.
2.6. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a written decision on the application for a mobile home
park license. In order to grant a license, the Code Enforcement Officer must find the following:
1. That the mobile home park is in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, regulations, and has
received all necessary approvals from the Town of Hampden and the State of Maine.
2. Deleted. Amended: 01-05-2009
3. That the Park Owner has complied with the requirements of this Ordinance during the term of the
prior license. Amended: 01-05-2009
2.7. The Code Enforcement Officer may issue a conditional license if the Park Owner enters into a
written agreement with the Town that contains a detailed schedule of compliance setting forth the specific
improvements to the park, mobile home lots, or mobile homes that the Park Owner shall make during the
term of the license. If the Park Owner fails to comply with the provisions of said agreement, said
noncompliance shall be the grounds for revocation, or non-renewal, of the license.
2.8. The Code Enforcement Officer, after notice and a hearing on the matter, may revoke any license to
establish, maintain or operate a mobile home park upon making a finding that the park is not being
operated or maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, or any other applicable law
or ordinance.
ARTICLE 3
MOBILE HOME LOT IDENTIFICATION.
3.1. Each mobile home lot shall have a number supplied by the Park Owner, and the lots shall be
numbered in an orderly, consecutive fashion. Even numbers shall be on one side of the street and odd
numbers shall be on the opposite side of the street.
3.2. Each mobile home shall be numbered in a manner consistent with the number assigned to the lot.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Mobile Home Park Ordinance
6 Effective 9-19-2018
3.3. The mobile home lot number shall be at least three inches high, and the Park Owner shall be
responsible for the placement and maintenance of the numbers on each mobile home in a prominent place
so that they may be readily observable by emergency services personnel.
3.4. The Park Owner shall be responsible for the placement and maintenance of the lot numbers on the
electrical service (i.e., meter junction box) for each mobile home.
ARTICLE 4
MOBILE HOME PARK STREET IDENTIFICATION.
4.1. The Park Owner shall cooperate with the Code Enforcement Officer to establish names for streets
within the mobile home park. Said street names shall be substantially different than existing street names
within the Town of Hampden so as not to be confused in sound or spelling. In general said streets shall
have names not numbers or letters.
4.2. The Park Owner shall erect, and maintain, street name signs at all street intersections, which signs
shall contain lettering that is reflectorized.
ARTICLE 5
OBLIGATIONS OF PARK OWNERS.
5.1. The Park Owner shall provide the occupants of the mobile home park with a copy of this Ordinance,
and inform the occupants of their duties and responsibilities under this Ordinance.
5.2. The Park Owner shall operate the mobile home park, or cause the same to be operated, in
compliance with this Ordinance, and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities,
improvements, and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition, as well as in
compliance with all state and local laws, regulations, or ordinances.
5.3. The Park Owner shall maintain all streets, roadways and driveways in the mobile home park in good
repair, and shall keep the same clear of snow, ice, standing water, and debris. In addition, the streets and
roadways in the mobile home park shall be constructed and maintained so as to comply with the "Fire
Lane" requirements of the Town of Hampden Fire Prevention Code.
5.4. The Park Owner shall maintain the mobile home park in a clean, orderly, safe and sanitary condition
at all times.
5.5. The Park Owner shall remove any abandoned, burned, dilapidated, or abandoned mobile home from
the mobile home park within ten business days of a notice from the Code Enforcement Officer.
5.6. The Park Owner shall not permit the presence or any accumulation of any (1) abandoned,
unregistered or un-inspected motor vehicles, or parts thereof, or (2) discarded, worn-out or junked
plumbing, heating supplies, electronic or industrial equipment; household appliances; furniture;
discarded, scrap or junked lumber; old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber
debris, waste or scrap iron, steel or other scrap ferrous or nonferrous material, or other solid waste or
debris in the mobile home park, whether on the streets or other common areas under the control of the
Park Owner or on the individual mobile home lots.
5.7. The Park Owner shall be responsible for the proper placement of each mobile home on its mobile
home stand, which includes securing its stability and installing all utility connections. Owner shall also
be responsible for the disconnection of all utilities prior to the departure of a mobile home from the park.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Mobile Home Park Ordinance
7 Effective 9-19-2018
5.8. The Park Owner shall conspicuously post a copy of the license in Park Owner’s office or on the
premises of the mobile home park at all times.
5.9. The Park Owner shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer and Tax Assessor, in writing, of the
arrival or impending departure of any mobile home or any change of ownership that occurs within the
park.
5.10. The Park Owner shall make adequate provision for the storage, collection, and lawful disposal of
all refuse from the mobile home park, and shall take adequate measures to prevent the creation of health
hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident hazards, or air, water, or ground pollution. All
refuse and garbage shall be bagged in plastic garbage bags by the homeowner or occupant for storage in
fully and tightly enclosed, watertight, rodent-proof containers, which shall be provided by Owner in
sufficient number and capacity to prevent any refuse or garbage from overflowing. Satisfactory container
racks or holders shall be provided by the Owner and shall be located not more than 150 feet from any
mobile home lot, or the Park Owner shall cooperate with the Code Enforcement Officer to establish
mutually agreed upon locations.
5.11. The Park Owner shall bring all nonconforming non-certified mobile homes into compliance with
the safety standards of Article 8. The Code Enforcement Officer may, as part of a conditional license,
enter into a schedule of compliance with the Owner.
5.12. The Park Owner shall provide adequate supervision to ensure that the mobile home park, mobile
home lot, mobile homes, and the owners or occupants of mobile homes comply with the provisions of this
Ordinance. Owner shall include provisions in rental agreements requiring that individual owners or
occupants of mobile homes shall comply with the provisions of this Ordinance, and Owner shall be
obligated to pursue legal remedies for any breach of those requirements.
5.13. The Park Owner shall cooperate fully with the Code Enforcement Officer in the administration and
enforcement of this Ordinance, including providing assistance in gaining access to mobile homes for the
required inspections.
5.14. The Park Owner shall not assign or transfer the license without the prior approval of the Code
Enforcement Officer. Any assignment or transfer shall be subject to the condition that the transferee
agree in writing to abide by the terms and conditions of the license and this Ordinance.
5.15. The owner(s) of the land on which the mobile home park is located shall be ultimately responsible
for compliance with this Ordinance, and shall remain responsible therefore regardless of the fact that this
Ordinance may also place certain responsibilities on the license holder, or mobile home owners and/or
occupants. This shall be so regardless of any agreements between the owners of the land and the license
holder or owner/occupants of mobile homes as to which parties shall assume such responsibility.
ARTICLE 6
OBLIGATIONS OF MOBILE HOME OWNERS OR OCCUPANTS.
6.1. It shall be the duty of the owners or occupants of mobile homes in a mobile home park to give the
Code Enforcement Officer access to the mobile homes at reasonable times for the purpose of conducting
an inspection thereof to determine satisfactory compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
6.2. The owners or occupants of mobile homes in a mobile home park shall comply with all applicable
requirements of this Ordinance, and shall maintain his/her mobile home, mobile home lot, and any
facilities, improvements, or equipment, in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. The home
Town of Hampden, Maine
Mobile Home Park Ordinance
8 Effective 9-19-2018
owner or occupant shall not cause or permit the presence or accumulation of the items specified in Article
5.6 on his/her mobile home lot, or at any other location within the mobile home park.
6.3. No home owner or occupant shall allow animals in his/her custody to run at large, or commit any
nuisance, within the mobile home park.
6.4. No home owner or occupant shall permit his/her mobile home to be occupied by a greater number of
persons than that for which it was designed.
6.5. The space directly beneath each mobile home shall be kept clean and free from refuse, or other
combustible materials.
6.6. No home owner or occupant shall permit the parking of vehicles or the storage of personal property
so as to interfere with access to the lots or mobile homes in the mobile home park by other owners or
occupants, or especially with access by emergency vehicles or personnel.
6.7. No home owner or occupant shall locate or use a utility structure on his/her lot unless it is located no
closer than 10 feet to any mobile home or other utility structure, and is made of noncombustible materials.
In addition, said structure shall not exceed 150 square feet in area and 10 feet in height.
6.8. No home owner or occupant shall dispose of any garbage or refuse except by first bagging the
garbage or refuse into a plastic garbage bag and the placing them into provided facilities in a clean and
sanitary manner.
6.9. The individual owner of a non-certified mobile home shall be responsible for bringing the mobile
home into compliance with the safety standards set forth in Article 8. The Code Enforcement Officer is
authorized to enter into a schedule of compliance with such a home owner.
ARTICLE 7
RESTRICTIONS ON THE SALE, LEASE, TRANSFER, OCCUPANCY OR LOCATION
OF MOBILE HOMES IN A MOBILE HOME PARK.
7.1. No person may sell, transfer, or otherwise convey a mobile home in a mobile home park without a
prior written determination from the Code Enforcement Officer stating that: (1) the mobile home is a
certified mobile home that is in a good state of repair and is in compliance with all applicable codes,
ordinances, laws or regulations or (2) is a non-certified mobile home that is in a good state of repair and is
in compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances, laws or regulations, including the requirements of
Article 8 of this Ordinance. The provisions hereof shall not apply to a mobile home that is being removed
from the mobile home park.
7.2. No person shall locate, move from one mobile home lot to another mobile home lot, or replace a
mobile home in a mobile home park without a prior written determination from the Code Enforcement
Officer stating that: (1) the mobile home is a certified mobile home that is in a good state of repair and is
in compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances, laws or regulations or (2) is a non-certified mobile
home that is in a good state of repair and is in compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances, laws or
regulations, including the requirements of Article 8 of this Ordinance.
7.3. No person shall permit or allow the occupancy of a mobile home in a mobile home park for dwelling
purposes without a prior Certificate of Compliance from the Code Enforcement Officer stating that: (1)
the mobile home is a certified mobile home that is in a good state of repair and is in compliance with all
applicable codes, ordinances, laws or regulations or (2) is a non-certified mobile home that is in a good
Town of Hampden, Maine
Mobile Home Park Ordinance
9 Effective 9-19-2018
state of repair and is in compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances, laws or regulations, including
the requirements of Article 8 of this Ordinance, and that the mobile home is properly placed on a mobile
home stand and properly connected to water, sewer, and electrical utilities. The Park Owner shall be
responsible for the proper installation of all utility connections, which shall be accomplished by duly
qualified and licensed persons.
7.4. The placement of a mobile home that is not (1) a certified mobile home that is in a good state of
repair and is in compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances, laws or regulations or (2) a non-certified
mobile home that is in a good state of repair and is in compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances,
laws, or regulations, including the requirements of Article 8 of this Ordinance in or near the mobile home
park is strictly prohibited. The area of the mobile home park and any of Park Owner's land in the vicinity
shall not be used as a staging area for the rehabilitation of non-certified mobile homes. The foregoing
shall not preclude the rehabilitation of mobile homes that existed in a park as of the date of adoption of
this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 8
SAFETY STANDARDS.
8.1. The purpose of this Article is to establish minimum standards to attain a condition of safety that will
allow a non-certified mobile home to perform in a manner that will greatly reduce hazards that present an
imminent and unreasonable risk of death or serious personal injury.
8.2. These standards shall apply to all non-certified mobile homes located in mobile home parks. These
standards shall also apply to any non-certified mobile homes being brought into parks.
Amended: 01-05-2009
8.3. Standards.
8.3.1. Light and Ventilation
1. Each habitable room shall be provided with exterior windows and/or doors having a total glazed
area of not less than 8 percent of the gross floor area.
2. Each bathroom and toilet compartment shall be provided with artificial light and, in addition, be
provided with external windows or doors having not less than 1½ square feet of fully operable
glazed area, except where a mechanical ventilation system is provided capable of producing a
change of air every 12 minutes. Any mechanical ventilation system shall exhaust directly to the
outside of the home.
8.3.2. Ceiling Height. Every habitable room shall have a minimum ceiling height of 6 feet and 6
inches.
8.3.3. Exit Facilities – Exterior Doors
1. Homes shall have a minimum of two exterior doors located remote from each other.
2. Required egress doors shall not be located where a lockable interior door must be used in order to
exit.
3. Doors may not be less than 12 feet from each other as measured in any straight line direction
regardless of the length of the travel between doors.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Mobile Home Park Ordinance
10 Effective 9-19-2018
4. One of the required exit doors must be accessible from the doorway of each bedroom without
traveling more than 35 feet.
5. All exterior swinging doors in mobile homes shall provide a minimum door leaf dimension of 28
inches wide by 74 inches high. Notwithstanding this regulation replacement swinging doors that
were installed prior to adoption of this ordinance measuring at least 28 inches in width by 72
inches in height shall not require replacement. All exterior sliding glass doors shall provide a
clear opening of at least 28 inches wide by 72 inches high. Locks shall not require the use of a
key for operation from the inside.
8.3.4. Exit Facilities – Egress Windows and Devices. Every room designed expressly for sleeping
purposes, unless it has an exterior exit door, shall have at least one outside window operable from the
inside without the use of tools and providing a clear opening of not less than 20 inches in width, 24
inches in height and 5.7 square feet in area. The bottom of the opening shall not be more than 44
inches off the floor.
1. Exception. In lieu of this regulation, an approved automatic sprinkler system may be installed in
accordance with NFPA 13D, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-
Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes.
8.3.5. Interior – Doors. Each interior door, when provided with a privacy lock, shall have a privacy
lock that has an emergency release on the outside to permit entry when the lock has been locked by a
locking knob, lever, button or other locking devices on the inside.
8.3.6. Room Requirements
1. Every home shall have sufficient space and functional arrangements to accommodate the normal
activities of living in a manufactured home.
2. Every home shall have at least one common area with no less than 150 square feet of gross floor
area.
3. All bedrooms shall have at least 50 square feet of floor area.
4. Bedrooms designed for two or more people shall have 70 square feet of floor area plus 50 square
feet for each person in excess of two.
5. Deleted. Amended: 01-05-2009
6. Bedrooms shall have an operable door with a latch to separate the room from the common area.
7. Each toilet compartment shall have a minimum of 21 inches of clear space in front of each toilet.
8. Hallways shall have a minimum horizontal dimension of 28 inches measured from interior
finished surface to the opposite finished surface. Minor protrusions by doorknobs, trim, smoke
detectors or light fixtures are permitted.
8.3.7. Fire Detection Equipment All homes, regardless of the date of manufacture, shall meet the
following requirements. At least one smoke detector (which may be a single station alarm device)
shall be installed in the home in the following locations:
Town of Hampden, Maine
Mobile Home Park Ordinance
11 Effective 9-19-2018
1. A smoke detector shall be installed on any wall in the hallway or space communicating with each
bedroom area between the living area and the first bedroom door unless a door separates the
living area from that bedroom area, in which case the detector shall be installed on the living area
side as close to the door as practical. Homes having bedroom areas separated by any one or
combination of communication areas such as kitchen, dining room, living room, or family room
(but not a bathroom or utility room) shall have at least one detector protecting each bedroom area.
2. When located in hallways, the detector shall be between the return air intake and the living area.
3. The smoke detector shall not be placed in a location which impairs its effectiveness.
4. Smoke detectors shall be labeled as conforming with the requirements of Underwriters
Laboratory Standards No. 217, Third Edition, 1985, as amended through October 8, 1985, for
single and multiple station smoke detectors.
5. Each smoke detector shall be installed in accordance with its listing on a wall or ceiling. If
installed on a wall, the top of the detector shall be located 4 inches to 12 inches below the ceiling.
However, when a detector is mounted on an interior wall below a sloping ceiling, it shall be
located 4 inches to 12 inches below the intersection on the connecting exterior wall and the
sloping ceiling (cathedral ceiling). The required detector(s) shall be attached to an electrical
outlet box and the detector connector by permanent wiring method into a general electrical
circuit. There shall be no switches in the circuit to the detector between the overcurrent
protection device protecting the branch circuit and the detector. The smoke detector shall not be
placed on any circuit protected by a ground fault circuit interrupter.
8.3.8. Cooking Unit Separation. No burner of a surface cooking unit shall be closer than 12
horizontal inches to a window or an exterior door.
8.3.9. Kitchen Cabinet Protectors All homes, regardless of the date of manufacture, shall meet the
following requirements.
1. The bottom and sides of combustible kitchen cabinets over cooking ranges to a horizontal
distance of 6 inches from the outside edge of the cooking range shall be protected with at least
5/16 inch thick gypsum board or equivalent limited combustible material. One inch nominal
framing members and trim are exempted from this requirement. The cabinet area over the
cooking range or cooktops shall be protected by a metal hood with not less than a 3 inch eyebrow
projecting horizontally from the front cabinet face. The 5/16 inch thick gypsum board or
equivalent material which is above the top of the hood may be supported by the hood. A 3/8 inch
enclosed air space shall be provided between the bottom surface of the cabinet and the gypsum
board or equivalent material. The hood shall be at least as wide as the cooking range.
2. The metal hood will not be required if there is an oven installed between the cabinet and the
range.
3. Ranges shall have a vertical clearance above the cooking top of not less than 24 inches to the
bottom of combustible cabinets.
8.3.10. Carpeting. Carpeting shall not be used in a space or compartment designed to contain only a
furnace and/or water heater. Carpeting may be used in other areas where a furnace or water heater is
installed, provided that it is not located under the furnace or water heater.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Mobile Home Park Ordinance
12 Effective 9-19-2018
8.3.11. Roof Loads. Prior to construction of an addition or alteration of the roof of a mobile home
design plans bearing the seal of a State of Maine registered professional engineer shall be submitted.
Said plans shall demonstrate that the roof design can withstand any snow loads or wind uplifts that
may occur. Building Inspector shall inspect the roof framing and supporting members prior to
sheathing.
8.3.12. Floors. All floors shall be of a solid construction to protect users of the mobile home from
the hazard of an unsafe floor.
8.3.13. Exterior Coverings. Exterior coverings shall be of moisture and weather resistant materials
to resist wind, snow, sleet, or rain.
8.3.14. Deleted Amended: 01-05-2009
8.3.15. Plumbing Systems. A person holding a master license issued by the State of Maine Plumbers
Examining Board shall inspect and certify that the plumbing system is in conformance with the
requirements of the Maine State Plumbing Code, is safe and verify that the following conditions are
met.
1. The plumbing is of a durable material, free from defective workmanship that would cause a safety
hazard.
2. Water closets are adjusted to use a minimum quantity of water consistent with proper
performance and cleaning.
3. All plumbing, fixtures, drains, appurtenances, and appliances designed or used to receive or
discharge liquid waste or sewage are connected to the drain system in a manner that is consistent
with the State Plumbing Code.
4. All piping and fixtures subject to freezing temperatures shall be insulated or protected to prevent
freezing under normal occupancy. To prevent freezing, a modern technological designed heat
cable should be used.
5. All dishwashing machines shall not be directly connected to any waste piping, but shall discharge
its waste through a fixed air gap installed above the machine.
6. Clothes washing machines shall drain either into a properly vented trap, into a laundry tub
tailpiece with watertight connections, into an open standpipe receptor, or over the rim of a
laundry tub.
7. Toilets shall be designed and manufactured according to approved or listed standards and shall be
equipped with a water flushing device capable of adequately flushing and cleaning the bowl.
8. Each shower stall shall be provided with an approved watertight receptor with sides and back at
least 1 inch above the finished dam or threshold.
9. Water supply plumbing systems shall be sized to provide an adequate amount of water to each
plumbing fixture at a flow rate sufficient to keep the fixture in a clean and sanitary condition
without any danger of backflow or siphonage.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Mobile Home Park Ordinance
13 Effective 9-19-2018
10. Each home shall be equipped with a kitchen sink and bathtub and/or shower and be provided with
a hot water supply system including a listed water heater.
11. No part of a water system shall be connected to any drainage or vent piping.
12. All new plumbing after the effective date of these standards shall be lead free with solders and
flux containing not more than 0.2 percent lead and pipes and pipe fittings containing not more
than 8.0 percent lead.
8.3.16. Heating and Fuel Burning Systems
1. A person holding a master license issued by the State of Maine Oil and Solid Fuel Technicians,
Board of Licensure and/or a person holding a master license issued by the State of Maine Propane
and Natural Gas Technicians, Board of Licensure shall inspect and certify that the heating and
fuel system is in a safe condition and meets all State of Maine laws and rules as adopted by said
boards. Amended: January 5, 2009
2. Heat-producing appliances and vents, roof jacks and chimneys necessary for installation in
mobile homes shall be listed or certified by a nationally recognized testing agency for use in
mobile homes.
8.3.17. Electrical System. A person holding a master license issued by the State of Maine
Electricians Examining Board shall inspect and certify that the electrical system that is accessible,
including the wiring of the smoke detector, is safe and meets the National Electrical Code in effect at
the time the mobile home was constructed.
1. Homes wired with aluminum conductors shall meet the current Underwriter Laboratory (UL)
requirements for connecting to branch circuits of 30 amps or less. (Note: The intent of this is not
to require the mobile home to be rewired, but only to require that U. L. Listed conductors be
affixed to receptacle switches and light fixtures. There are several methods of doing this. The
most preferred is the "pig tail" method.)
8.3.18. Separation Requirements. (Amended 1-5-2009, 8-20-2018)
1. The distance between mobile homes must be a minimum of ten feet from side to side
and eight feet from end to end (excluding the hitch) or end to side. The distance
between any mobile home and any utility structure must be a minimum of ten feet.
Any addition to a mobile home, including carports, decks, porches, living spaces,
sunrooms, etc. (but excluding steps) is considered to be part of the mobile home, and
is subject to these minimum separation requirements.
2. Any mobile home that was not in compliance with the prescribed separation
requirements as of the date of adoption of this Ordinance may remain at that location.
3. A mobile home may be replaced with a certified or non-certified mobile home if the
following conditions are met:
(a) the separation requirements are met,
(b) the replacement mobile home is no wider than fourteen (14) feet, and
Town of Hampden, Maine
Mobile Home Park Ordinance
14 Effective 9-19-2018
(c) the dimensional requirements of Section 4.13.3.3.1. of the Zoning Ordinance
are not made more nonconforming by the placement of a larger mobile home
on the lot.
ARTICLE 9
VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.
9.1. Any condition existing in violation of this Ordinance is deemed to be a nuisance.
9.2. The Code Enforcement Officer shall provide written notice of any violation to the Park Owner
and/or operator of the mobile home park. In addition, if the violation involves a violation by the home
owner or occupant of a mobile home, written notice shall also be given to the home owner or occupant.
The notice shall be mailed to the last known address according to records maintained by the Town. The
notice shall describe the violations, and shall state the corrective action necessary. The giving of notice
hereunder shall not be a prerequisite to the commencement of an enforcement action.
9.3. The Code Enforcement Officer, with the advice and consent of the Town Manager, is authorized to
institute, or cause to be instituted by the Town Attorney, in the name of the Town of Hampden, any and
all actions, legal or equitable, that may be appropriate or necessary for the enforcement of this Ordinance.
9.4. Any person, firm or corporation, being the owner or operator of, or having control or use of any
mobile home, mobile home lot or mobile home park, who violates any provision of this Ordinance shall
be subject to the penalties set forth in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each violation, and each day of each
violation, shall constitute a separate offense.
ARTICLE 10
APPEALS.
Amended 06-19-2006
10.1. Appeals. All appeals shall be subject to the provisions of the Town of Hampden Board of Appeals
Ordinance including but not limited to filing deadlines, application requirements, fees, appeal procedures,
decisions of the Board of Appeals and subsequent appeals to Superior Court. Any appeal from the Code
Enforcement Officer's approval, approval with conditions, or denial of a license application, or the
revocation of a license, shall be made to the Board of Appeals within 30 days of the rendering of such a
decision. Amended 06-19-2006
10.2 Appellate Review The review by the Board of Appeals shall be limited to an appellate review of
the Code Enforcement Officer's decision, and said decision may be overturned only if the officer
committed an error of law, abused his/her discretion, or made findings that are not supported by
substantial evidence on the record. No appeal may be taken from a violation determination or
enforcement action taken by the Code Enforcement Officer, except to the extent that said determination or
action forms the basis of a revocation of a license by the Code Enforcement Officer. Amended 06-19-2006
10.3 Basis of the Appeal. The appellant must demonstrate that the decision of the Code Enforcement
Officer: (1) committed an error of law, (2) abused his/her discretion, or (3) made findings that are not
supported by substantial evidence on the record. Amended 06-19-2006
10.4 Modification or Reversal of the Decision. The Board of Appeals may modify or reverse the
decision of the Code Enforcement Officer if they determine that he: (1) committed an error of law, (2)
abused his/her discretion, or (3) made findings that are not supported by substantial evidence on the
record. Amended 06-19-2006
Town Of Hampden, Maine
Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code Ordinance
1
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
MAINE UNIFORM BUILDING AND ENERGY CODE ORDINANCE
ADOPTED: Hampden Town Council, March 16, 2015
Effective Date: April 15, 2015
CERTIFIED BY: ___________________________
Denise Hodsdon
Town Clerk
Affix Seal
LIFE SAFETY CODE ORDINANCE
CONTENTS
SECTION PAGE
1 MAINE UNIFORM BUILDING AND ENERGY CODE 2
2 ADMINISTRATION 2
3. CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA FOR TOWN OF HAMPDEN 3
4. KNOX BOX PROGRAM 3
5. ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS 4
6. CIVIL PENALTIES 4
7. SAVINGS CLAUSE 4
8. EFFECTIVE DATE 5
Town Of Hampden, Maine
Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code Ordinance
2
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
MAINE UNIFORM BUILDING AND ENERGY CODE ORDINANCE
Section 1. Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code.
Effective December 1, 2010, the Town of Hampden applies and enforces the Maine Uniform
Building and Energy Code (“MUBEC”) as required by 10 M.R.S. §9724. MUBEC contains the
minimum standards for the construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use,
location, occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and structures and their service equipment,
both existing and proposed, located within the Town of Hampden. The purpose of this
Ordinance is to establish administration and enforcement provisions in relation to MUBEC. The
Town has the authority to enact this Ordinance under 10 M.R.S. §9724(5).
Section 2. Administration.
2.1 The Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Building/Fire Inspector of the Town of
Hampden shall serve as the building official as defined in 25 M.R.S. § 2371 and shall be
responsible for issuing building permits and certificates of compliance.
2.2 The Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Building/Fire Inspector shall be responsible for
inspecting all permitted construction for compliance with all components of MUBEC, as
such components may be revised from time to time by the Technical Building Codes and
Standards Board.
2.3 The property owner, at the owner’s sole expense, may elect to comply with MUBEC
through inspections and reports by third-party inspectors certified pursuant to 10 M.R.S.
§ 9723. The owner shall be responsible for contractual arrangements with a duly certified
third-party inspector. The Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Building/Fire Inspector
may issue the certificate of compliance for a building or structure upon receipt of a copy
of the Construction File and an original inspection report from the certified third-party
inspector. The Town of Hampden and the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the
Building/Fire Inspector have no obligation to review a report from a third-party inspector
for accuracy prior to issuing the certificate of compliance.
2.4 The administration and enforcement of MUBEC, including permits, certificates of
compliance, fees, and violations, shall be in accordance with Article 5 of the Town of
Hampden, Maine Zoning Ordinance and the Town of Hampden, Maine Fees Ordinance.
For the purposes of MUBEC, a certificate of compliance under the Zoning Ordinance
shall constitute a certificate of occupancy.
Town Of Hampden, Maine
Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code Ordinance
3
Section 3. Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria for the Town of Hampden
3.1. As referenced in MUBEC, the following climatic and geographic design criteria are
established for the Town of Hampden:
3.1.1. Ground Snow Load: 70 lb./ft.
3.1.2. Wind Design
Speed: 90 miles per hour
Topographical effects: None
3.1.3. Seismic Design Category: B
3.1.4. Subject to Damage From
Weathering: Severe
Frost Line Depth: 5 ft.
Termite: None to Slight
3.1.5. Winter Design Temp: -5ºF
3.1.6. Ice Barrier Underlayment Required: Yes
3.1.7. Flood Hazards: 9/4/1987
3.1.8. Air Freezing Index: 1750
3.1.9. Mean Annual Temp: 45ºF
Section 4. Knox Box Program
4.1. The Knox Box Program for the Town of Hampden shall be used for access to buildings
for emergency purposes only.
4.2. The Public Safety Director or designee shall serve as the administrator for the Knox Box
Program, as defined by the Knox Company.
4.3. The number, make, model and location of the box(s) shall be determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer, Building/Fire Inspector, or Public Safety Director or designee.
4.4. All keys required to operate the building’s life safety signaling and fire suppression
systems, electrical rooms and panels, and a master building key shall be placed within the
Knox Box.
4.5. All new buildings constructed or additions to current buildings performed after the
adoption of this amendment shall conform to this provision.
4.5.1. One- and two-family dwellings and townhouses are excluded from this
requirement.
Town Of Hampden, Maine
Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code Ordinance
4
Section 5. Administrative Appeals.
5.1 The owner of a building or structure may appeal to the Town of Hampden Board of
Appeals from a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Building/Fire
Inspector refusing to grant a building permit or to issue a certificate of compliance. Any
other aggrieved person may appeal the issuance of a building permit or a certificate of
compliance. Any appeal must be commenced within 30 days of the decision. All appeals
shall be subject to the provisions of the Town of Hampden Board of Appeals Ordinance
including but not limited to filing deadlines, application requirements, fees, and appeal
procedures.
5.2 The Board of Appeals may conduct an appellate review of the matter that is the subject of
the appeal. The appellant shall have the burden to demonstrate that the decision of the
Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Building/Fire Inspector was contrary to the
provisions of MUBEC.
5.3 The Board of Appeals may modify or reverse the decision of the Building Official upon
making a determination that the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the
Building/Fire Inspector was contrary to the provisions of MUBEC. The decision of the
Board shall be final.
Section 6. Civil Penalties.
The provisions of 30-A M.R.S. §4452 shall apply to the determination of penalties for violations
of MUBEC or this Ordinance. The minimum penalty for starting work without a permit required
by MUBEC or this Ordinance shall be $100.00, and the maximum penalty shall be $2,500.00.
The minimum penalty for any specific violation of this code shall be $100.00, and the maximum
penalty shall be $2,500.00. The maximum penalty may exceed $2,500.00, but shall not exceed
$25,000.00, when it can be shown that there has been a previous conviction of the same party
within the past two (2) years for violation of the same provision. If the economic benefit
resulting from the violation exceeds the applicable penalties set forth herein, the maximum civil
penalties may be increased to an amount not to exceed twice the economic benefit resulting from
the violation. Economic benefit includes, but is not limited to, the costs avoided or the enhanced
value accrued at the time of the violation as a result of the violator's noncompliance with the
applicable legal requirements. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation. All civil
penalties shall inure to the benefit of the Town of Hampden.
Section 7. Savings Clause.
If any provision of this Ordinance is found by a court of competent jurisdicion to be invalid, that
finding shall not affect the remaining provisions of the Ordinance.
Town Of Hampden, Maine
Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code Ordinance
5
Section 8. Effective Date.
In accordance with Section 213 of the Town Charter, this Ordinance shall become effective at
the expiration of thirty (30) days after the date of adoption by the Town Council.

Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Non-Storm Water Discharge Ordinance
2
NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE ORDINANCE
ARTICLE 1
PURPOSE and OBJECTIVES
1.1. Purpose. The purpose of this Non-Storm Water Discharge Ordinance (the “Ordinance”) is to provide
for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Hampden, Maine through the
regulation of Non-Storm Water Discharges to the Municipality’s Storm Drainage System as required by
federal and State law. This Ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction of Pollutants into
the Town’s Storm Drainage System in order to comply with requirements of the federal Clean Water Act
and State law.
1.2. Objectives. The objectives of this Ordinance are:
1.2.1. To prohibit unpermitted or unallowed Non-Storm Water Discharges to the Storm Drainage
System; and
1.2.2. To set forth the legal authority and procedures to carry out all inspection, monitoring and
enforcement activities necessary to ensure compliance with this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 2
DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the terms listed below are defined as follows:
Clean Water Act. “Clean Water Act” means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et
seq., also known as the “Clean Water Act”), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
Discharge. “Discharge” means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emptying, dumping, disposing or
other addition of Pollutants to “waters of the State.” “Direct discharge” or “point source” means any
discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel,
conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation or vessel or
other floating craft, from which Pollutants are or may be discharged.
Enforcement Authority. “Enforcement Authority” means the person(s) or department authorized under
Article 4 of this Ordinance to administer and enforce this Ordinance.
Exempt Person or Discharge. “Exempt Person or Discharge” means any Person who is subject to a Multi-
Sector General Permit for Industrial Activities, a General Permit for Construction Activity, a General
Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater from the Maine Department of Transportation and the Maine
Turnpike Authority Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems, or a General Permit for the Discharge of
Stormwater from State or Federally Owned Authority Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System Facilities;
and any Non-Storm Water Discharge permitted under a NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge license
or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (“EPA”) or the Maine Department of Environmental Protection (“DEP”).
Industrial Activity. “Industrial Activity” means activity or activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits
as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14).
Municipality. “Municipality” means the Town of Hampden, Maine.
Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Non-Storm Water Discharge Ordinance
3
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, or MS4. “Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System” or “MS4,”
means conveyances for storm water, including, but not limited to, roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels or storm drains (other than publicly
owned treatment works and combined sewers) owned or operated by any municipality, sewer or sewage
district, fire district, State agency or Federal agency or other public entity that discharges directly to surface
waters of the State.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit. “National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit” means a permit issued
by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) that authorizes the discharge of a specified amount of pollutants under certain conditions
to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide
basis.
Non-Storm Water Discharge. “Non-Storm Water Discharge” means any Discharge to an MS4 that is not
composed entirely of Storm Water.
Person. “Person” means any individual, firm, corporation, municipality, quasi-municipal corporation, State
agency or Federal agency or other legal entity which creates, initiates, originates or maintains a Discharge
of Storm Water or a Non-Storm Water Discharge.
Pollutant. “Pollutant” means dredged spoil, solid waste, junk, incinerator residue, sewage, refuse, effluent,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemicals, biological or radiological materials, oil, petroleum products
or by-products, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, dirt and industrial, municipal, domestic,
commercial or agricultural wastes of any kind.
Premises. “Premises” means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or
unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips, located within the Municipality from which
Discharges into the Storm Drainage System are or may be created, initiated, originated or maintained.
Regulated Small MS4. “Regulated Small MS4” means any Small MS4 regulated by the State of Maine
“General Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems”
dated June 3, 2003 (“General Permit”), including all those located partially or entirely within an Urbanized
Area (UA) and those additional Small MS4s located outside a UA that as of the issuance of the General
Permit have been designated by the DEP as Regulated Small MS4s.
Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, or Small MS4. “Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System”, or “Small MS4,”means any MS4 that is not already covered by the Phase I MS4 stormwater
program including municipally owned or operated storm sewer systems, State or federally-owned systems,
such as colleges, universities, prisons, Maine Department of Transportation and Maine Turnpike Authority
road systems and facilities, and military bases and facilities.
Storm Drainage System. “Storm Drainage System” means the Municipality’s Regulated Small MS4.
Storm Water. “Storm Water” means any Storm Water runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and
drainage; “Stormwater” has the same meaning as “Storm Water.”
Urbanized Area (“UA”). “Urbanized Area” or “UA” means the areas of the State of Maine so defined by
the summation of each of the decennial censuses beginning with the 2000 census by the U.S. Bureau of
the Census (i.e. the 2000 UA + 2010 a + 2020 ua).
Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Non-Storm Water Discharge Ordinance
4
ARTICLE 3
APPLICABILITY
This Ordinance shall apply to all Persons discharging Storm Water and/or Non-Storm Water Discharges
from any Premises into the Storm Drainage System.
ARTICLE 4
RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION
The Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Public Works Director who are both authorized as an
Enforcement Authority who shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 5
PROHIBITION OF NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGES
5.1. General Prohibition. Except as allowed or exempted herein, no Person shall create, initiate, originate
or maintain a Non-Storm Water Discharge to the Storm Drainage System. Such Non-Storm Water
Discharges are prohibited notwithstanding the fact that the Municipality may have approved the
connections, drains or conveyances by which a Person Discharges unallowed Non-Storm Water Discharges
to the Storm Drainage System.
5.2. Allowed Non-Storm Water Discharges. The creation, initiation, origination and maintenance of the
following Non-Storm Water Discharges to the Storm Drainage System is allowed:
5.2.1. Landscape irrigation; diverted stream flows; rising ground waters; uncontaminated ground
water infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20)); uncontaminated pumped ground water;
uncontaminated flows from foundation drains; air conditioning and compressor condensate;
irrigation water; flows from uncontaminated springs; uncontaminated water from crawl space
pumps; uncontaminated flows from footing drains; lawn watering runoff; flows from riparian
habitats and wetlands; residual street wash water (where spills/leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred, unless all spilled material has been removed and detergents are
not used); hydrant flushing and fire fighting activity runoff; water line flushing and discharges
from potable water sources; and individual residential car washing;
5.2.2. Discharges specified in writing by the Enforcement Authority as being necessary to protect
public health and safety; and
5.2.3. Dye testing, with verbal notification to the Enforcement Authority prior to the time of the test.
5.3. Exempt Person or Discharge. This Ordinance shall not apply to an Exempt Person or Discharge,
except that the Enforcement Authority may request from Exempt Persons and Persons with Exempt
Discharges copies of permits, notices of intent, licenses and orders from the EPA or DEP that authorize the
Discharge(s).
Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Non-Storm Water Discharge Ordinance
5
ARTICLE 6.
SUSPENSION OF ACCESS TO THE MUNICIPALITY’S SMALL MS4.
The Enforcement Authority may, without prior notice, physically suspend Discharge access to the Storm
Drainage System to a Person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened Non-Storm
Water Discharge to the Storm Drainage System which presents or may present imminent and substantial
danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the Storm Drainage System, or which
may cause the Municipality to violate the terms of its environmental permits. Such suspension may include,
but is not limited to, blocking pipes, constructing dams or taking other measures, on public ways or public
property, to physically block the Discharge to prevent or minimize a Non-Storm Water Discharges to the
Storm Drainage System. If the Person fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the
Enforcement Authority may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the
Storm Drainage System, or to minimize danger to persons, provided, however, that in taking such steps the
Enforcement Authority may enter upon the Premises that are the source of the actual or threatened Non-
Storm Water Discharge to the Storm Drainage System only with the consent of the Premises’ owner,
occupant or agent.
ARTICLE 7.
MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.
In order to determine compliance with this Ordinance, the Enforcement Authority may enter upon and
inspect Premises subject to this Ordinance at reasonable hours with the consent of the Premises’ owner,
occupant or agent: to inspect the Premises and connections thereon to the Storm Drainage System; and to
conduct monitoring, sampling and testing of the Discharge to the Storm Drainage System.
ARTICLE 8.
ENFORCEMENT.
It shall be unlawful for any Person to violate any provision of or to fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this Ordinance. Whenever the Enforcement Authority believes that a Person has violated
this Ordinance, the Enforcement Authority may enforce this Ordinance in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 4452.
8.1. Notice of Violation. Whenever the Enforcement Authority believes that a Person has violated this
Ordinance, the Enforcement Authority may order compliance with this Ordinance by written notice of
violation to that Person indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it,
including, without limitation:
8.1.1. The elimination of Non-Storm Water Discharges to the Storm Drainage System, including, but
not limited to, disconnection of the Premises from the MS4;
8.1.2. The cessation of discharges, practices, or operations in violation of this Ordinance;
8.1.3. At the Person’s expense, the abatement or remediation (in accordance with best management
practices in DEP rules and regulations) of Non-Storm Water Discharges to the Storm Drainage
System and the restoration of any affected property; and/or
8.1.4. The payment of fines, of the Municipality’s remediation costs and of the Municipality’s
reasonable administrative costs and attorneys’ fees and costs.
Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Non-Storm Water Discharge Ordinance
6
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a
deadline within which such abatement or restoration must be completed.
8.2. Penalties/Fines/Injunctive Relief. Any Person who violates this Ordinance shall be subject to fines,
penalties and orders for injunctive relief and shall be responsible for the Municipality’s attorney’s fees and
costs, all in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. Moreover, any Person who violates this Ordinance also shall be responsible for any and
all fines, penalties, damages and costs, including, but not limited to attorneys’ fees and costs, incurred by
the Municipality for violation of federal and State environmental laws and regulations caused by or related
to that Person’s violation of this Ordinance; this responsibility shall be in addition to any penalties, fines or
injunctive relief imposed under this Article.
8.3. Consent Agreement. The Enforcement Authority may, with the approval of the municipal officers,
enter into a written consent agreement with the violator to address timely abatement of the violation(s) of
this Ordinance for the purposes of eliminating violations of this Ordinance and of recovering fines, costs
and fees without court action.
8.4. Appeal of Notice of Violation. Any Person receiving a Notice of Violation or suspension notice may
appeal the determination of the Enforcement Authority to the Board of Appeals in accordance with the
Board of Appeals Ordinance. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of receipt
of the Notice of Violation. The Board of Appeals shall hold a de novo hearing on the appeal within 30 days
from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The Board of Appeals may affirm, reverse or modify the
decision of the Enforcement Authority. A suspension under Article 6 of this Ordinance remains in place
unless or until lifted by the Board of Appeals or by a reviewing court. A party aggrieved by the decision of
the Board of Appeals may appeal that decision to the Maine Superior Court within 45 days of the date of
the Board of Appeals decision pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
8.5. Enforcement Measures. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth
in the Notice of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal to the Board of Appeals, within 45 days of a decision
of the Board of Appeals affirming the Enforcement Authority’s decision, then the Enforcement Authority
may recommend to the municipal officers that the municipality’s attorney file an enforcement action in a
Maine court of competent jurisdiction under Rule 80K of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
8.6. Ultimate Responsibility of Discharger. The standards set forth herein are minimum standards;
therefore this Ordinance does not intend nor imply that compliance by any Person will ensure that there
will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of Pollutants into waters of the U.S. caused
by said Person. This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Municipality, or any officer agent
or employee thereof for any damages that result from any Person's reliance on this Ordinance or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
ARTICLE 9.
SEVERABILITY.
The provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or
paragraph of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall
be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions, clauses, sentences, or paragraphs or
application of this Ordinance.
Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Non-Storm Water Discharge Ordinance
7
ARTICLE 10.
BASIS.
The Town of Hampden, Maine enacts this Non-Storm Water Discharge Ordinance (the “Ordinance”)
pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 (municipal home rule ordinance authority), 38 M.R.S.A. § 413 (the
“Wastewater Discharge Law”), 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. (the “Clean Water Act”), and 40 CFR Part 122
(U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s regulations governing the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (“NPDES”)). The Maine Department of Environmental Protection, through its
promulgation of the “General Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater from Small Municipal Separate
Storm Sewer Systems” dated June 3, 2003, has listed the Town as having a Regulated Small Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer System (“Small MS4”); under this General Permit, listing as a Regulated Small MS4
necessitates enactment of this Ordinance as part of the Municipality’s Storm Water Management Program.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Outdoor Facilities Ordinance
1
ADOPTED DATE: Hampden Town Council, August 6, 2012
EFFECTIVE DATE: September 5, 2012
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, November 14, 2016
EFFECTIVE DATE: December 13, 2016
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council, May 20, 2019
EFFECTIVE DATE: June 19, 2019
CERTIFIED BY: _______
Paula Scott, Town Clerk
Affix Seal
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
OUTDOOR FACILITIES ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE……………………………………………………………………………………PAGE
ARTICLE I. PURPOSE .................................................................................................................. 2
ARTICLE II. AUTHORITY ........................................................................................................... 2
ARTICLE III. APPLICABILITY ................................................................................................... 2
ARTICLE IV. DEFINITIONS........................................................................................................ 2
ARTICLE V. PROHIBITIONS ...................................................................................................... 3
ARTICLE VI. OPERATION .......................................................................................................... 4
ARTICLE VII. ENFORCEMENT.................................................................................................. 5
ARTICLE VIII. PENALTIES ........................................................................................................ 5
ARTICLE IX. SEVERABILITY .................................................................................................... 5
ARTICLE X. EFFECTIVE DATE ................................................................................................. 5
APPENDIX A……………………………………………………………………………………..6
Town of Hampden, Maine
Outdoor Facilities Ordinance
2
ARTICLE I.
PURPOSE
1.1 Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide rules and regulations for the use of
and conduct in outdoor facilities situated in Hampden. This Ordinance hereby repeals the
Dorothea Dix Park Ordinance (adopted 10/16/89) and Papermill Road Recreation Area
Ordinance (last amended 5/18/09).
ARTICLE II.
AUTHORITY
2.1 Authority. Pursuant to the provisions of Title 30-A M.R.S. Sections 3001 and 3281-3284
and the Charter of the Town of Hampden, Article II, Section 212, and Article III, Section 302,
there is hereby established an Outdoor Facilities Ordinance to be organized, administered and
governed in accordance with the following provisions.
ARTICLE III.
APPLICABILITY
3.1 Applicability. This Ordinance provides full power and authority over all outdoor facilities
within the Town.
ARTICLE IV.
DEFINITIONS
4.1 Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance
shall have the customary dictionary definitions that give this Ordinance its most reasonable
application. Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural number includes the singular. The word “may” is permissive; “shall” is
mandatory and not discretionary.
Alcoholic Beverage: any beverage containing any amount of alcohol as regulated under state
law.
Controlled Substance: any legal or illegal drug, narcotic, hallucinogen, opiate, prescription drug,
or any other such substance regulated by state or federal law.
Electronic Smoking Device: a device used to deliver nicotine or any other substance intended for
human consumption that may be used by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation of
vapor or aerosol from the device, including, without limitation, a device manufactured,
distributed, marketed or sold as an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic pipe,
electronic hookah or so called vape pen.
Motorized Vehicle: any vehicle that is propelled by an engine, including but not limited to: cars,
trucks, motorcycles, snowmobiles, ATVs, OHVs, dune buggies, dirt bikes, three-wheelers, gokarts,
and golf carts.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Outdoor Facilities Ordinance
3
Outdoor Facility: any park, sports field, forest, wooded area, field, playground, or other property
for which the Town of Hampden is the deeded owner.
Parks: Includes the following outdoor facilities: Dorothea Dix Park, Papermill Road Recreation
Area, Western Avenue Recreation Area, Turtle Head Marina Park, or other areas designated as
such.
Public Safety Department: Includes Police, Fire, and Emergency Medical Services (EMS)
Departments.
Sports Fields: Includes the following outdoor facilities: Ball Field Road Ball Field, VFW
Recreation Area, Western Avenue Recreation Area, or other areas formally designated as such
by the Town Council.
Tobacco Products: cigars, cigarettes, chewing tobacco, snuff, or any other product containing
tobacco as regulated under state law.
ARTICLE V.
PROHIBITIONS
5.1 Camping. No person shall set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter for the
purpose of overnight camping in outdoor facilities, nor shall any person leave in outdoor
facilities after closing hours, any movable structures or special vehicle that could be used for
such purposes. Upon prior approval of a law enforcement officer of the Town of Hampden,
overnight camping may be permitted in situations involving unique circumstances.
5.2 Discharge of Firearms. No person shall discharge a firearm within parks or sports fields as
defined herein.
5.2.1 Exceptions – The foregoing prohibition on the discharge of firearms shall not apply
to the firing or discharge of firearms at any military exercise or review; nor to any
military personnel or law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties or
authorized training; nor to any person in the lawful defense of his or her person, family,
or property. This Section shall also not prohibit discharges as part of sporting events, or
ceremonial or historical events, with prior notice to the Police Chief.
5.3 Fires. No person shall kindle, build, maintain or use a fire except in areas designated for
such purposes. All fires shall be properly extinguished before the person utilizing the same
leaves the outdoor facility. Any fires shall be continuously under the care and supervision of a
competent person from the time it is kindled until it is extinguished. Fires may be prohibited by
the Recreation Director, Harbor Master, and or employees of the Public Safety Department
when, in his or her judgment, the conditions are such that any fire would represent a safety
hazard.
5.4 Wood. No person shall cut any wood on any outdoor facility without a prior permit from the
Town Forester, who shall have the discretion to deny any application for such a permit if he or
Town of Hampden, Maine
Outdoor Facilities Ordinance
4
she determines that the proposed activity is inconsistent with the goals of the forest management
plan for the property.
5.5 Alcoholic Beverages. No person shall consume or be under the influence of alcoholic
beverages in any outdoor facility.
5.6 Tobacco Products. No person shall consume or use tobacco products within any outdoor
facility.
5.7 Controlled Substances. No person shall consume or use any controlled substance legal or
illegal while within any outdoor facility, unless the person has a labeled container and proof of
prescription.
5.8 Trash. No person shall scatter, drop or leave any debris trash or other rubbish within any
outdoor facility except in receptacles provided for that purpose.
5.9 Animals. All animals brought into any outdoor facility shall be under the owner’s control at
all times so as to not interfere with the enjoyment of the outdoor facility by other members of the
public, if present. No animal shall be off a leash at any time at any sports field as defined herein,
or at any part of the Western Avenue Recreation Area. Owners shall pick up after their animals.
5.10 Motor Vehicle Access. Access to outdoor facilities by motor vehicles shall be governed by
the rules for that facility contained in Appendix A, entitled “Outdoor Facilities Rules and
Regulations.” Upon prior approval of a law enforcement officer of the Town of Hampden, motor
vehicle access may be permitted in situations involving unique circumstances. For specific
restrictions for each outdoor facility, please refer Appendix A. Motor vehicle access to a
facility’s parking area is allowed, as this section is meant to address access to parts of facilities
that are not meant for motor vehicles.
5.11 Other Vehicles Prohibited. No person shall operate a trail bike, all-terrain vehicle,
snowmobile, or any other motorized recreational vehicle within any outdoor facility except for
on designated trails or areas, or for purposes of maintenance or rescue.
5.12 Smoking. No person shall smoke within any outdoor facility, park, or sports field.
“Smoking” includes carrying or having in one’s possession a lighted or heated cigarette, cigar, or
pipe, or a lighted or heated tobacco or plant product intended for human consumption through
inhalation whether natural or synthetic in any manner or in any form. “Smoking” includes the
use of an electronic smoking device.
ARTICLE VI.
OPERATION
6.1 Hours & Dates of Operation. Outdoor facilities shall be open to the public from a half hour
before dawn to an hour after sunset. Outdoor facilities are open 365 days a year as weather
allows. For information on reservations, which facilities are plowed during the winter, and
Town of Hampden, Maine
Outdoor Facilities Ordinance
5
closing times for areas with artificial lighting, please see Appendix A. Snowmobiles are
permitted after dark on designated trails.
ARTICLE VII.
ENFORCEMENT
7.1 Law Enforcement. Any law enforcement officer of the Town of Hampden shall have the
authority to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance and revoke the permission of any individual
to use an outdoor facility when the officer observes, or has probable cause to believe, that such
individual has violated any provisions of this Ordinance, committed a civil infraction within the
facility, or has violated any provision of the laws and Ordinances of the State of Maine or the
Town of Hampden within the facility. The Recreation Department, Harbor Master, and Code
Enforcement Officer also have the authority to revoke the permission of any individual to use an
outdoor facility if they are found to have violated the provisions of this Ordinance.
7.2 Enforcement Mechanism. This Ordinance may be enforced by the institution of legal or
equitable proceedings in court, including proceedings pursuant to 30-A M.R.S. §4452.
ARTICLE VIII.
PENALTIES
8.1 Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this Ordinance shall
be fined not less than Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) nor more than One Hundred Fifty Dollars
($150.00) for each violation. Each day that such violation is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. Any fines recovered shall
inure to the benefit of the Town of Hampden.
ARTICLE IX.
SEVERABILITY
9.1 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
provision shall be deemed as a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
ARTICLE X.
EFFECTIVE DATE
10.1 Effective Date. Pursuant to Section 213(c) of the Town Charter, this Ordinance shall
become effective at the expiration of 30 days after its adoption by the Town Council.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Outdoor Facilities Ordinance
6
Appendix A:
Town of Hampden Outdoor Facilities Ordinance
Rules and Regulations
Motor Vehicle Access
Shall be permitted as weather allows for all facilities that have areas for motor vehicle access. No
person shall operate a motor vehicle in or on an Outdoor Facility or in any area except
established roads, driveways, or parking areas, or such other areas as may, on occasion, be
specifically designated as temporary parking areas by Town of Hampden. No person shall
operate a motor vehicle in the park, or leave a motor vehicle standing or parked therein, during
times when it is closed to the public.
Snowmobile Access
Snowmobiles are permitted after dark seasonally on designated trails only.
Reservations
Please see the details for each facility in the sections below regarding what can and cannot be
reserved. Reservations should be made with the Recreation Director (sports fields/facilities) or
Public Works Director (parks). Applicable fees for reserved use are included in the Town of
Hampden Fees Ordinance.
Law Enforcement
After receiving multiple complaints (two or more) for violations of the Ordinance or these Rules,
the Hampden Public Safety Director, or designee, shall have the authority to require that the
person(s) to whom the complaint was against leave the area until the next day.
Rules and Regulations by Facility
Dorothea Dix Park
Seasonal access permitted between April 1 and November 1 (conditions permitting). Motor
vehicle access may be controlled by barriers seasonally to prevent damage. This park is a public
space and no sections or parts may be reserved for exclusive use. Park is not lit, therefore is
available for use from half an hour before dawn to an hour after sunset.
Papermill (Road) Park
Seasonal access permitted between April 1 and November 1 (conditions permitting). Motor
vehicle access will be controlled by barriers year-round. Small parking area provided at the
roadside. This is a carry in/carry out park. This park is a public space and no sections or parts
may be reserved for exclusive use. Park is not lit, therefore is available for use from half an hour
before dawn to an hour after sunset.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Outdoor Facilities Ordinance
7
Marina Park
Seasonal access permitted between April 1 and November 1 (conditions permitting). This park is
a public space and no sections or parts may be reserved for exclusive use. The park is
not currently lit but used for a boat launch for events that may take place after dark, therefore
available for use from half an hour before dawn to 11pm. After dark use is limited to the boat
launch and parking lot. Facility is closed for public use from 11 pm until half hour before dawn.
Western Avenue Recreation Area
Year-round access permitted. The gazebo and playground area are public spaces and no sections
or parts may be reserved for exclusive use. The sand volleyball courts and sports field may be
reserved for exclusive use/programmatic use, during such times these areas are closed to the
general public. Reservation requests must be made with the Recreation Director. The
Recreation Area is minimally lit, and existing lighting is timed to end at 10 pm. After dark use is
limited to the playground, sand volleyball court, and parking lot. Facility is closed for public use
from 10 pm until half hour before dawn.
VFW Recreation Area
Seasonal access permitted between April 1 and November 1 (conditions permitting). Motor
vehicle access may be controlled by barriers seasonally to prevent damage. This Recreation
Area is a public space however sections or parts may be reserved for exclusive use/programmatic
use, during such times these areas are closed to the general public. Reservation requests must be
made with the Recreation Director. The Recreation Area has user activated lighting for timed
night use. After dark use is limited to the tennis courts and outdoor basketball courts. Facility is
closed for public use from 11 pm until half hour before dawn.
Ball Field Road Ball Field
Seasonal access permitted between April 1 and November 1 (conditions permitting). The softball
field and adjacent parking lot are public spaces however the complex may be reserved for
exclusive use/programmatic use, during such times these areas are closed to the general public.
During a portion of the spring/early summer season, temporary fencing is left in place reducing
the field size and limiting complex use. Reservation requests must be made with the Recreation
Director. The Recreation Area has user activated fee based lighting for night use. Facility is
closed for public use from 11 pm until half hour before dawn.
TOWN OF HAMPDEN
NON-MUNICIPAL ORGANIZATION FUNDING REQUEST POLICY
As part of the annual budget review process, the Hampden Town Council
shall consider whether to include budget requests from non-profit Non-
Municipal Organizations. This decision shall be made after the municipal
budget, including school, and county costs, has been presented. The annual
amount of funding for non-municipal organizations shall not exceed $20,000
without a super majority vote of the Town Council.
The following process shall be followed by interested organizations:
1. Application –
Non-profit and civic organizations seeking funding from the Town of
Hampden shall meet the following criteria and provide the following
information:
A. Eligibility criteria –
1. Organizations must provide a service/benefit to residents of the
Town of Hampden
2. Organizations must be non-profit entities
B. Information/action required for consideration of request
1. Completion of non-municipal organization funding request form
and submission of verifying documentation.
2. Attendance by an authorized representative of the entity
requesting funding at the Hampden annual budget review session
related to non-municipal funding requests
2. Evaluation
Non-municipal organization funding requests shall be evaluated
according to the following criteria:
A. Type of service/benefit provided & value to the community
B. Availability of the service/benefit in the community
C. Resident participation/benefit
D. Preference
1. Preference shall be given to organizations located in the Town of
Hampden
2. Preference shall be given to organizations who provide service
to the community through volunteer activities
3. Preference shall be given to organizations that provide
necessary services that may otherwise result in impacts to the
municipal budget through line items such as general assistance.
4. Preference shall be given to organizations that offer desired
services not otherwise available to Hampden residents.
5. Preference shall be given to entities whose purpose furthers
goal(s) in the Town’s Comprehensive Plan.
Adopted by the Hampden Town Council on Monday, May 21, 2012
TOWN OF HAMPDEN
NON-MUNICIPAL ORGANIZATION FUNDING REQUEST FORM
Name of Organization: ____________________________________________
Address : __________________________________________________
__________________________________________________
__________________________________________________
Telephone number: ______________________________
Email address: ___________________________________
Date Organization established: _______________
Non-profit : Yes _____ No _____
501c3: Yes ______ No ______
Service/benefit provided to Hampden Residents:
_______________________________
_______________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________
Location(s) service(s)/benefit(s) provided:
_____________________________________________
_____________________________________________
_____________________________________________
Dollar value of service provided: _______________________
Documentation supporting this request must be included with the application.



PERSONNEL RULES AND POLICIES ORDINANCE/HANDBOOK
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
TOWN OF HAMPDEN
PERSONNEL RULES AND POLICIES ORDINANCE/HANDBOOK
The Town of Hampden hereby ordains as follows:
1. The attached Personnel Rules and Policies Ordinance/Handbook is hereby
adopted.
2. The existing Personnel Rules and Policies Ordinance, as last amended on
August 15, 2005, is hereby repealed in its entirety.
3. Pursuant to Section 213(c) of the Town Charter, the foregoing provisions shall
be effective 30 days after the adoption of this Ordinance by the Town Council.
ADOPTED: Hampden Town Council, December 19, 2011 (in substitution of
August 15, 2005 Ordinance)
Effective Date: January 18, 2012
CERTIFIED BY:
____________________________
Denise R. Hodsdon, Town Clerk
1
SECTION PAGE
INDEX 1-2
SECTION 1
Welcome Letter Town Manager 3
Mission Statement 4
General Provisions 5
Nature of Handbook 6
How We Behave, Standard Conduct & What We Expect 7
Orientation 8
Employee Acknowledgement Form 9
SECTION 2
Equal Opportunity 10
Sexual Harassment Policy 11
Hostile Work Environment & Incivility 12
Americans with Disabilities Act 13
SECTION 3
Recruitment, Testing & Hiring Practices 14
Types of Employment 15
Probationary Period 16
Position Classification & Pay Plan 17
Promotions & Transfers 18
Standard Work Week/Overtime 19
Attendance & Time Sheets 20
Employee Performance Evaluations 21
Employee Training 22
Travel Reimbursement Policy & Practices 23
Emergency Call-Back Pay 24
Dress Code 25
Personnel Files 26
Lay-Off, recall & Resignation 27
Outside Non-Employment & Political Activities 28
SECTION 4
Employee Benefits 29
Workers Compensation 30
2
SECTION PAGE
SECTION 5
Vacation Leave 31
Sick Leave 32
Jury Duty & Holiday Leave 33
Bereavement Leave 34
Compensatory Time Off 35
Discretionary Leave without Pay 36
Employment Leave for Victims of Violence 37
Family & Medical Leave (FMLA) 38-39
Maine Family Military Leave 40-41
Military Service Leave 42
SECTION 6
Customer Complaint Policy 43
Smoke Free Workplace Policy 44
Drug Free Workplace Policy 45-47
Violence in the Workplace Policy 48-49
Whistleblower Protection 50
SECTION 7
Information Systems Policy 51
Personal Computers 52
Using E-Mail & Voice Mail 52
Fax Machines/Other Prohibited Uses 53
SECTION 8
Disciplinary Action 54-56
Grievance Procedures 57
3
Dear New Employee:
Welcome to the Town of Hampden. As a new employee for the Town, I want to wish you
success and personal satisfaction as a member of the Town of Hampden employee
‘team’.
We are fortunate to have many highly qualified and talented individuals who work for the
Town. There is a wealth of experience and knowledge and a cooperative, team-centered
approach to the work that needs to be done. There are high standards and expectations for
accomplishment, but there is also training and advancement opportunities, fair pay, and
excellent benefits offered in return.
This Employee Handbook defines work rules, benefits, applicable policies that identify
regulations related to smoking and drug and alcohol use and family medical leave, the
grievance procedure-and many other items that really define the employer-employee
relationship here. It is important that you read and understand the contents of the
handbook. After doing so, if you have questions about any material in it, please see
Finance and Human Resource Officer Janie Pitcher and she will be happy to answer
them.
Janie handles all questions related to payroll and accounts payable as well as information
for employees who are both newly hired and those separating from service. Questions
related to insurance coverage(s) and changes should be addressed to Tammy Ewing, the
Finance Assistant.
Again - welcome. I look forward to working with you.
Sincerely,
Susan Lessard
Town Manager
4
MISSION STATEMENT
TOWN OF HAMPDEN
Our mission is a continual journey to improve Quality, Understanding, Enthusiasm,
Service and Teamwork in all levels of the Town of Hampden by providing an open forum
to achieve excellence in communication, work processes and to promote unity.
We will continually reinforce our reputation for superior customer service by providing
respect, training, involvement, recognition, reward, security and advancement
opportunities to our employees.
We will address both internal and external needs, never losing sight of the value of
humor.
We will reach for the best within ourselves.
5
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Purpose: The purpose of the Town Council in adopting the Personnel Rules and
Regulations Ordinance (hereinafter “Ordinance”) was to set forth a uniform and equitable
system of personnel administration for the Town of Hampden, to promote the most
effective and efficient municipal operations on behalf of the citizenry, and to pursue
positive employee morale. The purpose of this Handbook is to provide each employee
with a written summary of work benefits, privileges and responsibilities to better ensure
that all employees are treated equally. The Handbook is based on the provisions of the
Ordinance, and also includes administrative provisions issued by the Town Manager. We
strive to provide a logical, workable method for employees to resolve any conflicts that
may arise.
Scope: Except as otherwise provided, the rules and policies set forth in the Ordinance
and this Handbook shall apply to all Town of Hampden employees. These rules shall not
apply to any employee covered by a collective bargaining agreement between the Town
and its organized employees. Fringe benefits provided by the Town apply to full time
employees only.
Administration: Insuring the day to day administration of the rules and policies shall be
the function of the Town Manager, working with each Department Head. It shall be the
responsibility of each Department Head to insure his/her own familiarity with the rules
and policies, as well as that of his/her staff.
Department Rules: It is recognized that there may be a need to establish and maintain
departmental rules of conduct and procedures, especially in the emergency service areas.
In the case of conflict between the rules and policies of the Ordinance and this Handbook
and those rules and procedures of specific departments, the rules and policies of the
Ordinance and this Handbook shall be controlling unless the department rules and any
revisions have received Council approval.
Note: We shall try to make every effort to insure maximum compatibility between these
rules and departmental rules.
Compliance with Governmental Laws and Regulations:
The Town of Hampden has made every effort to ensure that the rules and policies of the
Ordinance and this Handbook are in compliance with all federal, state and local
employment laws and regulations. In the event that a provision in the Ordinance or this
Handbook is in conflict with a federal, state or local law or regulation, the appropriate
law or regulation will prevail, and the provision in the Ordinance or this Handbook shall
be deemed amended to the extent necessary to comply with such law or regulation.
6
NATURE OF HANDBOOK
Neither the Ordinance, nor this Handbook, is intended to create an employment
contract, express or implied, and the Town of Hampden reserves the right to modify
the rules, policies and procedures contained in the Ordinance or this Handbook.
Any changes to the Ordinance or this Handbook must be in writing and approved
by the Town Council.
This Handbook is intended as a summary of the rules, policies and procedures
contained in the Ordinance, and is not intended to be a complete description of the
Town of Hampden’s rules, policies and procedures concerning employment by the
Town. The actual policies referenced in this Handbook can be accessed in their
entirety during normal business hours in the personnel office.
7
HOW WE BEHAVE
We accept the need to be accountable to the public for the resources with which we are
entrusted. We are self-motivated, committed to doing our best work and honest in our use
of time and talents, recognizing that we share a reputation that is dependent upon the
actions and behaviors of each of us. We take pride in our work.
We share the responsibility to create and maintain a clean, safe work environment that
enables each of us to do our best job and to realize our personal purpose and potential.
Personal commitment to mission, enthusiasm for the work, mutual support and an interest
in finding some fun amongst the toil are the most important things that we offer to each
other.
We are honest and candid about our individual and collective performance: we look to do
better what we do well. We are adaptable. We take risks and accept failure as part of the
learning process.
STANDARD OF CONDUCT
Employees of the Town of Hampden are to regard themselves as public employees and as
such they are to be governed by the highest ideals of honor and integrity in all their
public relationships in order that they may merit the respect and confidence of the general
public. The Town of Hampden maintains a drug and alcohol free workplace. No
employee shall report to work under the influence of alcohol or drugs. Employees on
medication for treatment of illness or injury shall not perform work activities that are
prohibited under the terms of the prescriptions.
WHAT WE EXPECT OF EACH OTHER
? We expect everyone to behave as responsible, professional adults.
? We expect hard work, a positive attitude and a personal commitment; you expect to be
fairly compensated and fairly treated.
? We expect you to treat tools well, use your time honestly and stay well informed; you
expect to be given the tools, time and information to do your work well.
? We expect everyone to treat our customers with courtesy, dignity and respect; You
expect our customers to treat you with courtesy, respect and dignity.
? We expect everyone to take pride in his/her work and to openly be supportive of
coworkers and the Town of Hampden; you expect to receive support from your
coworkers and the Town of Hampden.
? We don’t have many rules and we expect everyone to follow them; you expect
everyone to follow the rules.
? We all expect to have some fun together.
8
ORIENTATION
? Tour of the work area
? Receipt of the Employee handbook and signed Acknowledgement Form
? Introduction to co-workers
? Basic information on keys, rest rooms, break areas, entrances, exits
? Review and discussion of job descriptions, job expectations and short term goals
? Details on the work area (use of telephones, computers, e-mail system, appropriate
access instructions)
? Completion of necessary payroll forms and communication of pay cycles
? Lunch/Break schedules
? Assign a buddy or peer to shadow with
? Meet with them briefly at the end of the day to discuss any concerns they have
? Copy of ‘In the Loop’ employee newsletter
? Discussion on Open Door Policy
9
EMPLOYEE ACKNOWLEDGMENT FORM
This form acknowledges that I have received a copy of the Town of Hampden’s
Employee Handbook and that I understand that the Employee Handbook describes
important information about the Town. I understand that I should consult the Human
Resource Officer regarding any questions not answered in the Handbook.
I have entered into my employment relationship with the Town of Hampden voluntarily
and acknowledge there is no specified length of employment, unless otherwise provided
in a notice of appointment or employment contract.
Furthermore, I acknowledge that this Handbook is neither a contract of employment nor a
legal document. I have received the Handbook, and I understand that it is my
responsibility to read and comply with the policies contained in this Handbook and any
revisions made to it. Any contract of employment must be in writing and must be signed
by the Town Manager.
________________________________
DATE:________________________________
10
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY POLICY
The Town of Hampden is committed to providing equal employment opportunities for all
persons making application to the Town and for equity of treatment and advancement
opportunities for its employees. The Town therefore sets forth the following:
1. The Town of Hampden shall recruit, hire, upgrade, train and promote in all job
titles without regard to race, color, ethnicity, national origin, ancestry, religious
belief, political affiliation or belief, age, gender, sexual orientation, marital status,
veteran status, physical or mental disability (except where based on a bona fide
occupational qualification).
2. All other personnel actions, such as compensation, layoffs, discipline, etc. shall be
administered without regard to those characteristics as outlined in #1 above.
3. All employment decisions will be based upon the principles of Equal Opportunity
and with the intent to further the Town of Hampden’s commitment to Equal
Opportunity.
4. It is the policy of the Town of Hampden that no person shall, on the grounds of
race, color, ethnicity, national origin, ancestry, religious belief, age, gender,
sexual orientation, marital status, veteran status, or physical or mental disability,
be discriminated against.
5. Any violation of this stated policy, or the practice of discrimination by any person
employed by the Town of Hampden, may be considered grounds for disciplinary
action, up to and including dismissal.
The responsibility for implementing and monitoring this policy for the Town of Hampden
is assigned to the Town Manager and/or the Human Resource Officer.
11
SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY
It is the policy of the Town of Hampden that all employees have the right to work in an
environment free of illegal discrimination, which includes freedom from sexual
harassment. The Town will not tolerate any form of sexual harassment by Supervisors,
co-workers, members of the general public or any other visitors to the workplace. This
policy is intended to prohibit offensive conduct, either physical or verbal, that threatens
human dignity and employee morale.
Sexual Harassment is outlined in the EEOC Sexual Discrimination Guidelines and the
Maine Human Rights Act.
1. Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or
physical conduct of a sexual nature when (a) submission to such conduct is made
either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition for employment (b) submission
to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as a basis for employment
decisions (c) such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working
environment.
2. The following are some common types of conduct that may constitute sexual
harassment:
- slurs, jokes or degrading comments of a sexual nature
- unwelcome sexual advances
- suggestive or lewd remarks
- unwelcome hugging, touching or kissing
- requests for sexual favors
- repeated offensive sexual flirtation or propositions
- the display of sexually offensive pictures or objects
- repeated unwelcome physical contact or touching such as patting, pinching
or constant brushing against another’s body
Department heads, Supervisors and the Town Manager are responsible for monitoring
behavior which could be construed as harassment and for initiating necessary action to
eliminate such behavior. An employee who feels exploited should immediately report the
matter to his/her Supervisor, Department Head or if they prefer, the Town Manager and
/or the Human Resource Officer.
The Town Manager, or designee, will immediately investigate any complaints and take
disciplinary action if warranted. Such action may include suspension, demotion or
termination of employment.
12
HOSTILE WORK ENVIRONMENT
AND INCIVILITY POLICY
The Town of Hampden promotes a productive work environment and does not tolerate
verbal or physical conduct by any employee that disrupts or interferes with another’s
work performance. The Town will not tolerate unlawful discrimination, harassment or
incivility.
“Incivility” is defined as seemingly inconsequential, inconsiderate words or deeds that
violate a conventional work place conduct. It includes such behavior as shaming, verbal
humiliation, potshots, sarcasm and rudeness. Passive hostility, manipulation and team
sabotage are also considered to be an “incivility”.
Such behavior should be directed to your Supervisor, Department Head or Town
Manager. The Human Resource Officer is also available if necessary.
13
THE AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (ADA)
POLICY
The following policy is the Town of Hampden’s commitment to the American with
Disabilities Act (“ADA”) and Maine’s counterpart, the Maine Human Rights Act
(MHRA):
Purpose:
The ADA and MHRA prohibits discrimination in employment on the basis of a physical
or mental disability.
Employment Requirements:
As an employer, the Town of Hampden must:
? Have non-discriminatory application procedures, qualification standards and
selection criteria and all other terms and conditions of employment.
? Make reasonable accommodation to the known limitations of a qualified applicant or
employee unless to do so would cause an undue hardship.
Exceptions:
The ADA and MHRA make exceptions regarding employment of a person who poses a
direct or significant risk to the person or to others, such as a person with a contagious
disease or a person who illegally uses drugs or alcohol.
Disability Defined:
Anyone with a physical or mental impairment substantially limiting one or more major
life activities; has a record of such impairment; or is regarded as having such an
impairment, is considered a person with a disability.
In terms of employment, the law defines a “qualified individual with a disability” as an
individual with a disability who satisfies the requisite skill, experience, education and
other job-related requirements and who can perform the essential functions of the job
with or without reasonable accommodations.
The responsibility for implementing and monitoring this policy is assigned to the Town
Manager and/or the Human Resource Officer. All complaints should be directed to them.
14
RECRUITMENT, TESTING, AND HIRING PRACTICES
Appointments: The employment of all personnel shall be the responsibility of the Town
Manager in accordance with Section 206 and Section 301 of the Town Charter. There
shall be as wide a search for a candidate as possible. The character of this search will
vary from position to position, but will consist of internal posting for Town employees
first. The search may then include advertising, open competitive examination, contact
with state and other employment offices and contact with special sources of information
in each case.
Eligibility: It is the policy of the Town Council that all positions in the Town of
Hampden be filled by fully qualified persons who have been examined on the basis of job
related criteria. Eligibility for appointment shall be based on such an examination.
Individuals will be recruited from a geographic area as wide as necessary to ensure
obtaining well-qualified persons for employment. In cases where residents and nonresidents
are substantially equally qualified for particular vacancies, residents shall
receive first consideration.
Applications: Applications for employment shall be made on a standard application form
or by submission of a resume, or both. Employment forms are available from the Human
Resource Office.
I-9 Forms: After a job offer has been made, but before any person can begin work, this
form needs to be completed. It is proof of employment eligibility and is a requirement of
Federal Law.
Application/Testing: Candidates for positions shall be examined on the basis of the job
related criteria. Examinations may include such things as: applications/resume review,
completion of written or skills tests, evaluation of education and job experience, personal
interview, medical examination, psychological examination and background
investigation. Any required medical or psychological examination shall occur after a job
offer, but before the offeree can begin work.
15
TYPES OF EMPLOYMENT
Full Time Employment: An appointment to work a standard work week (based on
40 hours unless employed by Public Safety) on a continuing or indefinite basis.
Except as otherwise provided, such employees are subject to the rules, policies and
procedures of the Ordinance and this Handbook, and receive all benefits and rights
provided by the Town of Hampden.
Part Time Employment: An appointment to work less than the standard work week,
but on a continuing or indefinite basis. No employer-paid benefits will be offered by
the Town of Hampden.
Seasonal Employment: An appointment to work for a specific season (may work a
standard week or less) and with the expectation of being laid off at the end of the
season for which appointed. No benefits will be offered by the Town of Hampden.
Student Appointments: These appointments are on an “internship basis” and afford
students majoring in fields valuable to public service an opportunity to gain work
experience. Such appointments are for a definite period of time, typically less than six
(6) months. Compensation and other conditions of employment are determined in
accordance with the internship program of the sending school and applicable portions
of the Town’s personnel rules.
Temporary Employment: These appointments are made for a definite but limited
period of time when a special project requires additional employees for a specific
time, or to fill a position of an employee on a leave of absence or long term training
such as occurs in the police field. These appointments may also include persons hired
under an existing federal manpower program. In such cases, the range of benefits
made available to the employee will be assessed in the light of the applicable federal
or state regulations and these personnel rules.
On Call Employment: An appointment to render a specified type of service to the Town
(such as fire fighting) on an irregular basis and only in response to a specific call to
service from the Town. Periods of service normally involve only a few hours.
16
PROBATIONARY PERIOD
All persons appointed, promoted or transferred to a full-time position in the Town
Government shall serve a probationary period of six (6) months. A full-time employee
who is transferred or promoted and who does not meet or otherwise comply with the
work standards of the new position shall be transferred to the previous position held, if
possible, or to another position for which she/he is deemed to qualify, if one is available.
Reasonable efforts shall be made to schedule such transfers as to protect the employee’s
job security.
17
POSITION CLASSIFICATION AND PAY PLAN
Purpose and Responsibility: The Town Manager shall maintain inventory of the
positions in the Town Service by classification that shall be the basis of compensation for
employees holding such positions.
Content: Compensation shall take into consideration the relative difficulty and
responsibility existing between various classes, and the prevailing pay for similar types of
work in the relevant public and private labor market. Individual pay increases shall also
take into account employee performance as evaluated by proper authority.
Pay Plan: A pay plan providing at least a schedule of minimum-maximum salary ranges
for each job classification shall be prepared and annually revised in the light of labor
market realties. The Town Manager will ensure that copies of the pay plan and revisions
are provided to Department Heads.
a) New employees will be paid at the minimum rate applicable to the position
classification for which they were hired. At the request of the Department Head,
exceptions may be made by the Town Manager for an applicant with unusual
experience or education.
b) The rate of pay for employees promoted or transferred shall be established by the
Town Manager.
Work Outside of Classification: Regardless of job classification, all employees are
required to perform all job assignments made by their Supervisors, Department Heads or
Town Manager.
18
PROMOTIONS AND TRANSFERS
The Town Council desires that Town employees be given maximum opportunity for
advancement in the service. In so far as possible vacancies will be filled from lower
classifications within the same department. Present employees shall be given
consideration in filling a vacancy, but it is recognized, from time to time, the good of the
service will require that a vacancy be filled from outside the service. Such a decision
shall be made only after careful review of the qualifications of all Town employees who
apply for the position.
19
HOURS OF WORK AND STANDARD WORK WEEK
Policy: A “standard work week” shall be the calendar week commencing 0001 A.M. on
Sunday and expiring at midnight on Saturday. Administration employees are scheduled
for four (4) work days of ten (10) hours each (except in the case of flexible scheduling)
for a total of forty (40) hours. Public Works schedule consists of five (5) work days of
eight (8) hours each. Public Safety scheduling is defined by the Public Safety Director.
The Lura Hoyt Pool schedule is defined by the Pool Director. The Library schedule is
five (5) days, eight (8) hours a day for a total of forty (40) hours.
Scheduling: The Town Manager and the Department Heads shall endeavor to establish
schedules of working hours not in excess of those stipulated by general law of the
business and industry for related positions.
Posting: All departments and divisions or sections thereof shall post the regular hours of
work for the respective groups in a conspicuous place.
OVERTIME
Policy: When circumstances warrant, overtime work shall be required. All employees in
the labor and trades classifications (except employees in classifications exempted under
Federal/State Wage-Hour Laws) when required to work more than the established work
week of forty (40) hours will be paid time and one-half for each additional hour worked.
This provision will not apply to situations where schedules other than forty (40) hours per
week are established for more efficient operation or employee convenience. All overtime
hours shall be approved by the appropriate Supervisor or Department Head.
20
ATTENDANCE
Policy: Employees shall be at their respective places of work in accordance with the
general or departmental regulation pertaining to the hours of work. It is the responsibility
of the employee to notify the immediate Supervisor and make any arrangements for any
absence, not previously approved, prior to the beginning of the work shift to be missed.
Records: Each Department Head shall be responsible for maintaining daily attendance
and work records and shall furnish weekly reports to the Payroll Department.
TIME SHEETS
Policy: A weekly time sheet shall be completed by every employee and submitted to the
Department Head for approval. Every employee shall keep accurate record of their time,
to include vacation, sick and compensatory time used. No employee shall be paid for
lunch breaks, but are entitled to a fifteen minute break in the morning and in the
afternoon. It is the employee’s responsibility to report any inaccuracies that may occur on
their pay stub to the Payroll Department so that the records may be corrected. Intentional
falsification of any payroll records may be just cause for disciplinary action, up to and
including dismissal.
All time sheets are to be submitted to your Department Head for approval. The
Department Head will complete a transmittal sheet that includes all hours broken down
respectively for each employee. The Department Head will then submit the transmittal
sheet to the Finance Office on Monday morning before 9 AM.
All employees are required to have direct deposit of their payroll check. A voided check
will be printed so that you will have the ability to track your sick, vacation, and
compensatory time. These are available to each department on Thursday mornings for
distribution to the employees.
21
EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
Policy: Employee performance evaluations shall be in writing utilizing a standard form
and shall be made part of the employee’s personnel file. In all cases, the evaluations will
be discussed with the employee by the Department Head and signed by both parties. A
copy will be kept in the personnel file. A copy will be retained in the employees
personnel file.
Frequency of evaluation:
a) Probationary employees shall be evaluated by the Department Head prior
to the conclusion of six months of employment. The Department Head
shall recommend to the Town Manager whether the employee should be
retained.
b) Commencing with the employee’s anniversary date, performance
evaluations shall be conducted annually.
NOTE: Public Safety utilizes “rating periods” in lieu of yearly evaluations.
22
EMPLOYEE TRAINING
Policy: The Town of Hampden is committed to the maintenance of a well trained and
efficient staff. It shall attempt to make opportunities for development available to
employees within the framework of organization needs and priorities. Employees, as a
condition of employment, shall attend and participate in such training programs and
courses as may be directed by the Department Head or Town Manager and for which the
Town assumes the cost.
23
TRAVEL REIMBURSEMENT POLICY AND PRACTICES
Policy: The Town of Hampden reimburses all approved travel expenses directly related
to its activities and reasonable under the particular circumstances involved. This policy
and related practices apply to all paid employees, as well as the Town Council.
Practices:
All travel plans and anticipated expenses must have prior approval by the Department
Head and/or the Town Manager.
Take a copy of the Tax Exemption Certificate to avoid tax charges. A copy can be
obtained from the Finance Office.
1. The following travel costs are reimbursed at the stated rates:
a) For employees and Council members who use their private
vehicle, reimbursement is determined by the official IRS mileage
reimbursement rate.
b) Tolls, parking, taxi and other fares are paid at actual costs:
Receipts are required.
c) Reasonable service tips are actual costs: Receipts are required.
2. Documented actual meal and lodging costs are reimbursable if reasonable for the
function and location. Receipts are required.
3. The Town of Hampden will not reimburse you for separate travel costs associated
with your spouse or partner. The cost of a shared hotel room need not be allocated
between you and your spouse/partner unless said room is higher than the cost for
a single person.
4. The Town of Hampden does not allow compensatory time. If you are traveling to
an office, conference etc. outside your typical travel area for one day, you are paid
your hourly wage for travel time beyond your scheduled working/commuting
hours for the day. If you do not or can not readjust your work schedule on other
work days that week and your actual work hours in that work week exceed 40
hours, you will receive pay at the rate of time and one-half for all hours in excess
of 40.
5. Travel time associated with overnight stays is considered compensable work time
when the business travel occurs during the employee’s normal work hours,
regardless of what day of the week travel takes place.
6. The Town Manager may approve higher reimbursement rates when necessary.
7. Claims for reimbursement must be:
a) On the correct Expense Request form
b) Verified by receipts
c) Signed by the employee and Department Head
d) Submitted to the Finance Officer within 30 days following the completion
of the travel
24
EMERGENCY CALL-BACK PAY
Policy: All full-time hourly employees of the Public Works shall be paid a minimum of
two (2) hours for emergency call backs. Rate of pay in excess of the two hour minimum
shall be at the normal hourly rate applicable based on the number of hours worked in the
pay period. Police and Fire/EMS shall be paid consistent with the in-force union contracts
for those departments.
25
DRESS CODE POLICY
Public Safety and Public Works Departments both require uniforms, which are provided
by the Town of Hampden.
Pool and Recreation employees dress more casually because of the nature of their jobs.
However, clothing is required to be clean and neat. Shirts with Town Logos are required
when working with programs and events.
Administration employees may wear jeans only when wearing shirts/sweaters/blazers
with the Town Logo on them. The tops are limited in the choice of color an employee
may choose and must be approved by the Town Manager. They are not limited in the
style that an employee may choose.
All employees are asked to dress appropriately. It is important that we present a
responsible and respectable image to the customers that we deal with daily. ‘Mini’ skirts,
short shorts, halter tops and revealing clothing are not appropriate dress for Town
employees.
When in doubt, ask your Department Head or Supervisor.
26
PERSONNEL FILES
Personnel Files: The Town of Hampden keeps a personnel file containing your
application for employment, resume and other information considered pertinent to your
employment. It also holds your job description, Letter of Hire (including starting date and
scheduled hours), job title, starting wages, evaluations and other material related to
performance. It shall contain any written disciplinary actions, as well. The Town keeps a
copy of all benefits requested by you.
The Human Resource Office keeps a separate file containing confidential information,
such as medical information and verification of employment requests.
Workmen’s Compensation claims also have a separate file. These files are maintained by
the Town Clerk.
If you wish to look at your file(s), you may make an appointment with the Human
Resource Officer. The file(s) can be examined on the premises. You may not remove
anything from nor add anything to the file(s). You may have a complete photocopy of
your file(s). Additions may be placed in your file(s) upon written request and with the
approval of the Town Manager.
Requests for employee information: Requests for general information for an employee
will be directed to the Human Resource Officer, such as date of hire or job title. Specific
questions pertaining to an employee’s job abilities or character will be referred to their
Department Head.
27
LAY-OFF, RECALL, RESIGNATION
Lay-off: An employee may be laid off by competent authority for lack of work, lack of
funds, reductions in staff, or other legitimate reasons. All employees shall be furnished a
written statement setting forth the reasons for the lay-off.
Lay-off Procedure: Full-time employees will, in so far as possible, be laid off in order of
seniority within the department by classification and with “bumping” rights provided the
employee is qualified to perform the duties of the job to which he/she is to be transferred.
Lay-off Notice: Full-time employees shall be given one (1) week notice before the
effective date of the lay-off. Employees who are not full-time and full-time employees
who have not completed the probationary period may be laid off at any time without
recourse to the grievance procedure set forth in the Ordinance or this Handbook.
Recall: Employees who are laid off in good standing shall, provided that their
qualifications are equal to the qualifications of other applicants, be given preference for
re-employment. In the case of substantially equal qualifications among former employees
seeking re-employment, preference shall be given to the employee with the greatest
seniority within the hiring department at the time of lay-off. For purposes of this article,
seniority rights shall be retained for six (6) months after the date of lay-off.
Resignation: An employee serving in the capacity of Department Head shall file a
written notice of intent to terminate employment with the Town of Hampden thirty (30)
days prior to such time. Any employee wishing to leave Town Employment in good
standing shall file with his/her Department Head a written notice of intent to terminate
employment two (2) weeks prior to termination. All Town property shall be returned to
the Town prior to separation from service. Final pay shall include wages earned,
accumulated vacation and compensation time and 25% of accrued sick time. Payment
will occur on the 1st payroll following termination.
28
OUTSIDE/NON-TOWN EMPLOYMENT
Policy: No employee shall, during non-duty hours, be engaged in any employment
activity or enterprise that is incompatible or in conflict with his/her duties with the Town.
Such employment may be ordered to be curtailed or terminated by the appropriate
Department Head or the Town Manager if, in his/her judgment, such employment hinders
the employee in the impartial or efficient performance of his/her duties. In any event, no
employee shall fail to appear for a mandatory work assignment or shift due to conflicting
outside employment or business commitments.
POLITICAL ACTIVITIES
Policy: While employed by the Town of Hampden, employees shall refrain from seeking
or accepting nomination or election to any office in the Town of Hampden government,
and from using their influence publicly in any way for or against any candidate for
elective office in the Town of Hampden government. Town employees shall not circulate
any petitions or literature for elective Town of Hampden officials, or be in any way
connected with soliciting or receiving subscriptions, contributions or political service
from any person for any political purpose pertaining to the government of the Town of
Hampden. This rule is not to be construed to prevent Town employees from becoming, or
continuing to be, members of any political organization, from attending political
organization meetings, from expressing their views on political matters, or from voting
with complete freedom in any election.
29
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
Retirement System: The Town of Hampden is a participating district in the Maine
Public Employees Retirement System (“MainePERS”) for the benefit of all full-time
employees who choose to join. The Town also participates in the International City
Manager’s Association Retirement (ICMA) 401 plan and the 457 plan. The employee
must choose which plan he/she would prefer. Information on these plans can be obtained
from the Human Resource Office.
Social Security: In addition to the MainePERS System and/or the ICMA Retirement
Program, the Town participates jointly with the employees in Social Security payments.
Benefits provided include a retirement feature, survivor’s benefit payments if death
occurs before retirement, disability insurance and Medicare coverage. Questions may be
directed to the Human Resource Officer.
Group Hospital, Surgical and Major Medical Insurance: The Town participates in the
Maine Municipal Association Health Benefit Plan (MMEHT) up to and including the
family level of coverage. Major features of this plan will be explained at time of
employment and are available for full-time employees. Scheduled part-time employees
working 20 hours per week may purchase Group Hospital coverage at Town’s rates.
The Town pays 100% of the cost for a single subscriber to the health plan. The Town
pays 70% of the difference between single subscriber and the cost for family or
employee/dependant coverage as a weekly payroll deduction. Full time employees who
are covered by insurance from their spouse or an alternate source may elect to receive a
payroll adjustment (subject to all tax and FICA withholdings) in lieu of insurance
coverage equal to 50% of the annual single subscriber premium through the Maine
Municipal Association Health Trust. Employees electing to utilize this provision must
provide the Payroll Department with proof of alternative health insurance coverage.
Group Life Insurance: The Town participates in a group life insurance program which
offers life insurance and accidental death and dismemberment coverage. Provisions of
this policy will be outlined at time of employment and are available for full-time
employees.
Unemployment Compensation: The Town provides unemployment compensation
coverage for its employees as required by Maine State Law.
Dental Insurance: The Town participates in a dental plan, through MetLife, up to and
including the family level of coverage. Major features of this plan will be explained at the
time of employment and is available to full-time employees. The Town pays $150.00
yearly per employee for dental insurance premiums for employees who elect to
participate.
30
WORKER’S COMPENSATION
The Town of Hampden provides Workers’ Compensation Insurance for all its employees,
as mandated by law. The purpose is to provide medical/hospital care and partial salary
replacement when an employee is incapacitated due to work related reasons.
All employee injuries at work, no matter how slight, are to be reported to the employee’s
Department Head or Supervisor who will provide the necessary accident report forms
(Employers First Report of Occupational Injury or Disease and Accident/Injury
Investigation Form). These forms are completed regardless whether medical care is
received and/or time from work is lost. Injury reports must be made and must reach the
Town Clerk’s office within 24 hours of the injury.
Employees who suffer injuries that require time off to recover are still Town of Hampden
employees and will be asked to comply with certain procedures. It would be prudent of
the employee to contact the payroll office to discuss deductions the employee may have
and make any arrangements that may be necessary.
While off work due to an injury, employees shall report to their Supervisor or
Department Head once a week, at a previously arranged time, in order to keep the Town
informed of the healing process and when return to work can be expected. If the
employee is ambulatory, this weekly reporting should be made in person.
When the injured employee is released by his/her attending physician for alternative work
or regular work, the release should be presented by the employee to the Department Head
or Supervisor immediately. Failure to report as outlined here without valid reason may be
considered the employee’s voluntary termination of employment.
31
VACATION LEAVE
Policy: Vacation privileges are available only to full-time employees. Each full-time
employee shall earn annual vacation with pay on the following basis:
a) Vacation earned;
1. 0-4 years of employment: Vacation shall accrue at the rate of 8 hours per
month
2. 5-9 years of employment: Vacation shall accrue at the rate of 10 hours per
month.
3. 10-19 years of employment: Vacation shall accrue at the rate of 14 hours
per month.
4. 20+ years of employment: Vacation shall accrue at the rate of 16 hours per
month.
b) Vacations shall be granted at such time or times as is mutually agreeable to the
employees and their Department Heads and shall not disrupt departmental
operations. Due consideration shall be given to an employee’s seniority in regard
to scheduling vacation.
c) An employee, upon resigning, is entitled to 100% of any accrued vacation time.
d) At the discretion of the Department Head, employees may request to be paid in
lieu of vacation, not to exceed two weeks and must have the approval of the Town
Manager. Contact the Finance Office to get the necessary paperwork.
e) Any vacation accrual of more than 80 hours at the end of the fiscal year must have
the approval of the Town Manager before it can be carried forward to the next
year.
f) An employee may request an advance of their vacation time (prior to actual
accrual of said time) with permission of the Town Manager.
NOTE: Vacation accrual time may vary with Fire Department personnel. Refer to
your contract.
32
SICK LEAVE
Eligibility and Accrual: Sick leave for full-time employees shall accrue at a rate of 8
hours for each calendar month of service, accumulative of 960 hours. The first month of
an employee’s service shall be counted as a full month of service if employment begins
on or before the 15th day of the month.
Sick Leave Usage: Sick leave may be used for personal illness or physical/mental
incapacity of such degree as to render the employee unable to perform the duties of
his/her position or other assigned duties within their respective department, or for the
illness of a spouse or family member in the care of the employee. If requested, after three
consecutive sick days, the employee shall furnish the Department Head a certificate from
his/her attending physician. Sick leave may also be used for the care of immediate family
members who are under the care of a physician.
Sick Leave Accounting: Sick leave usage shall be recorded regularly on the payroll. The
Town Manager/Human Resource Officer shall review all sick leave records periodically
and shall investigate any cases that indicate abuse of the privilege.
Abuse of Sick Leave: Willful abuse of the sick leave privilege may be cause for
dismissal.
Sick Leave and Worker’s Compensation: Employees are eligible for Worker’s
Compensation for a service connected injury and may elect to take earned sick leave in
addition to Worker’s Compensation to the extent that it provides no more than regular
pay, and to the extent of earned sick leave credit.
Sick Time Payment: At the time of resignation or retirement, an employee in good
standing is entitled to payment for 25% of accrued sick time.
33
JURY DUTY
Should you be required to serve on jury duty, you will be compensated the difference
between the amount received and your salary with the Town of Hampden. Time spent on
jury duty will be considered equal to regular working hours, thus you will accrue all
benefits due you.
Payments you receive from your jury duty service must be turned into the Finance
Officer for processing. You will receive a full paycheck for the period of time in
question.
You are required to return to work on any day or part of a day that you are excused from
jury duty.
HOLIDAY LEAVE
The Town of Hampden follows the State of Maine holiday schedule. The number of
hours in a holiday are based on 8(10) hour work day, depending on your department.
Holidays falling within a period of vacation/earned time are paid at the holiday rate.
Employees on a leave of absence without pay are not eligible for holiday pay.
Holidays that fall on a Saturday are observed on the preceding Friday and those falling on
a Sunday are observed on the following Monday. The exception to this rule is the
Administration Department. The Saturday ruling does not apply because this department
is closed on Fridays.
Exempt (Salaried) employees can not hold over holiday leave for future use. It must be
recorded in the week which in it actually occurred.
All full time employees, including those on probation, who have worked at least thirty
days, shall be entitled to paid holidays.
New Years Day Labor Day
Martin Luther King’s Birthday Columbus Day
President’s Day Veterans Day
Patriot’s Day Thanksgiving Day & the Friday after
Memorial Day Christmas Day
Fourth of July
34
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
The Town Manager may grant up to three (3) days of leave with pay, as necessary, in the
event of the death of an immediate family member. Immediate family member for this
purpose is defined as: spouse, children, parents, brothers, sisters, grandparents,
grandchildren and domestic partners. This leave is intended to accommodate the need to
travel or conduct necessary business and need not be taken consecutively.
For the death of intermediate family members defined as aunts, uncles, nieces, nephews,
cousins, any in-law, persons sharing a residence or “someone close to you, one (1) day of
leave may be approved by the Town Manager.
Earned time or time without pay may be used at your own discretion.
Employees who need bereavement leave must contact their Supervisors or Department
Head as soon as possible.
The Town Manager reserves the right to extend the leave to a maximum of five (5) days
when distance or unusual circumstances are factors.
35
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF
Policy: Salaried employees exempted for overtime rates of pay when required to work in
excess of the standard work week, may be compensated by compensatory time off to be
granted by the Department Head, except that it is understood that exempt salaried
positions are paid on the basis of job responsibility and it is the responsibility of the
person filling the position to accomplish the work, within reason. Department Heads,
Supervisors or other salaried professionals reporting directly to the Town Manager shall
be ineligible for overtime rates of pay but shall be eligible for compensatory time off at
the discretion of the Town Manager.
a) Exempted positions eligible for compensatory time off in lieu of overtime, at the
discretion of the Department Head, shall include all full-time, hourly paid
employees. No hourly paid employee shall accrue more than eighty (80) hours of
compensatory time. All compensatory time records for compensatory time earned
and used shall be submitted to the Finance Officer for record keeping purposes.
b) Exempted salaried employees shall be eligible for compensatory time in
circumstances where the hours of work required exceed the “normal” work week
due to night/weekend meetings, special projects and other work not a routine part
of job responsibilities. No salaried shall accrue more than 80 hours of
compensatory time. Records for compensatory time earned and used shall be
submitted to the Finance Officer for record keeping purposes.
c) Compensatory time for both salaried and hourly paid exempted employees shall
accrue at the rate of 1.5 hours for each hour worked in excess of the normal work
schedule. It will not accrue if a sick, vacation or holiday day occurs in the same
week. It would then be considered straight time.
36
DISCRETIONARY LEAVE WITHOUT PAY
Policy: A full-time employee may be granted a leave of absence without pay by the
Town Manager for a period deemed necessary for the purpose of the leave, but in no case
to exceed six (6) months without prior approval by the Town Council. The employee
must use all accrued vacation, compensatory and holiday entitlements before
commencing his/her leave of absence. The employee is expected to return to work upon
expiration of the granted leave or arrange an extension of the leave prior to its expiration.
Failure on the part of the employee to return to work on the expiration of a granted leave,
without having arranged for an extension of leave, shall be deemed a resignation from the
Town of Hampden.
No employee shall receive a salary or Town-paid fringe benefits while on discretionary
leave of absence. Employees on discretionary leave may continue to participate through
the Town in Group Health, Life and Dental Insurance at their own expense. Employment
and leave of absence shall terminate when the employee accepts other employment.
When computing length of service for any reason, time spent on a leave of absence will
not be computed. In effect, this changes the anniversary date of the employee for salary
increases and other benefits.
37
EMPLOYMENT LEAVE FOR VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
Pursuant to 26 M. R. S. §850, the Town of Hampden will grant reasonable and necessary
unpaid leave from work for an employee to:
1. prepare for and attend court proceedings
2. receive medical treatment or attend to medical treatment for a victim who is the
employee’s daughter, son, parent or spouse.
3. obtain necessary services to remedy a crisis caused by domestic violence, sexual
assault or stalking
The leave must be needed because you, or your daughter, son, parent or spouse are
victims of violence, assault, sexual assault, stalking or any act that would support an
order of protection. The Town of Hampden will not take adverse actions against
exercising your rights under the law.
Any request for leave from work must be made in advance, within a reasonable time
given the circumstances. Reasonable time will be defined by the Town Manager on a
case by case need. These requests must be made in writing to the Town Manager
accompanied by the proper documentation. Confirmation and/or Denial of leave will be
made in a timely fashion.
The Town of Hampden does reserve the right to deny requests for leave for any of the
following reasons:
1. if the Town would sustain undue hardship from the absence
2. the request for leave is not communicated to the Town Manager within a
reasonable time frame under the circumstances
3. the requested leave is impractical, unreasonable or unnecessary based on the facts
then made known to the Town Manager.
The length of leave shall be determined by the purpose for which it is sought.
38
FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE
Federal Family Medical Leave
The Family & Medical Leave Act (29 U.S. C. § 2601 et seq.) is a federal law that
requires unpaid leave for employees who have worked for the Town for at least twelve
(12) months and at least 1,250 hours during the prior twelve (12) months to deal with
family and personal matters. Eligible employees may take up to 12 weeks of job
protected unpaid leave in a 12-month period for the following reasons:
1. Birth and/or care of a child of the employee;
2. Placement of a child into the employee’s family by adoption or by a foster care
arrangement;
3. Care of the employee’s spouse, child or parent who has a serious health condition;
4. Inability of the employee to perform the functions of the employee’s position due
to a serious health condition;
5. To address a qualifying exigency arising out of the fact that the employee’s
spouse, child or parent is on covered active duty (or has been notified of an
impending call or order to covered active duty) in the Armed forces;
6. To care for a covered servicemember who is the spouse, child, parent or next of
kin of the employee (for up to 26 workweeks in a 12-month period).
This law guarantees certain rights to eligible workers:
1. Restoration to the same position upon return to work, or one that is equal in pay,
benefits and responsibility
2. Protection of employee benefits while on leave.
3. Protection from retaliation by an employer for exercising this right
State Family Medical Leave
Under the Maine Family Medical Leave law (26 M.R.S. § 843 et seq.), employees who
have worked for the Town for 12 consecutive months but for less than 1,250 hours, and
are therefore ineligible for Federal family and medical leave, may be eligible for up to 10
work weeks of unpaid leave in any 2 years for the following reasons:
1. Serious health condition of the employee;
2. Birth of the employee’s child or the employee’s domestic partner’s child;
3. Placement of a child 16 years of age or less with the employee or with the
employee’s domestic partner in connection with the adoption of the child by
the employee or the employee’s domestic partner;
4. A child, domestic partner’s child, parent, domestic partner, sibling or spouse
with a serious health condition;
5. Donation of an organ of the employee for a human transplant; or
39
6. Death or serious health condition of the employee’s spouse, domestic partner,
parent, sibling or child if the spouse, domestic partner, parent, sibling or child,
as a member of the state military forces (as defined in Title 37-B M.R.S. §102)
or of the Unites States Armed Forces, including the National Guard and
Reserve, dies or incurs a serious health condition while on active duty.
If both Federal and State leave are applicable, the time on leave will count toward the
leave limits under both the Federal and the State laws, as it is the Town’s intent for leave
to run concurrently under both laws.
For further information contact the Human Resource Office. All necessary forms are also
available at the same location.
40
MAINE FAMILY MILITARY LEAVE
In accordance with 26 M.R.S. §814, employees with family members serving on active
duty in the military are entitled to a leave of absence, which leave of absence shall be
unpaid leave.
In order to be eligible for family military leave, an employee must meet both of the
requirements below:
1. The employee must have been employed by the Town for at least 12
months and for at least 1250 hours during the 12-month period preceding
the leave.
2. The employee must be a spouse, domestic partner or parent of a
serviceperson who is:
a. a Maine resident, and
b. in the state military forces (as defined in 37-B M.R.S. §102)
or the U.S. Armed Forces, including the National Guard and
Reserves, and
c. deployed for military service in a combat theatre or in an area
where armed conflict is occurring for a period lasting longer than
180 days.
An eligible employee may receive up to 15 days of family military leave per deployment,
if requested. The leave may be taken only during one or more of the following time
frames:
1. The 15 days immediately prior to the deployment;
2. Deployment, if the military member is granted leave; or
3. The 15 days immediately following the deployment.
In order to be eligible for family military leave, employees must comply with the
following notice requirements. An employee must give at least fourteen (14) days’ notice
of the intended date upon which the leave will commence if leave will consist of 5 or
more consecutive work days. An employee taking family military leave for fewer than 5
consecutive work days must provide such advance notice as is practicable. An employee
shall consult with the Town to schedule leave so as not to unduly disrupt the operations
of the Town.
The Town will make it possible for an employee to continue employee benefits at the
employee’s expense during any family military leave. Taking family military leave will
41
not result in the loss of any employee benefits accrued before the date on which the leave
commences.
Any employee who exercises the right to family military leave is entitled to be restored to
the position held when the leave commenced or to a position with equivalent seniority
status, employee benefits, pay and conditions of employment, unless the employer proves
that the employee was not restored to such employment because of circumstances
unrelated to the employees’ exercise of family military leave rights prevent the Town
from restoring the employee to the same or equivalent position..
42
MILITARY SERVICE LEAVE
Policy: The Town will grant military leave as necessary in compliance with all applicable
state and federal laws.
Reserve Service Leave: Reserve service leave is available to regular full-time employees
who are members of the military reserves or National Guard in accordance with the terms
of applicable Federal and State law. In addition, for any period of reserve service up to
two (2) weeks in any calendar year, the Town will compensate the employee for the
difference between his/her regular weekly wages and his/her total military pay. In
instances where the military pay is equal to or exceeds the pay that would have been
earned by the employee in service to the town, such leave shall be without pay.
Employees using reserve service leave must furnish the Department Head with an official
statement of reserve service pay received. Any amount served in excess of two (2) weeks
shall be considered leave without pay.
Long-Term Active Duty Leave: Regular full-time employees required to interrupt their
active employment specifically for the purpose of entering active military service are
entitled to a leave of absence in accordance with the Uniformed Services Employment
and Reemployment Rights Act.
43
CUSTOMER COMPLAINT POLICY
From time to time, you may have a complaint or concern regarding the quality of our
work. It is important to address such matters promptly.
In most instances, if you are the first staff person to hear the complaint, you should be
able to resolve the issue immediately and are encouraged to do this.
When immediate resolution is not possible, you should refer the matter to your
Department Head or Supervisor who will take over the responsibility for resolution and
will inform the Town Manager if it is warranted by the nature of the complaint.
The Department Head or Supervisor will establish a file of the complaint, including the
original complaint and will work to resolve the matter through direct interaction with the
complainant.
If the independent resolution is acceptable to the complainant and the Department Head
or Supervisor, the case will be closed and a summary report will be sent to the Town
Manager.
If the independent resolution is unacceptable to both parties, the case and the resolution
will be reviewed by the Town Manager and a final determination will be made by the
Town Manager.
This will exhaust the internal complaint process.
44
SMOKE FREE WORKPLACE POLICY
The Town of Hampden is committed to wellness and the health and safety of our
employees and their families. The Town Council has established the following policy
concerning smoking in the Town of Hampden public proceedings, in buildings owned or
occupied by the Town of Hampden, or in places of employment owned or occupied by
the Town of Hampden.
1. SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PROCEEDINGS: No person may smoke
tobacco or any other substance in any public proceedings conducted by any
Board, Commission, Agency or other body of the Town of Hampden when such
proceedings are held inside.
2. SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC AREAS OF PUBLICLY OWNED
BUILDINGS: No person may smoke tobacco or any other substance in any public
area of a building owned or occupied by the Town of Hampden. For the purpose
hereof, the term “public area” shall mean any area in which members of the
public are allowed.
3. SMOKING PROHIBITED IN WORKPLACE OF THE TOWN OF HAMPDEN:
No person may smoke tobacco or any other substance in any structurally enclosed
location or portion thereof owned or occupied by the Town of Hampden. This
provision would also include any vehicles owned and operated by the Town of
Hampden. If public employees’ rights under a current collective bargaining
agreement are affected by this provision, the Town Manager may designate
smoking areas in the non-public areas of buildings owned or occupied by the
Town.
4. SMOKING DEFINED: For the purposes hereof, the term “smoking” includes
carrying or having in one’s possession a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe or other
object giving off or containing any substance giving off smoke.
5. DISCIPLINARY ACTION: Any employee who violates the provisions of this
policy may be subject to disciplinary action in accordance with the Town of
Hampden Personnel Rules and Policies Ordinance and/or applicable collective
bargaining agreements.
NOTE: Effective September 12, 2009, Maine State Law requires that designated
smoking areas must be located outside and must be at least twenty (20) feet from
entryways, vents and doorways.
45
DRUG FREE WORKPLACE POLICY STATEMENT
It is the policy of the Town of Hampden to maintain a drug/alcohol free work place. In
accordance with this policy, the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing,
possession or use of a controlled substance is prohibited by the Town of Hampden, and
any employee convicted of such activity may be subject to disciplinary actions up to and
including dismissal.
As a condition of employment with the Town of Hampden you agree to abide by the
policies concerning a drug/alcohol free work place as stated in the policy. Further you
agree to notify the Town of Hampden immediately of any criminal drug status
conviction, for a violation occurring in the work place, of yourself or any other employee
of whom you become aware, no later than five (5) days after such conviction.
PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR:
The Town Manager is designated by the Town of Hampden as the Alcohol/Drug Testing
Program Administrator. The Program Administrator is responsible for answering
questions from drivers, employees or the public in general. The Program Administrator
will maintain the confidentiality of all information relating to drug and alcohol testing.
The Program Administrator may provide such information as necessary to enable the
appropriate Department Head or Supervisor to take the appropriate action to ensure
compliance with this policy. In addition to his/her duties under this policy, the Program
Administrator is also responsible for compliance with the Program Administrator
Guidelines.
SCOPE OF POLICY:
This policy applies to all regular full-time, part-time, seasonal, on-call and temporary
employees who are required to hold a Commercial Driver’s License (CDL) for their
positions. All applicants for employment positions requiring a CDL are required to pass a
drug test as a prerequisite of employment, after a conditional offer of employment and
prior to final hiring. Any applicant who fails a drug test shall not be hired, although may
re-apply for employment in the future.
Any person who was employed on a part-time or on-call basis for the Town of Hampden
at least once during 1995 and is employed at least once annually thereafter shall be
considered a continuing employee for the purpose of this policy, and is not subject to preemployment
testing prior to recommencing work. However, such employees are subject
to all other provisions of this policy.
All covered employees shall receive a copy of this policy, as well as educational
materials on alcohol and substance abuse.
46
COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
All CDL employees subject to alcohol and drug testing must be in compliance with this
policy at all times while working for the Town of Hampden. This includes all time spent
operating commercial vehicles, as well as time spent maintaining or repairing those
vehicles.
Note regarding independent contractors:
Independent contractors and their employees who must hold a CDL for the contracted
activity are subject to the requirements of 49 CFR part 382 and are responsible for
compliance with that and related laws. The Town of Hampden will not provide or pay for
test, evaluation or rehabilitation for independent contractors or their employees. The
Town of Hampden shall make compliance with the law a condition of any contract which
requires a CDL driver.
SUBSTANCE TESTED:
When drug and alcohol screening is required by this policy, a breath test and/or urine test
will be given to detect the following:
1. Alcohol
2. Marijuana
3. Cocaine
4. Phencyclidine (PCP)
5. Opiates
PRESCRIPTION DRUG USE:
Employees covered by this policy may use prescription drugs and “over the counter”
medications provided that:
1. The prescription drugs or their generic equivalent have been prescribed to the
employee within the past 12 months by an authorized medical practitioner.
2. The employee does not consume prescribed drugs more often than as prescribed
by the employee’s physician.
3. Any employee who has been informed that the medication could cause adverse
side effects while working shall inform his/her Department Head or Supervisor
prior to using these substances. The Town of Hampden at all times reserves the
right to have a licensed physician determine if use of a prescription drug or
medication by an employee produces an adverse effect. If such a finding is made,
the Town of Hampden may notify the employee’s physician (with employee’s
permission) to determine if other medications are available which would not
seriously affect the employee’s ability to work safely. If an appropriate substitute
medicine is not available, the Town of Hampden may limit or suspend the
employee’s work activities to non-safety sensitive duties.
47
CONSEQUENCES OF VIOLATION OF THIS POLICY
?? Any employee who violates this policy shall be immediately removed from the
safety-sensitive function and will be advised by the Town of Hampden of the
resources available for evaluating and resolving drug and alcohol abuse problems.
The employee shall be required to be evaluated by a substance abuse professional.
All evaluation and rehabilitation shall be at the employee’s cost unless otherwise
agreed by the Town of Hampden. An employee shall not be allowed to return to
the safety-sensitive function until he/she has a return-to-duty alcohol test result of
less than 0.02 or a return-to-duty drug test with a verified negative result.
?? In addition, any employee who violates this policy may be subject to disciplinary
action up to and including dismissal. Before discipline, reassignment or dismissal
is imposed following a confirmed positive drug test, the employee shall have the
opportunity to participate for up to 6 months in a rehabilitation program. The
employee is responsible for all costs associated with the rehabilitation program
unless otherwise agreed by the Town of Hampden. Factors to be considered in
determining the appropriate disciplinary response include, but are not limited to
the following: the employee’s work history, length of employment, current job
performance and existence of past disciplinary actions. Disciplinary action is
imposed by municipal policy; it is not required by federal law.
*Under State law, if part of all of the costs of drug abuse rehabilitation are
covered by a group health insurance plan which includes the employee in
question, then such insurance may be used by the employee for that purpose;
See: 26 M.R.S. §685.
CONFIDENTIALTY OF INFORMATION
Unless the employee or applicant consents, all information acquired by the Town of
Hampden in connection with the testing processes is confidential and may not be released
to any person other than to the employee or applicant who is tested, the Program
Administrator, officials with a need to know and the rehabilitation provider. The
foregoing shall not prevent the release of information required or permitted by state or
federal law, or the use of information in any grievance procedure, administrative hearing
or lawsuit relating to the imposition of the test or the use of the test results.
SEVERABILITY
In the event that a Court finds any provision of this policy void or unenforceable, the
remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
48
VIOLENCE IN THE WORKPLACE POLICY AND PRACTICES
PURPOSE:
The policy states the values and points of view from which we develop our Violence in
the Workplace practices. The Council retains the right to change and interpret these
policies, and shall review and approve them.
POLICY:
It is the policy of the Town of Hampden to promote a safe work environment for its
employees. We are committed to working with employees to maintain a work
environment free from violence, threats of violence, harassment, intimidation and other
disruptive behavior. The Town of Hampden does not tolerate violent, threatening,
aggressive, abusive, intimidating or other disruptive behavior on the part of employees,
customers or anyone else involved in its business or facilities. All reports of such
incidents will be taken seriously and will be dealt with appropriately. The purpose of this
policy is intended to be protective and to prevent instances of work place violence. We
need your cooperation to implement this policy effectively and maintain a safe work
environment.
PRACTICES:
Employees may not use or be subjected to rude or abusive language or behavior, threats,
harassment, intimidation or acts of physical, emotional or psychological violence. Such
behavior can include oral or written statements, gestures or expressions that communicate
a direct or indirect threat of physical or mental harm. If such instances occur, all business
with such individuals and in the immediate area is to stop until the situation is resolved.
Individuals who commit such acts may be removed from the premises and may be subject
to corrective action, criminal complaint or both.
If a customer is behaving in a manner that you find intimidating, explain our policy
regarding behavior, discontinue providing service and focus on de-escalating the
situation.
If the customer cannot resume appropriate behavior and he/she is on the telephone, tell
them that they may call back when they are calmer and hang up.
If a customer cannot resume appropriate behavior and are in your physical presence, ask
the customer to leave telling them they may return on another day when they are under
control. If the customer refuses to leave, disengage, leave the area and notify your
Department Head or Supervisor who will then assume direction of the situation.
49
If, in your best judgment, an individual’s behavior, whether a co-worker, customer or
other guest may endanger anyone or if the person refuses to leave the premises, call the
police (or closest law enforcement official) and notify your Department Head or
Supervisor.
Do not ignore violent, harassing, intimidating or other disruptive behavior. If you observe
or experience such behavior by anyone on the premises, whether an employee or
customer, you must report it to your Department Head or Supervisor. The Supervisor will
notify the Town Manager who will log the incident, investigate as necessary and assure
that appropriate action is taken.
If you have foreknowledge of a potentially abusive or violent circumstance that may
present itself in our workplace (e.g. the arrival of an abusive partner or an irate customer)
immediately inform your Department Head or Supervisor or the most senior staff person
in the facility.
The above “umbrella” practices provide guidance to all employees. Departments may
issue additional practices to their work settings. All such practices must be filed with the
Human Resource Officer and appended here.
Employees at each work site should discuss specific plans of action they will follow to
best address their particular circumstance.
NOTE: The Town Office and Public Safety lobbies are under audio and video
surveillance, 24 hours a day, 365 days a year.
50
WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION
The Town of Hampden strives to conduct its business with integrity and in strict
compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. Accordingly,
any employee is encouraged to bring to the attention of the employee’s supervisor or the
Town Manager any actions of town officials or employees which the employee believes
may be improper. The Town will not retaliate against any employee who makes a report
in good faith to the employee’s supervisor, the Town Manager, or a regulatory body.
51
INFORMATION SYSTEMS POLICY AND PRACTICES
These policies state the values and points of view from which we develop our
Information Systems practices. The Council retains the right to change and interpret these
policies and approve them.
POLICY:
This policy applies to all information systems owned, leased or used by the Town of
Hampden and used by employees to manage and communicate information such as paper
documents, spoken communication, telephones and cell phones, including voice mail, fax
machines, computer hardware and software including e-mail, cameras, recording devices,
photocopiers and any other information systems, equipment or technology that the Town
of Hampden owns, licenses, operates or may acquire in the future.
As an employee, you are expected to utilize the Information Systems, including the
Internet, and the equipment in a responsible, professional manner for programmatic and
business activities of the Town of Hampden. As a benefit to you, you may occasionally
use the Town’s computers for Internet access, for other non job related use, during breaks
or times approved by your Department Head or Supervisor: any such personal use is
governed by the same expectations that the systems and equipment be used in a
responsible, professional manner in accordance with this policy and in such a manner that
will not embarrass or otherwise effect the reputation of the Town of Hampden or limit
our ability to accomplish our work. Any personal use shall not interfere with an
employee’s performance of their duties.
All information transferred to and from and/or stored on equipment and in files owned by
the Town of Hampden is the property of said Town. The Management of the Town of
Hampden reserves the right to examine all voice mail, e-mail, faxes, electronic
documents, databases, personal file directories and other information transferred through
or stored on computers and telephones owned by the Town, as well as paper documents
and records. By using equipment, you waive all expectations of privacy in respect to
document files, software, e-mail, voice mail, fax communications and Internet access.
All information systems must be used in accordance with all Town policies and practices.
If you have questions about the appropriateness of any activity, consult your Department
Head or Supervisor. Irresponsible use the Town’s equipment and information may be
subject to corrective action, up to and including dismissal.
Purchasing of software and equipment:
The Town of Hampden intends to have standardized equipment and software. All
purchases shall be made through the IT Officer using Town procurement policies under
the guidance the Town Manager. Equipment and software are provided for the use of the
employees when needed to conduct Town business. The installation or downloading of
52
new software on the computers is the sole duty of the IT Officer with the approval of the
Town Manager. No installation of software shall be done without the approval of the IT
Officer or the Town Manager.
Personal computers:
Configuration of desktops will be managed by the IT Officer to obtain maximum
efficiency and uniformity from Town owned machines.
Computer equipment may not be altered or added to in any way without the knowledge
and authorization of the IT Officer.
The Town of Hampden is committed to working safely. Safety is the responsibility of
both Management and Staff. If you find your environment uncomfortable or unsafe,
report the condition to your Department Head or Supervisor for further evaluation and
correction.
Passwords must be selected carefully with no obvious relation to the user and not easy to
guess .Passwords should contain letters, numbers and special characters.
Internet usage:
? Access to the Internet is provided for business use. Access is coordinated by the IT
Officer.
? Personal use is restricted to work related tasks except during breaks or Department
Head or Supervisor approved periods of time and is expected that your personal usage
will conform to the Town’s expectations of professionalism and this policy.
Using e-mail and voice mail systems:
?Activity, communications and messages are subject to review at any time to ensure that
the use of the system is consistent with the Town’s legitimate interests.
?You should attend to current e-mail messages in a timely way.
?E-mail and voice mail messages should be deleted or archived as soon as possible to
avoid degrading performance of the system.
?Voice mail greetings must be professional and courteous.
?The content of e-mail and voice mail messages should be brief and courteous. Sensitive
information should not be sent via electronic mail.
53
Fax machines
? If possible, fax machines should be avoided for transmission of information that is
restricted or confidential.
? If the information is confidential or restricted, a cover letter must accompany it
stipulating that the information is confidential or restricted.
? Faxing of information should be limited to job related duties. It is not to be used for
public faxes. You may make personal use of the fax machine, at cost, on an infrequent
basis consistent with these policies.
Other Prohibited Uses
1. Engaging in any communication that is discriminatory, defamatory, pornographic,
obscene, racist, sexist, or that evidences religious bias, or is otherwise of a
derogatory nature toward any specific person, per Maine Human Rights Act.
2. Browsing or downloading and/or forwarding and/or printing pornographic,
profane, discriminatory, threatening or otherwise offensive material from any
source including, but not limited to, the Internet.
3. Engaging in any communication that is in violation of Federal, State or Local
laws.
4. Promoting any religious belief or tenet.
5. Campaigning for or against any candidate for political office or any ballot
proposal or issue.
6. Sending, forwarding, redistributing or replying to “chain letters”.
7. Unauthorized use of passwords to gain access to another user’s information or the
Town of Hampden’s communications system or elsewhere.
8. Advertising, solicitation or other commercial, non-programmatic use.
9. Knowingly introducing a computer virus, spyware or malware into the Town’s
communication system or knowingly causing damage to the Town’s systems.
10. Using the Town’s systems in a manner that interferes with normal business
functions in any way.
11. Excessive personal use of the Town’s technologies that preempts any business
activity or interferes with Town productivity.
12. Sending e-mail messages under an assumed name or obscuring the origin of an email
message sent or received.
54
DISCIPLINARY ACTION
Policy: The Town has a policy of progressive discipline of employees, which means that
repeated instances of poor job performance or misconduct will be subject to progressively
more severe sanctions, which may include oral warnings, written reprimands, suspension
with or without pay, demotion or dismissal. Progressive discipline does not mean that the
initial disciplinary response to unsatisfactory job performance or misconduct will always
be the same. Serious job performance problems or misconduct such as, but not limited to,
dishonesty, violence or theft, may result in more severe disciplinary sanctions, up to and
including dismissal, even on the first occurrence.
Examples of Conduct Warranting Disciplinary Action: The following examples
illustrate types of conduct which may constitute grounds for disciplinary action, and are
not exclusive:
1. Attendance
a. Improper or unauthorized use or abuse of paid leave.
b. Excessive absenteeism, regardless of reason, the effect of which
disrupts or diminishes operational effectiveness.
c. Being absent without authorized leave, or repeated unauthorized late
arrival or early departure from work.
d. Abuse of break and lunch periods.
2. Behavior
a. Violation of the provisions of Town ordinances, including Personnel
Rules and Regulations, department operating rules or procedures, or
related directives.
b. Failure to carry out a direct order from a supervisor, except where the
employee’s safety may reasonably be jeopardized by the order, or the
order is illegal or in conflict with any law.
c. Engaging in a conflict of interest.
d. Conduct that discredits the employee or the Town, or willful
misrepresentation of the Town.
e. Conviction of a crime, including convictions based on a plea of nolo
contendere or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, the nature of
which reflects the possibility of serious consequences related to the
continued assignment or employment of the employee.
f. Knowingly falsifying, removal, or destruction of information related to
employment, payroll, or work-related records or reports.
g. Soliciting outside work for personal gain during business hours;
participating in any off-duty employment that adversely affects the
employee’s performance of work for the Town.
55
h. Discourteous treatment of the public or other employees, including
harassing, coercing, threatening, or intimidating others.
i. Conduct that interferes with the management of Town operations.
j. Violation or neglect of safety rules, or contributing to hazardous
conditions.
k. Unauthorized use of Town property.
l. Physical altercations
m. Any act or conduct that is discriminatory in nature toward another
person’s race, creed, color, national origin, sex (including sexual
harassment), age, religious beliefs or political affiliations.
n. Accepting gratuities intended to influence the employee’s job
performance.
o. Misuse of Town telephones, computers, or internet service.
p. Possession, display, or use of explosives, firearms, or other dangerous
weapons while on duty or on Town property. (Except for police officers
and other authorized employees in the performance of their duties.)
q. Possession of alcohol, narcotics, or drugs while on Town property
(except in the official discharge of police duties). Alcohol may only be
on Town property at sanctioned events as authorized by the Town
Manager.
3. Performance
a. Inefficiency, incompetence, or negligence in the performance of duties,
including failure to perform assigned tasks or training, or failure to
discharge duties in a prompt, competent, and reasonable manner.
b. Refusal or inability to improve job performance in accordance with
written or verbal direction after a reasonable trial period.
c. Refusal to accept reasonable and proper assignments from an authorized
supervisor.
d. Intoxication or incapacity on duty due to the use of alcohol or drugs.
e. Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs while on duty;
suspension of driver’s license where job duties require driving.
f. Careless, negligent, or improper use of Town property, equipment or
funds, including unauthorized removal, or use for private purpose, or
use involving damage or unreasonable risk of damage to property
g. Unauthorized release of confidential information or official records.
Authority of Disciplinary Action
The Town Manager shall have the authority to take necessary disciplinary action which
may include such remedies as oral warnings, written reprimands, suspension with or
without pay, demotion or dismissal. Such authority may be delegated by the Town
Manager. Supervisors below the Department Head level shall NOT be given the authority
to suspend, demote or dismiss a subordinate. If a Department Head has been delegated
56
disciplinary authority, no suspension without pay for more than two (2) days, demotion
or dismissal shall be taken by the Department Head without consultation with, and
approval by, the Town Manager.
Just Cause: All disciplinary action involving suspension without pay for more than two
(2) days, demotion or dismissal shall be for just cause.
Due Process Hearing
Before making a final decision to suspend without pay for more than two (2) days,
demote or dismiss an employee, the Town Manager or designee shall hold an informal
hearing. The employee shall be given written notice of the proposed disciplinary action
and the reasons therefor in advance of the informal hearing. The hearing shall include, at
a minimum, the employee, the employee’s Department Head and the Town Manager or
designee. The employee shall be afforded an opportunity at the informal hearing to
respond to the reasons and to present reasons why the employee believes the discipline or
discharge is not justified. The employee shall be permitted to have witnesses speak on
the employee’s behalf and to be assisted by a representative. A prior informal hearing
shall not be required when in the judgment of the Town Manager the employee’s conduct
or job performance creates an immediate threat of injury to the employee, any other
Town employee, or members of the public, or is otherwise detrimental to the Town,
provided that the employee shall be suspended with pay until such time as an opportunity
for an informal hearing is offered.
Appeal to Personnel Appeals Board
Should an employee be dissatisfied with the Town Manager’s decision with respect to
suspension without pay for more than two (2) days, demotion or dismissal, the employee
may file an appeal of the decision to the Personnel Appeals Board. The appeal shall be in
writing and shall be filed with the Town Clerk within seven (7) calendar days of the
decision. The appeal shall set forth the relief sought. The Personnel Appeals Board shall
conduct a hearing on the matter within fourteen (14) days from the receipt of the appeal
by the Town Clerk. The Board shall render a written recommendation based on its
findings to the Town Council and Town Manager pursuant to Section 301 of the Town
Charter, which recommendation shall be made within seven (7) days from the conclusion
of the hearing.
57
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES
Definition: A grievance is a dispute between an employee and the employer concerning
the interpretation or application of the terms of the Personnel Rules and Policies,
departmental rules or this Handbook, but excluding disciplinary matters involving a
suspension without pay for more than two (2) days, demotion or dismissal.
Procedure:
1. Any employee who deems himself or herself aggrieved shall, within five (5)
calendar days of the occurrence or knowledge of the problem, bring such
grievance to the attention of the immediate Supervisor who shall render a decision
within five (5) calendar days.
2. If the employee does not feel the matter has been adequately resolved, he/she may
bring the matter to the attention of the Department Head in writing within five (5)
calendar days from the date of the Supervisor’s decision. The Department Head
shall have five (5) calendar days in which to render a written decision. NOTE: If
the immediate Supervisor is the Department Head, the employee shall proceed, in
the case of dissatisfaction, from step 1. to step 3.
3. If the employee is not satisfied with the decision of the Department Head, he/she
may within five (5) calendar days from such decision, bring the matter to the
attention of the Town Manager who shall render a written decision within seven
(7) days.
4. Should the employee be dissatisfied with the Town Manager’s decision, the
employee may within seven (7) calendar days from such decision, submit the
grievance to the Personnel Appeals Board in writing and shall set forth the relief
being sought. The Appeals Board shall conduct a hearing into the matter within
fourteen (14) calendar days from the receipt of the grievance. The Board shall
render a written recommendation based on its findings to the Town Council and
Town Manager pursuant to Section 301 of the Town Charter, which
recommendation shall be made within seven (7) days from the conclusion of the
hearing. The above time limits may be extended by mutual agreement.
5. Nothing in the Ordinance or this Handbook shall diminish the right of any
employee to present his/her own grievance.

Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance
1
Article 1. Purpose.
The purpose of this “Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance” (the “Ordinance”) is
to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Hampden
through review and approval of Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plans and monitoring
and enforcement of compliance with such plans as required by federal and State law. This
Ordinance establishes methods for post-construction stormwater management in order to comply
with minimum control measures requirements of the federal Clean Water Act, of federal
regulations and of Maine’s Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems General Permit.
Article 2. Objectives
This Ordinance seeks to meet the above purpose through the following objectives:
A. Reduce the impact of post-construction discharge of stormwater on receiving waters; and
B. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution,
wherever possible, through use of Best Management Practices as promulgated by the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to its Chapters 500 and 502
Rules, and ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no
threat to health and public safety.
Article 3. Definitions. (Note: Defined terms appear in italics throughout this ordinance).
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the terms listed below are defined as follows:
A. Applicant. "Applicant" means a Person with requisite right, title or interest or an agent for such
Person who has filed an application for New Development or Redevelopment that requires a Post-
Construction Stormwater Management Plan under this Ordinance.
B. Best Management Practices (“BMP”). “Best Management Practices” or “BMPs” means
schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the State. BMPs also include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
C. Clean Water Act. “Clean Water Act” means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., also known as the “Clean Water Act”), and any subsequent amendments
thereto.
D. Construction Activity. “Construction Activity” means work or activity undertaken on the
Premises that results in one acre or more of Disturbed Area, or activity with less than one acre of
total land area that is part of a subdivision, if the subdivision will ultimately disturb equal to or
greater than one acre.
E. Discharge. “Discharge” means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emptying, dumping,
disposing or other addition of Pollutants to “waters of the State.” “Direct discharge” or “point
Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance
2
source” means any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to,
any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock,
concentrated animal feeding operation or vessel or other floating craft, from which Pollutants are
or may be discharged.
F. Disturbed Area. “Disturbed Area” means all land areas that are stripped, graded, grubbed,
filled, or excavated at any time during the site preparation or removing vegetation for, or
construction of, a project.
"Disturbed area" does not include routine maintenance, but does include re-development and new
impervious areas. "Routine maintenance" is maintenance performed to maintain the original line
and grade, hydraulic capacity, and original purpose of the facility. Paving impervious gravel
surfaces while maintaining the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity and original purpose of
the facility is considered routine maintenance. Cutting of trees, without grubbing, stump removal,
disturbance or exposure of soil is not considered "disturbed area".
G. Enforcement Authority. “Enforcement Authority” means the Code Enforcement Officer and
or the Public Works Director who are both authorized by the Municipality to administer and
enforce this Ordinance.
H. Municipality. “Municipality” means the Town of Hampden.
I. Municipal Permitting Authority. “Municipal Permitting Authority” means the municipal
official or body that has jurisdiction over the land use approval or permit required for a New
Development or Redevelopment.
J. Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, or MS4. “Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System” or “MS4,” means conveyances for storm water, including, but not limited to, roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels or
storm drains (other than publicly owned treatment works and combined sewers) owned or operated
by any municipality, sewer or sewage district, fire district, State agency or Federal agency or other
public entity that discharges directly to surface waters of the State.
K. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge
Permit. “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge
Permit” means a permit issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) or by the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection (“DEP”) that authorizes the discharge of a
specified amount of pollutants under certain conditions to waters of the United States, whether the
permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
L. New Development. “New Development” means any Construction Activity on unimproved
Premises.
M. Person. “Person” means any individual, firm, corporation, municipality, quasi-municipal
corporation, State agency or Federal agency or other legal entity.
N. Pollutant. “Pollutant” means dredged spoil, solid waste, junk, incinerator residue, sewage,
refuse, effluent, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemicals, biological or radiological
Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance
3
materials, oil, petroleum products or by-products, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock,
sand, dirt and industrial, municipal, domestic, commercial or agricultural wastes of any kind.
O. Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan. “Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Plan” means BMPs and Stormwater Management Facilities employed by a New
Development or Redevelopment to meet the standards of this Ordinance and approved by the
Municipal Permitting Authority.
P. Premises. “Premises” means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips, located within the
Municipality from which Discharges to the Storm Drainage System are or may be created,
initiated, originated or maintained.
Q. Qualified Post-construction Stormwater Inspector. “Qualified Post-construction
Stormwater Inspector” means a Professional Engineer who conducts post-construction
Stormwater Management Facilities inspections for compensation and has a practical knowledge
of stormwater hydrology and stormwater management techniques, including the maintenance
requirements for stormwater management facilities, and the ability to determine if stormwater
management facilities are performing as intended.
R. Redevelopment. “Redevelopment” means Construction Activity on Premises already improved
with buildings, structures or activities or uses, but does not include such activities as exterior
remodeling.
S. Regulated Small MS4. “Regulated Small MS4” means any Small MS4 regulated by the State
of Maine “General Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater from Small Municipal Separate Storm
Sewer Systems” effective July 1, 2008 (“General Permit”), including all those located partially or
entirely within an Urbanized Area (UA) and those additional Small MS4s located outside a UA
that as of the issuance of the General Permit have been designated by the DEP as Regulated Small
MS4s.
T. Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, or Small MS4. “Small Municipal Separate
Storm Sewer System”, or “Small MS4,”means any MS4 that is not already covered by the Phase I
MS4 stormwater program including municipally owned or operated storm sewer systems and State
or federally-owned systems, such as Maine Department of Transportation Maine Turnpike
Authority road systems and facilities.
U. Storm Drainage System. “Storm Drainage System” means the Municipality’s Regulated Small
MS4.
V. Stormwater. “Stormwater” means any Stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff
and drainage; “Stormwater” has the same meaning as “Storm Water.”
W. Stormwater Management Facilities. “Stormwater Management Facilities: means any
parking areas, catch basins, drainage swales, detention basins and ponds, pipes and related
structures that are part of the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan for a New
Development or Redevelopment.
Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance
4
X. Urbanized Area (“UA”). “Urbanized Area” or “UA” means the areas of the State of Maine so
defined by the summation of each of the decennial censuses beginning with the 2000 census by
the U.S. Bureau of the Census (i.e. the 2000 UA + 2010 UA + 2020 UA).
Article 4. Applicability.
A. In General. This Ordinance shall apply to any application for a building permit, subdivision
approval, site plan approval or other zoning, planning or land use approval for any New
Development or Redevelopment within the Urbanized Area that Discharges Stormwater to the
Municipality’s MS4 and to associated Stormwater Management Facilities.
B. Exception. This Ordinance does not apply to New Development or Redevelopment on a lot,
tract or parcel where that lot, tract or parcel is part of a subdivision that is approved under this
Ordinance; said lot, tract or parcel shall not require separate review under this Ordinance, but shall
comply with the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan requirements for that approved
subdivision.
Article 5. Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan Approval
A. General Requirement. Except as provided in Section 4.B. above, no Applicant for a building
permit, subdivision approval, site plan approval or other zoning, planning or other land use
approval for New Development or Redevelopment to which this Ordinance is applicable shall
receive such permit or approval for that New Development or Redevelopment unless the Municipal
Permitting Authority for that New Development or Redevelopment also determines that the
Applicant’s Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan for that New Development or
Redevelopment meets the requirements of this Ordinance.
B. Performance Standards
1. Stormwater Treatment Required. The Applicant shall make adequate provision for the
management of the quantity and quality of all stormwater generated by the New Development or
Redevelopment through a Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan. This Post-
Construction Stormwater Management Plan shall be designed by a Professional Engineer to meet
the standards contained in the Maine Department of Environmental Protection’s Chapters 500 and
502 Rules and shall comply with the practices described in the manual Stormwater Management
for Maine, published by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, January 2006, which
hereby are incorporated by reference pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3003.
2. Location of Facilities. The Applicant may meet the quantity and quality standards above
either on-site or off-site, but where off-site facilities are used, the Applicant must submit to the
Municipality documentation, approved as to legal sufficiency by the Municipality’s attorney, that
the Applicant has a sufficient property interest in the property where the off-site facilities are
located -- by easement, covenant or other appropriate legal instrument -- to ensure that the facilities
will be able to provide post-construction stormwater management for the New Development or
Redevelopment and that the property will not be altered in a way that interferes with the off-site
facilities.
Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance
5
3. Maintenance Agreement Required. The Applicant shall submit to the Municipality
documentation, approved as to legal sufficiency by the Municipality’s attorney that the Applicant,
its successors, heirs and assigns shall have the legal obligation and the resources available to
operate, repair, maintain and replace the stormwater management facilities, and furthermore the
Applicant shall enter into a Maintenance Agreement with the Municipality. A sample of this
Maintenance Agreement is attached as Appendix 1 to this Ordinance.
4. Easements and Dedications. Whenever elements of the Stormwater Management
Facilities are not within the right-of-way of a public street and the facilities will not be offered to
the Municipality for acceptance as public facilities, the Municipal Permitting Authority may
require that perpetual easements not less than thirty (30) feet in width, conforming substantially
with the lines of existing natural drainage, and in a form acceptable to the Municipality’s attorney,
shall be provided to the Municipality allowing access for maintenance, repair, replacement and
improvement of the Stormwater Management Facilities. When an offer of dedication is required
by the Municipal Permitting Authority, the Applicant shall be responsible for the maintenance of
these Stormwater Management Facilities under this Ordinance until such time (if ever) as they are
accepted by the Municipality.
5. Conflict with State Laws or Rules. In addition to any other applicable requirements of
this Ordinance and the Municipality’s land use ordinances, any New Development or
Redevelopment which also requires a stormwater management permit from the Maine Department
of Environmental Protection (DEP) under 38 M.R.S.A. 420-D shall comply with the rules adopted
by DEP under 38 M.R.S.A. 420-D(1), as the same may be amended from time to time, and the
Applicant shall document such compliance to the Municipal Permitting Authority. Where the
standards or other provisions of such stormwater rules conflict with municipal ordinances, the
stricter (more protective) standard shall apply.
6. Engineering and administrative fees. At the time of application, the Applicant shall pay
to the Municipality any fees and escrow account deposits (for engineering or legal review) as
stipulated in the Fees Ordinance.
In addition, any persons required to file an annual certification under Section 6 of this
Ordinance shall pay, prior to the issuance of any temporary or permanent certificate of compliance
for the New Development or Redevelopment, a fee as stipulated in the Fees Ordinance to cover the
Municipality’s administrative and technical costs of review of the annual certification.
7. Notice of BMP Discharge to Municipality’s MS4. At the time of application, the
Applicant shall notify the Municipal Permitting Authority if its Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Plan includes any BMP(s) that will discharge to the Municipality’s MS4 and shall
include in this notification a listing of which BMP(s) will so discharge.
8. As-Built Certification. Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance for a project
requiring a Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan under this ordinance, the Applicant
shall submit evidence in the form of a letter or plan prepared and stamped by a Professional
Engineer who either prepared the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan and its
associated Facilities or supervised the Plan and Facilities construction and implementation. The
letter or plan shall certify that the Stormwater Management Facilities have been installed in
Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance
6
accordance with the approved Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan and that they will
function as intended by said Plan.
Article 6. Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan Compliance
A. General Requirements. Any Person owning, operating, leasing or having control over
Stormwater Management Facilities required by a Post-Construction Stormwater Management
Plan approved under this Ordinance, and the Facilities are located in the Urbanized Area and
Discharge Stormwater to the Municipality’s MS4, shall at their own expense demonstrate
compliance with that Plan as follows.
1. Scope of Inspection. A Qualified Post-construction Stormwater Inspector shall, at least
annually, inspect the Stormwater Management Facilities, including but not limited to any parking
areas, catch basins, drainage swales, detention basins and ponds, pipes and related structures, in
accordance with all municipal and state inspection, cleaning and maintenance requirements of the
approved Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan.
2. Deficiencies Identified. If the Stormwater Management Facilities require maintenance or
repair to function as intended by the approved Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan,
that Person shall take or cause to be taken corrective action(s) to address the deficiency or
deficiencies.
3. Submission of Inspection Form. A Qualified Post-construction Stormwater Inspector
shall, on or by July 1 of each year, provide a completed and signed certification to the Enforcement
Authority in a form identical to that attached as Appendix 2 to this Ordinance, certifying that he/she
has inspected the Stormwater Management Facilities and that they are adequately maintained and
functioning as intended by the approved Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan, or that
they require maintenance or repair, describing any required maintenance and any deficiencies
found during inspection of the Stormwater Management Facilities and, if the Stormwater
Management Facilities require maintenance or repair of deficiencies in order to function as
intended by the approved Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan, the Person shall
provide a record of the required maintenance or deficiency and corrective action(s) taken.
B. Right of Entry. In order to determine compliance with this Ordinance and with the Post-
Construction Stormwater Management Plan, the Enforcement Authority may enter upon property
at reasonable hours with the consent of the owner, occupant or agent to inspect the Stormwater
Management Facilities.
C. Annual Report. Beginning September 1, 2009 and September 1 each year thereafter, the
Municipality shall include the following in its Annual Report to the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection:
1 The cumulative number of sites that have Stormwater Management Facilities discharging
into their MS4;
2 A summary of the number of sites that have Stormwater Management Facilities
discharging into their MS4 that were reported to the Municipality;
Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance
7
3 The number of sites with documented functioning Stormwater Management Facilities;
and;
4 The number of sites that required routine maintenance or remedial action to ensure that
Stormwater Management Facilities are functioning as intended.
Article 7. Enforcement.
It shall be unlawful for any Person to violate any provision of or to fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this Ordinance or of the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan.
Whenever the Enforcement Authority believes that a Person has violated this Ordinance or the
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan, the Enforcement Authority may enforce this
Ordinance in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
A. Notice of Violation. Whenever the Enforcement Authority believes that a Person has violated
this Ordinance or the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan, the Enforcement
Authority may order compliance with this Ordinance or with the Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Plan by written notice of violation to that Person indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it, including, without limitation:
1. The abatement of violations, and the cessation of practices, or operations in violation of
this Ordinance or of the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan;
2. At the Person’s expense, compliance with BMPs required as a condition of approval of the
New Development or Redevelopment, the repair of Stormwater Management Facilities
and/or the restoration of any affected property; and/or
3. The payment of fines, of the Municipality’s remediation costs and of the Municipality’s
reasonable administrative costs and attorneys’ fees and costs.
If abatement of a violation, compliance with BMPs, repair of Stormwater Management Facilities
and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which
such abatement, compliance, repair and/or restoration must be completed.
B. Penalties/Fines/Injunctive Relief. Any Person who violates this Ordinance or the Post-
Construction Stormwater Management Plan shall be subject to fines, penalties and orders for
injunctive relief and shall be responsible for the Municipality’s attorney’s fees and costs, all in
accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. Moreover, any Person who violates this Ordinance or the Post-Construction
Stormwater Management Plan also shall be responsible for any and all fines, penalties, damages
and costs, including, but not limited to attorneys’ fees and costs, incurred by the Municipality for
violation of federal and State environmental laws and regulations caused by or related to that
Person’s violation of this Ordinance or of the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan;
this responsibility shall be in addition to any penalties, fines or injunctive relief imposed under this
Section.
Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance
8
C. Consent Agreement. The Enforcement Authority may, with the approval of the municipal
officers, enter into a written consent agreement with the violator to address timely abatement of
the violation(s) of this Ordinance or of the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan for
the purposes of eliminating violations of this Ordinance or of the Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Plan and of recovering fines, costs and fees without court action.
D. Enforcement Measures. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements
set forth in the Notice of Violation, then the Enforcement Authority may recommend to the
municipal officers that the Municipality’s attorney file an enforcement action in a Maine court of
competent jurisdiction under Rule 80K of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
Article 8. Severability.
The provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause,
sentence, or paragraph of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment,
or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions, clauses,
sentences, or paragraphs or application of this Ordinance.
Article 9. Basis.
The Town of Hampden enacts this “Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance” (the
“Ordinance”) pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 (municipal home rule ordinance authority), 38
M.R.S.A. § 413 (the “Wastewater Discharge Law”), 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. (the “Clean Water
Act”), and 40 CFR Part 122 (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s regulations governing the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (“NPDES”)). The Maine Department of
Environmental Protection, through its promulgation of the “General Permit for the Discharge of
Stormwater from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems,” has listed the Town of
Hampden as having a Regulated Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (“Small MS4”);
under this General Permit, listing as a Regulated Small MS4 necessitates enactment of this
Ordinance as part of the Municipality’s Storm Water Management Program in order to satisfy the
minimum control measures required by Part IV H 5 (“Post-construction stormwater management
in new development and redevelopment”).
Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance
9
APPENDIX 1
Maintenance Agreement for
Stormwater Management Facilities
This Maintenance Agreement is made this day of ______________________ 20___ by and
between _________________________ and the Town of Hampden, Maine.
The project name is ______________________________________________________.
The location is: _____________________________________________, Hampden, Maine.
The project’s Tax Map and Lot Numbers are Tax Map _________, Lot_____________.
The project is shown on a plan entitled "__________________________" dated___________
and most recently revised on ______________, approved by the __________ [Municipal
Permitting Board] on _________________ and recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of
Deeds in Plan Book _____________ Page ____________ (the “Project”).
WHEREAS, the approval of the Project includes Stormwater Management Facilities which
require periodic maintenance; and
WHEREAS, in consideration of the approval of the Project the Town of Hampden requires that
periodic maintenance be performed on the Stormwater Management Facilities;
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual benefits accruing from the approval of the
Project by the Town and the agreement of ____________________________ to maintain the
Stormwater Management Facilities, the parties hereby agree as follows:
1. _______________________, for herself/himself/itself, and her/his/its successors
and assigns, agrees to the following:
(a) To inspect, clean, maintain, and repair the Stormwater Management Facilities, which
includes, to the extent they exist, parking areas, catch basins, detention basins or ponds, drainage
swales, pipes and related structures, as required by Article 6 of the Town’s Post-Construction
Stormwater Management Ordinance, to prevent the build up and storage of sediment and debris
in the system;
(b) To repair any deficiencies in the Stormwater Management Facilities noted during the
required inspection;
(c) To provide a summary report on the inspection, maintenance, and repair activities
performed, as required by Article 6 of the Town’s Post-Construction Stormwater Management
Ordinance, on the Stormwater Management Facilities to the Town Enforcement Authority;
Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance
10
(d) To allow access by Town personnel or the Town’s designee for inspecting the
Stormwater Management Facilities for conformance with these requirements.
(e) To create a homeowners' association for the purpose of maintaining the Stormwater
Management Facilities.
2. Upon creation of the homeowners’ association, the homeowners’ association shall
become responsible for compliance with the terms of this Agreement.
3. This Agreement shall constitute a covenant running with the land, and _____________
shall reference this Agreement in all deeds to lots and/or units within the Project.
________________________________
________________________ By: ____________________________
Witness Its:
TOWN OF HAMPDEN
________________________ By: ____________________________
Witness Printed Name: ___________________
Its: ____________________________
STATE OF MAINE
_________________, ss. ______________________, 20__
Personally appeared the above-named ___________________________ _________, the
______________ of ___________________________________, and acknowledged the
foregoing Agreement to be said person's free act and deed in said capacity.
Before me,
__________________________________
Notary Public / Attorney at Law
Printed Name:______________________
Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance
11
STATE OF MAINE
Penobscot, ss. ______________________, 20__
Personally appeared the above-named ____________________________________, the
_________________________ of the Town of Hampden, and acknowledged the foregoing
Agreement to be said his/her free act and deed in said capacity.
Before me,
__________________________________
Notary Public / Attorney at Law
Print Name: ________________________
Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance
12
APPENDIX 2
Stormwater Management Facilities Certification
(to be sent to Municipality)
I, ________________________________ (print or type name), certify the following:
Qualified Post-construction Stormwater Inspector
1. I am making this Stormwater Management Facilities Certification for the
following property: _____________________________________________________________
(print or type name of subdivision, condominium or other development) located at
_________________________________________ (print or type address), (the “Property”);
2. The owner, operator, tenant, lessee or homeowners’ association of the Property is:
______________________________________________________ (name(s) of owner, operator,
tenant, lessee, homeowners’ association or other party having control over the Property);
3. I am a Qualified Post-construction Stormwater Inspector hired by the
person/entity named in Paragraph 2;
4. I have knowledge of erosion and stormwater control and have reviewed the
approved Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan for the Property;
5. On _____________, 20__, I inspected the Stormwater Management Facilities,
including but not limited to parking areas, catch basins, drainage swales, detention basins and
ponds, pipes and related structures required by the approved Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Plan for the Property;
6. At the time of my inspection of the Stormwater Management Facilities on the
Property, I identified the following need(s) for routine maintenance or deficiencies in the
Stormwater Management Facilities:
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
7. On ____________, 20__, the owner, operator, tenant, lessee or president of the
homeowners’ association took or had taken the following routine maintenance or the following
corrective action(s) to address the deficiencies in the Stormwater Management Facilities stated in
6 above:
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance
13
8. As of the date of this certification, the Stormwater Management Facilities are
functioning as intended by the approved Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan for the
Property.
Date:____________________, 20__. By:______________________________________
Signature
______________________________________
Print Name
STATE OF MAINE
_______________________, ss. _______________________, 20__
Personally appeared the above-named _______________________________, the
_________________ of ____________________________, and acknowledged the foregoing
Certification to be said person’s free act and deed in said capacity.
Before me,
___________________________________
Notary Public/Attorney at Law
Print Name: _________________________
Mail or hand deliver this certification to the Municipality at the following address:
Public Works Director
Town of Hampden
106 Western Avenue
Hampden, ME 04444

Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Private Event Venue Ordinance
2
Section 1. Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to license Private Event Venues as defined in the
Zoning Ordinance to ensure compliance with local approvals and to provide an opportunity for the public
to provide comments on the operation of such venues.
Section 2. Applicability. All Private Event Venues in the Town of Hampden are required to comply with
the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 3. License Required. In order to operate within the Town, the owner of a Private Event Venue
must obtain a license from the Town Council on an annual basis.
Section 4. Relationship to Other Ordinances and Regulations.
A. Zoning Ordinance. All Private Event Venues must be approved in accordance with the provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance prior to applying for a license under this Ordinance.
B. Victualers Ordinance. A Private Event Venue which provides food or drink to attendees which is
prepared at the venue or by the owner/operator of the venue is required to obtain a Victualers
License on an annual basis. A Private Event Venue that only provides food or drink via a duly
licensed caterer is not required to obtain a Victualers license.
C. Liquor License. A Private Event Venue which provides alcoholic beverages to attendees must
possess a valid Liquor license from the state of Maine, which requires approval of the Town
Council. A Private Event Venue that only provides alcoholic beverages via a duly licensed caterer
is not required to obtain a Liquor license.
D. Concourse Gathering Ordinance and Special Amusement Ordinance. Events, except as provided
below, held at approved and licensed Private Event Venues are exempt from the Concourse
Gathering Ordinance and from the Special Amusement Ordinance, however no event may exceed
the maximum number of attendees or other limits as approved by the Planning Board. Outdoor
concerts or events open to the general public for which an admission charge (monetary or
otherwise) is imposed are limited to daylight hours unless a permit has been obtained under the
Concourse Gathering Ordinance or the Special Amusement Ordinance, as applicable.
Section 5. New Year’s Eve Events.
A. If the owner of a Private Event Venue desires to hold events on New Year’s Eve, The Town
Council has the authority to permit a later closing time for that event provided the following
criteria are met:
1. A written request must be submitted to the Town Council at least 3 months in advance of the
event (September 30th) which states the time upon which all attendees will vacate the
property;
2. There are no residences within 500 feet of the building in which the event is to take place;
3. There must not be any outdoor activity associated with the event; and
Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Private Event Venue Ordinance
3
4. Notification must be mailed to all property owners which directly abut the Private Event
Venue parcel as well as to anyone who has requested notification under §4.26.2 of the Zoning
Ordinance.
B. The Town Council has the authority to approve the request as submitted, approve it with a
different closing time, approve it with other conditions, or deny it.
Section 6. Application and Process.
A. Application for a Private Event Venue license or license renewal shall be made on a form
available from the Town Clerk. Each application must be accompanied by payment of an
application fee pursuant to the Fees Ordinance. Incomplete applications will not be processed.
B. Applications will be heard by the Town Council at a public hearing held at a regularly scheduled
meeting. A notice of the hearing will be published in a local newspaper at least seven days prior
to the meeting. Such notice will be mailed to all property owners of parcels within 300 feet of the
subject property, plus any other property owners who request such notification.
C. All Private Event Venues must be inspected prior to the issuance of a license or license renewal
by the Code Enforcement Officer and the Fire Inspector to determine if they are in compliance
with all local and state regulations and ordinances.
D. The Treasurer and Tax Collector must certify that all sewer user fees and applicable taxes are
current as of the date of the application.
E. Reports on the operation of the venue may be submitted by other Town staff, including but not
limited to the Director of Public Safety, the Director of DPW, and the Town Planner, and are to
be considered by the Town Council in their deliberations on the application.
F. Town Council shall make a decision on the application within 30 days of the close of the public
hearing. The application may be denied if the Town Council finds cause based on the results of
the required inspections, failure to pay sewer fees or personal property taxes, the reports of any
Town staff, or testimony from abutters and others within the neighborhood where the venue is
located. Town Council may issue a license or license renewal with conditions that must be
complied with during the license period (e.g. reduced hours of operation from that approved by
the Planning Board in the case of repeated violations or neighborhood complaints).
G. A new license, when granted, is valid for one year and must be renewed annually in the month in
which it was first issued.
H. The current license must be displayed at the Private Event Venue in a location where it can
readily be viewed by any attendee.
I. In cases where multiple local licenses are required, they can be applied for concurrently and
Town Council may grant them with a single public hearing.
Effective Date: Dec. 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Private Event Venue Ordinance
4
Section 7. Penalty. Violations of this ordinance shall be prosecuted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S. § 4552. Any
violation of this ordinance constitutes a nuisance. Any person found guilty of operating a Private Event
Venue without a valid license to do so shall be subject to a fine of $2,500.00 per day for each day of
operation without the required license. If the Town prevails in an enforcement action pursuant to 30-A
M.R.S. § 4552, it shall be awarded reasonable attorneys' fees and costs associated with bringing the
enforcement action. The Town Council may also seek preliminary and permanent injunctive relief.
Section 8. Suspension or Revocation of License. The Town Council, upon notice and hearing, for cause,
may at any time suspend or revoke a Private Event Venue license issued pursuant to this ordinance. Cause
shall mean the violation of any license provision or any provision of this ordinance, or any condition
constituting a threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, including but not necessarily limited to
neighborhood disruption, disorderly attendees, or excessively loud or unnecessary noise that initiates
complaints to or requires a response from police, fire, or other town regulatory bodies or employees.
Section 9. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of the Ordinance.












Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 1
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
SEWER ORDINANCE
ADOPTED by Hampden Town Council, December 5, 2011
Effective Date: January 4, 2012
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council April 19, 2016
Effective: May 19, 2016
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council January 17, 2017
Effective: February 17, 2017
CERTIFIED BY: ___________________________________
Paula Scott, Town Clerk
Affix Seal
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 2
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
SEWER ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Preamble
ARTICLE 1 - GENERAL ADMINSTRATION
1.1 Definitions ------------------------------------------------------------------------- 4
1.2 Powers and Authority of Inspectors -------------------------------------------- 12
1.3 Repeal of Prior Ordinance ------------------------------------------------------ 12
1.4 Conflict with Other Ordinances ------------------------------------------------ 12
1.5 Severability ------------------------------------------------------------------------ 13
1.6 Effective Date ------------------------------------------------------------------- 13
ARTICLE 2 – USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED
2.1 Discharges ------------------------------------------------------------------------- 13
2.2 Discharges to Land --------------------------------------------------------------- 13
2.3 Private Sewers --------------------------------------------------------------------- 13
2.4 Connections of Plumbing Facilities to Public Sewers ------------------------ 13
2.5 Waiver from Connecting to Public Sewer -------------------------------------- 13
ARTICLE 3 – PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
3.1 Unavailability of Public Sewers ------------------------------------------------ 13
3.2 Construction of Private Subsurface Disposal Systems ---------------------- 13
3.3 State Department of Health Recommendations ------------------------------ 14
3.4 Conversion to Public Sewer ---------------------------------------------------- 14
3.5 Additional Requirements -------------------------------------------------------- 14
3.6 Septage Disposal ----------------------------------------------------------------- 14
ARTICLE 4 – BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC SEWERS
4.1 State Plumbing Code -------------------------------------------------------------- 15
4.2 Connections to Public Sewers ---------------------------------------------------- 15
4.3 Permits and Connection Fees ----------------------------------------------------- 16
4.4 Shared Building Sewers ----------------------------------------------------------- 16
4.5 Quality and Weight of Materials ------------------------------------------------ 16
4.6 Size and Slope of Sewer ---------------------------------------------------------- 16
4.7 Elevation and Location of Sewer ------------------------------------------------ 16
4.8 Building Drains -------------------------------------------------------------------- 17
4.9 Excavations and Backfilling ----------------------------------------------------- 17
4.10 Joints and Connections ----------------------------------------------------------- 17
4.11 Connections ------------------------------------------------------------------------ 17
4.12 Inspections; and Connection to Public Sewers -------------------------------- 19
4.13 Building Sewers Requiring Frequent Maintenance --------------------------- 19
4.14 Infiltration -------------------------------------------------------------------------- 19
4.15 Costs and Expenses Borne by the Owner -------------------------------------- 20
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 3
Page
ARTICLE 5- SEWER EXTENSIONS
5.1 Sewer Extensions Constructed by the Town ---------------------------------- 20
5.2 Sewer Extensions Constructed by Private Developer ------------------------ 20
5.3 Requirements for Extending Sanitary Sewer Systems ----------------------- 20
5.4 Testing ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 24
5.5 Transfer of Ownership to the Town --------------------------------------------- 27
5.6 Privately Owned Sewer Extensions --------------------------------------------- 27
5.7 Requirement for Building Permits ---------------------------------------------- 27
ARTICLE 6 – USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
6.1 Unlawful Deposits and Discharges ---------------------------------------------- 27
6.2 Storm Sewers ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 27
6.3 General Sewer Use Requirements ----------------------------------------------- 28
6.4 Wastewater Surveys ------------------------------------------------------------- 33
6.5 Wastewater Discharge Permits ------------------------------------------------- 34
6.6 Reporting Requirements --------------------------------------------------------- 38
6.7 Compliance Monitoring; Right of Entry ---------------------------------------- 42
6.8 Confidential Information --------------------------------------------------------- 43
6.9 Publication of User in Significant Non-Compliance -------------------------- 43
6.10 Administrative Enforcement Remedies --------------------------------------- 43
6.11 Judicial Enforcement Remedies ------------------------------------------------- 46
6.12 Supplemental Enforcement Action --------------------------------------------- 47
6.13 Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations -------------------------------- 47
ARTICLE 7 – PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE
7.1 Tampering with Town’s Publicly Owned Works ------------------------------ 49
7.2 Contractor’s Liability Insurance ------------------------------------------------ 49
ARTICLE 8 – INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN
8.1 Purpose ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 49
8.2 Significant Non-Compliance ----------------------------------------------------- 50
8.3 Selection of Enforcement Responses -------------------------------------------- 51
8.4 Enforcement Response Plan Definitions ---------------------------------------- 52
8.5 Enforcement Table 1 --------------------------------------------------------------- 54
ARTICLE 9 – PENALTIES – RESIDENTIAL
9.1 Violation of Sewer Ordinance --------------------------------------------------- 59
9.2 Fines -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 59
9.3 Alternate Penalties ---------------------------------------------------------------- 59
9.4 Liabilities to the Town ------------------------------------------------------------ 59
ARTICLE 10 – SEWER SERVICE CHARGE
10.1 Establishment of a Sewer Service Charge ------------------------------------- 59
10.2 Sewer Service Charge Rate ----------------------------------------------------- 59
10.3 Abatements ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 60
10.4 Special Charge for Industrial Organizations ----------------------------------- 60
10.5 Reserved Right to Charge Sewer Service Charge ----------------------------- 60
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 4
10.6 Charge for Property Owners Outside Town Limits -------------------------- 60
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 5
Preamble
An Ordinance to promote the general welfare, to prevent disease and to promote health, and to provide
for the public safety by regulating the use of public and private sewers and drains, private sewage
disposal, the installation and connection of building sewers, and the discharge of waters and wastes into
the public sewer systems, and providing penalties for violations thereof in the Town of Hampden, County
of Penobscot, State of Maine.
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL ADMINSTRATION
Section 1.1. Definitions. As used in this Ordinance, “shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this Ordinance will be as
follows:
ACT OR THE ACT: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean Water Act," 33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY: The Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER:
(1) If the user is a corporation:
(a) The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal
business function or any other person who performs similar policymaking or decision making functions for
the corporation; or
(b) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager
is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility, including
having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and
direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental
laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures.
(2) If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively.
(3) If the user is a federal, state or local government facility, a director or highest official appointed or
designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility or his/her
designee.
(4) The individuals described in Subsections (1) through (3) above may designate another authorized
representative if the authorization is in writing; the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and the written authorization is submitted to the
Town.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices,
maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Section
6.3. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site
runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation
of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade,
expressed in milligrams per liter, (mg/1).
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 6
BUILDER: Any person, persons, or corporation who undertake to construct, either under contract or for
resale, any habitable building.
BUILDING DRAIN: The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the
discharge from sewerage and other non-storm or ground water drainage pipes inside a building and
conveys it to the building sewer beginning two (2) feet outside of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the point of connection to the public sewer
or other place of disposal.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD: Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of
the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in Title 40 of the
Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
CATEGORICAL USER: Any user of the Town's wastewater treatment system whose discharges are
regulated under 40 CFR 403 and 40 CFR 405 through 471 or who is otherwise subject to United States
Environmental Protection Agency pretreatment requirements as a categorical user.
CITY: The City of Bangor, Maine.
CITY ENGINEER: The City official appointed and designated by the Bangor City Manager as the City
Engineer for the City of Bangor.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The individual(s) retained or designated by the Manager to enforce
provisions of this ordinance. For purposes of this Ordinance, the Local Plumbing Inspector shall act under
the authority and direction of the Code Enforcement Officer.
COLOR: The optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water.
One-hundred-percent transmittance is equivalent to zero optical density.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples
taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time.
CONTRACTOR: Any person, firm, or corporation approved by the Town Council to do work in the Town
of Hampden.
DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT: The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day.
Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass
discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration
derived from all measurements taken that day.
DEP: Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
DEVELOPER: Any person, persons or corporation who undertake to construct simultaneously more than
one housing unit on a given tract or land subdivision.
DISCHARGE: Any substance knowingly put or allowed to flow into any part of the Town's POTW.
DISCHARGER: All industrial users, including categorical users and significant industrial users as defined
in this section. "Discharger" also refers to any nonindustrial user of the Town's POTW which discharges
wastewater into the POTW.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE: Water and water-carried wastes and sewage normally discharged into the
sanitary sewers from dwellings, including single-family homes, multifamily homes and hotels, and from
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 7
office buildings, factories and institutions, but not including stormwater drainage or surface water drainage
and not including industrial wastes as defined in this section.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY: The United States Environmental Protection Agency or,
where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director or other duly authorized official of
said agency.
EXCESSIVE LOADING: Any discharge resulting in a BOD or TSS loading in excess of 350 mg/l or a
loading of fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin or oil and grease or other petroleum or
mineral oil products in excess of 140 mg/l. Where a correlation is established between BOD and COD or
TOC, a discharge in excess of the equivalent COD or TOC loading shall constitute excessive loading.
EXISTING SOURCE: Any source of discharge the construction or operation of which commenced prior to
the publication by the EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to
such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act.
FOUNDATION OR PERIMETER DRAIN: The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from the soil, foundation or perimeter drain inside and outside of the
building foundation or foundation footer.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food
and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the
flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: A hazardous waste as that term is defined in 40 CFR 261 or Maine Department
of Environmental Protection regulations Chapter 850
HIGH-STRENGTH CONVENTIONAL WASTE: Any nonindustrial waste of a substantially greater density,
toxicity or acidity than normal domestic sewage, including all wastes likely to cause excessive loading as
defined in this section.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any
nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
INDUSTRIAL USER or USER: A source of indirect discharge. This term covers discharges from any
source, including agriculture, forestry, fishing, mining, manufacturing, transportation, communication,
electrical, gas and sanitary services and other industrial services discharging into the POTW any
industrial waste or discharging into the POTW any waste other than domestic sewage as defined in this
section. This term may also apply to any other source of pollutant which adversely affects the POTW.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: All water, water-carried solids, liquid and gas wastes resulting from any
industrial, manufacturing or food processing operation or process or form the development of any natural
resource or any mixture of these fluids and domestic sewage or any mixture of these fluids with any other
water or with any other liquid.
INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT: The maximum concentration or
loading of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any grab or
composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling
event.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other
sources, both:
(1) Inhibits or disrupts the Town's POTW, treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use
or disposal; and
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 8
(2) Which thus contributes to cause a violation of any requirement of the Town's MEPDES permit,
including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, or of the prevention of sludge use or
disposal in compliance with statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued under Section 405 of
the Clean Water Act, RCRA, the Clean Air Act, SWDA, the Toxic Substances Control Act, the Marine
Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act and any state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of RCRA.
MAINE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (MEPDES): Permit program of the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection.
MANAGER: The term Manager shall have the same meaning as Town Manager.
MASS-BASED LIMITATIONS: Users implementing process changes, including best management
practices, may request permit discharge limitations be based on mass limitations in lieu of concentrationbased
limitations. The intent of mass-based limitations is to encourage and allow best management
practices, pollution prevention and/or water conservation measures that may result in increased pollutant
concentrations while not increasing actual mass of pollutant discharged. Mass-based limitations shall be
calculated from current, pollutant-specific concentration and user discharge flow. Mass-based limitations
shall not exceed the previous mass of specific pollutant discharged (prior to the implementation of
process changes or best management practices) based on the historic performance of that user.
Decisions on granting requests for mass-based limitations will be based on user-specific information and
current operating conditions of the POTW and will be at the discretion of the Town. Implementation of
mass-based limitations shall not contravene any requirements or limitations of federal or state law and/or
regulations implemented thereunder and may not waive applicable categorical pretreatment standards.
MEDICAL WASTE: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological
wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory
wastes and dialysis wastes.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER: A weight to volume ratio. The figure appearing before the symbol "mg/l" shall
be the number of milligrams to be found in one liter of the substance being tested. This figure can be
transposed to pounds per million gallons of water by multiplying said figure by 8.34.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, pond, lake, or other body of surface or ground
water.
NEW SOURCE:
(1) Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants,
the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under
Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter
promulgated in accordance with that section of the Act, provided that:
(a) The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source
is located; or
(b) The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production
equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
(c) The production or wastewater-generating processes of the building, structure, facility or
installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether the sources are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new
facility is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in
the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered.
(2) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new
source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the
criteria of Subsection 1.1(1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or
production equipment.
(3) Construction of a new source as defined under this section has commenced if the owner or operator
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 9
has:
(a) Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program, any
placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment or significant site preparation work,
including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or (b)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is
intended to be used in his or her operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts for
feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
subsection.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with
any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product.
NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE: Sewage in which the average concentration of TSS does not exceed
250 mg/l and in which the five-day BOD does not exceed 250 mg/l and fats, oils or greases of animal or
vegetable origin or oil and grease and other petroleum or mineral oil products do not exceed 100 mg/l.
NPDES: The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program of the EPA.
OWNER: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, or group having title to real property.
PASS-THROUGH: Any discharge from the Town's POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, cause a
violation of any requirement of the Town's MEPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, company, association, society, corporation, group, joint-stock
company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity of whatever relationship or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state or local governmental
entities.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ions concentration expressed in moles per
liter. pH shall be determined by standard methods as defined in this section.
POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sludge,
pretreatment by-products, munitions, wastewater, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials,
metals, oil and grease, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar
dirt, agricultural and industrial wastes and other waste or material that alters or adversely affects the
characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, TTO,
TOC or odor).
PREMISES: Any building or lot under individual ownership or individual use where water service is
metered independently or that discharges wastewater to the POTW.
PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the
alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such
pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological
processes, by process changes or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants,
unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT PROGRAM COORDINATOR: The Town’s designated individual responsible for
supervision of the Town's wastewater pretreatment program.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment
imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD or STANDARDS: Prohibited discharge standards, categorical
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 10
pretreatment standards and local limits.
PRIVATELY OWNED SEWER EXTENSION: An extension of the public sewer where ownership and
maintenance is retained by the developer or property owner.
PRIVATE SUBSURFACE DISPOSAL SYSTEM: A disposal system generally consisting of a subsurface
storage tank and leaching field most commonly used in residential housing.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES: Absolute prohibitions against
the discharge of certain substances. These prohibitions appear in Article 6 of this Ordinance.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food
or produce that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any
dimension.
PROPERTY LINE: The property boundary line if the building sewer is to connect with the public sewer in
a public street, or the edge of a sewer right-of-way in those instances where the building sewers connect
to the public sewer in a right-of-way.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A treatment works, as defined by Section 212 of
the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned by the City/Town. This definition includes any devices or
systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of wastewater of a liquid
nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. Depending on the context,
POTW may include the collection, transport and treatment facilities of the City of Bangor that handle
wastewater from the Town’s POTW.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting property have equal rights and which is
controlled by public authority.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The individual retained or designated by the Manager to supervise and
oversee the operation and maintenance of the municipal sewer system and treatment facilities.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are
not intentionally admitted.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE: Any wastewater from holding tanks, such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers,
trailers and septic tanks.
SEWAGE: A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions,
and industrial establishments, together with such incidental ground, surface, and storm water that may be
present.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER EXTENSION: The connection of any public or private sewer to the existing sewer system, except
as required under Section 5.1 of this Ordinance.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER:
(1) A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
(2) A user that:
(a) Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW, excluding
sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater; or
(b) Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather
hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or
(c) Is designated as such by the Town on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 11
(3) Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Town may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user and in
accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a
significant industrial user.
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE: Includes the following:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those violations in which 66% or
more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed
(by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as
defined in Section 1.1;
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33% or more of wastewater
measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limit, as defined in
Section 1.1, multiplied by the applicable criteria 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all
other pollutants except pH);
(3) Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by Section 1.1 (daily
maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Town or Pretreatment
Program Coordinator determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference
or pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public as defined in
this section;
(4) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused an imminent danger to human health, including the
health of the Town’s or City’s POTW personnel, or to the environment or has required an exercise of the
Town’s or City’s emergency authority to halt the discharge under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vi)(B);
(5) Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in
an individual wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance;
(6) Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline
monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic selfmonitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
(7) Failure to accurately report any noncompliance with permit requirements; or
(8) Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices,
which the Town determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the Town’s
pretreatment program.
SLUDGE: A by-product of the primary and secondary treatment processes of the POTW, also known as
"biosolids." This term does not include by-products resulting from the pretreatment of industrial wastes.
SLUG or SLUG LOAD: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the
general prohibitions of Section 6.3.1 and the specific prohibitions of Section 6.3.2 of this Ordinance. A
"slug discharge" is any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an
accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause
interference or pass-through or in any other way violate the POTW’s regulations, local limits or permit
conditions.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION CODE: A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual issued from time to time by the United States Office of Management and Budget.
STANDARD METHODS: Testing methods and techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 or, if not found
therein, other appropriate procedures approved by the EPA.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 12
STATE PLUMBING CODE: The latest edition of the State of Maine Plumbing Code.
STORM SEWER OR STORM DITCH: A pipe or conduit which carries storm, surface waters and drainage
but excludes sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting
from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
SUPERINTENDENT: The Wastewater Treatment Plant Superintendent of the City of Bangor POTW or
his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or
other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering in accordance with Standard Methods.
TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS: The summation of all quantifiable values greater than 0.01 mg/l for the toxic
organics listed at 40 CFR 413.02(i).
TOWN: The Town of Hampden, Maine.
TOWN MANAGER: The Town Manager of Hampden or the individual designated by the Town Council to
perform this function, or the authorized deputy, agent, or representative of this individual which shall
include but not be limited to the Code Enforcement Officer, Public Works Director, POTW Superintendent,
City Engineer, etc.
TOWN COUNCIL: The duly elected Town Council of the Town of Hampden, Maine, or its authorized
representative.
TOXIC POLLUTANT: One of 126 pollutants or a combination of those pollutants listed as toxic in
regulations promulgated by the EPA pursuant to Section 307 (33 U.S.C. § 1317) of the Act. This term
also includes any pollutants that may be added to this promulgated list by amendment.
TREATMENT PLANT EFFLUENT: The discharge from the POTW into waters of the United States.
TREATMENT PLANT INFLUENT: The wastewater in the POTW which is presented for treatment at the
City’s wastewater plant.
UPSET: An exceptional incident in which a discharger is in a state of noncompliance with the categorical
pretreatment standards due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the discharger. This term
excludes noncompliance due to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment
facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, careless or improper operation
of the treatment facilities or other similar reason.
WASTEWATER: Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and domestic sewage from residential
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or
untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
WASTEWATER PLANT: Any facility owned by the City and used for receiving and treating wastewater.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 13
Subsection 1.1.1 Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
BMP Best management practices
CCTV Closed Circuit Television
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
DEP Maine Department of Environmental Protection
EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency
Gpd Gallons per day
L Liter
MEPDES Maine Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
Mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
O&M Operation(s) and maintenance
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC Standard Industrial Classification Code
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act
TOC Total organic carbon
TSS Total suspended solids
TTO Total toxic organics
U.S.C. United States Code
WEF Water Environment Federation
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 14
Section 1.2. Powers and Authority of Inspectors: The Town Manager or his/her designee, shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. The appointed designee, including
but not limited to Hampden Code Enforcement Officer, Public Works Director, and Superintendent of the
POTW or their designee, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation, enforcement and measurement sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of
this Ordinance.
Section 1.3. Repeal of Prior Ordinances: The Sewer Ordinance enacted on June 19, 1978, as
amended, shall stand repealed as of the effective date of this Ordinance. The enactment of this
Ordinance, however, shall not affect or prevent any pending or future prosecution of, or action to abate,
any violation of the Ordinance repealed hereby.
Section 1.4. Conflict with Other Ordinances: Whenever the requirements of this Ordinance are in
conflict with any other rule, regulation, or ordinance, that imposing the most restrictive or higher standard
shall govern.
Section 1.5. Severability: In the event that any section, subsection, or any provision of this Ordinance
shall be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, such decision shall
not be deemed to affect the validity of any other section, subsection, or other portion of this Ordinance; to
this end, the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable.
Section 1.6 Effective Date: Pursuant to Section 213(c) of the Town Charter, this Ordinance shall
become effective at the expiration of thirty (30) days after its adoption by the Town Council.
ARTICLE 2
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED
Section 2.1. Discharges: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any watercourse, either directly or through
any storm sewer, within the Town or to any area under the jurisdiction of the Town, any sewage, industrial
wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
federal, state or local laws.
Section 2.2. Discharges to Land: It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in an unsanitary manner on public or private property within the Town or to any area under the
jurisdiction of the Town, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. This
section shall exclude normal agricultural practices.
Section 2.3. Private Sewers: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, leaching pit, or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of sewage.
Section 2.4. Connection of Plumbing Facilities to Public Sewers: The owner of any house,
structure, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose,
situated within the Town and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located, or
may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of the Town, is hereby required, at owner’s expense,
to install suitable plumbing facilities therein, including but not limited to toilets, and to connect such
facilities to the public sewer, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, within ninety (90) days
after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is located opposite any portion of
the frontage of the property to be served by said sewer.
Section 2.5. Waivers from Connecting to Public Sewer: The Town Council may waive the
requirement to connect to the public sewer under certain circumstances. Waivers may be obtained where
1) unusual circumstances exist due to the presence of ledge, incompatible elevations, and financial
hardship. 2) excavation of a public highway is prohibited by State law or regulation. 3) a new subsurface
wastewater disposal system had been installed within the previous five (5) year period. Private
subsurface sewer systems installed more than five (5) years earlier shall be grandfathered until such time
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 15
as the system is in disrepair or is no longer operable. At that time, the owner shall connect to the public
sewer system at the owner’s cost. The Town Council may impose conditions on waivers as they see
necessary to carry out the intent of this ordinance. All waivers granted by the Town Council shall be
recorded at the Penobscot Registry of Deeds.
ARTICLE 3
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Section 3.1. Unavailability of Public Sewers: Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the
provisions of Section 2.4, the building sewer shall be connected to a private subsurface disposal system
complying with the provisions of this Article and the State Plumbing Code.
Section 3.2. Construction of Private Subsurface Disposal Systems: Construction of private
subsurface disposal systems shall comply in all respects with requirements of the State Plumbing Code.
Before commencement of construction of a private subsurface disposal system, the owner shall first
obtain a permit from the Town. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the
Division of Environmental Health, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and
other information as are deemed necessary by the Town.
A use permit for a private subsurface disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is
completed to the satisfaction of the Town. The Town shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction. The applicant for the permit shall notify the Town before any underground portions are
covered and when the work is ready for final inspection.
No additional private subsurface disposal system serving more than one private residence or commercial
establishment shall be connected to, nor in any way discharge to, any portion of the Town’s POTW,
except as provided in Article 5.
Whereas maintenance of the POTW in compliance with Federal and State pollution abatement legislation
is essential to the public good; no existing private sewers discharge to the POTW shall be increased in
extent or flow, and upon issuance of written notice by the Town Manager, all existing private sewers shall
be maintained in full compliance with construction and infiltration standards of this Ordinance, at no
expense to the Town.
Failure to maintain an existing private sewer in compliance with this Ordinance within 90 days of issuance
of written notice shall be adequate cause for the Town to seek penalties from the owner/resident to rectify
the issue and to notify the State of Maine of the infraction.
Section 3.3. Division of Environmental Health Recommendations: The type, capacities, location,
and layout of a private subsurface disposal system shall comply with all requirements of the Division of
Environmental Health, State of Maine.
Section 3.4. Conversion to Public Sewer: At such time as a public sewer system becomes available
to a property served by a private sewer system, as provided in Section 2.4, connection shall be made to
the public sewer in compliance with this Ordinance, and any septic tanks, cesspools or similar private
sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. Septic tanks, cesspools or
similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be suitably cleaned and septage disposed of in accordance
with current State and Federal regulations. Tanks and similar structures shall be removed or broken and
filled with 4” minus compacted well-graded granular material.
Section 3.5. Additional Requirements: No statement contained in this Article shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Town.
Section 3.6. Septage Disposal: Septic tank waste and private pump station waste originating from or
generated in the Town of Hampden may be introduced into the POTW only at the designated receiving
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 16
structure of the Bangor POTW and at such times as are established by the Town of Hampden and the
City of Bangor. Such wastes shall not violate Section 6.3 of this Ordinance or any other requirements
established or adopted by the Town of Hampden or the City of Bangor. In no circumstance will wastes be
accepted without prior approval from the City of Bangor, Director of Water Quality (hereafter “Director”) or
his/her designee.
The Town and/or City may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with this Ordinance
and the City of Bangor’s Chapter 252: Sewers and Drains Ordinance. The Town and/or City may require
the hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
Waste haulers must provide the POTW with a copy of a waste-tracking form for every load prior to
discharge. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste hauler, truck
identification, sources of waste and volume and characteristics of waste.
Waste haulers using trucks having a volume gauge or sight glass will be charged at the applicable rate
per 1,000 gallons of wastewater discharged. Trucks lacking such a volumetric measuring device or other
means satisfactory to the Town to measure the volume of wastewater discharged will be presumed full
and will be charged accordingly.
Any person who discharges hauled wastewater at any other location in the Town or at the designated
receiving structure at other than the times allowed shall be subject to applicable civil and criminal
penalties, including those prescribed at 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 and 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 349 and 1319-T.
A suitable odor-control chemical approved by the Town and the Director or his/her designee, shall be
introduced to the hauled wastewater prior to its transportation to the designated receiving structure.
Sufficient quantities of such chemical shall be used by the waste hauler to adequately control odors
emanating from the hauled wastewater.
If at any time, in the opinion of the Town Manager or his/her designee, the discharge of hauled
wastewater is placing an excessive burden on the POTW's treatment process or is otherwise causing a
nuisance, the Town or City can refuse to accept such wastewater for treatment in the POTW.
ARTICLE 4
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS TO
PUBLIC SEWERS
Section 4.1. State Plumbing Code: The provisions of this article shall be deemed to supplement
provisions of the State Plumbing Code with respect to building sewers and connections thereof to public
sewers. In event of conflicts between this article and the state plumbing code, the most restrictive or
higher standard shall be deemed to apply. Permits and fees stipulated hereunder are additional to any
permits or fees, or both, required under the State Plumbing Code.
Section 4.2. Connection to Public Sewers: No person shall uncover, use, alter or disturb any public
sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written Street Opening/Utility Connection permit
from the Town. Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial change in the
volume or character of pollutants that are being discharged into the system shall notify the Town at least
45 days prior to the proposed change or connection and pay applicable sewer connection fees.
4.2.1. Street Opening/Utility Connection Permit: Said Permit shall specify whether the connection is
for residential or commercial service or for service to establishments producing or handling
industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the Town. The permit application shall be accompanied by any
plans, specifications, or other information required in accordance with the provisions in the
Street Opening/Utility Connection Ordinance. The fee for the Street Opening/Utility
connection permit is established in the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 17
4.2.2. Except on an emergency basis to serve existing structures only (e.g. following a failure of an
existing private septic system), no street opening/utility connection permit shall be issued
authorizing connection to any public or private sewer line or sewer extension which is found
by the Town to be inadequate, by reason of its design, condition or lack of hydraulic capacity,
to accommodate the additional volume or flow or types of wastes to be discharged from the
premises concerned; or which by reason of its design, condition or hydraulic capacity, causes
or materially contributes to upsets, surcharges, slug loads or untreated outfalls at any
downstream or other location. All permits issued on an emergency basis under this
subsection shall bear the designation of “emergency permit” and shall be subject to annual
review by the Public Works Director and/or the Town Manager. Any emergency permit shall
be deemed terminated upon correction of the condition that led to its issuance.
4.2.3. Except for the purpose of correcting the violation concerned, no new street opening/utility
connection permit shall be issued to any person who has been cited by the Public Works
Director or the Town Manager for violations of this ordinance if such violation remains
uncorrected at the time of application.
4.2.4. Backwater Valves Required: To protect from the possibility of backflow of sewage,
backwater valves shall be required for all new connections to public sewers and shall also be
required when existing sewer services are excavated.
1. Material. All bearing parts of backwater valves shall be of corrosion-resistant material.
Backwater valves shall comply with ASME A112.14.1, CSA B181.1 or CSA B181.2.
2. Seal. Backwater valves shall be so constructed as to provide a mechanical seal against
backflow.
3. Diameter. Backwater valves, when fully opened, shall have a capacity not less than that of
the pipes in which they are installed.
4, Access. Backwater valves shall be installed so that access is provided to the working parts
for service and repair.
Section 4.3. Permits and Connection Fees: There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer
connection permits/fees:
1. residential service, and
2. commercial, industrial, and other nonresidential service.
In either case, the owner or owner’s agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the
Town. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information
considered pertinent to the judgment of the Town. A permit and inspection fee at the rate prevailing at
the date of application shall be paid to the Town at the time an application is filed. The Town Manager,
with recommendation from the Public Works Director, shall establish a permit and inspection fee for each
commercial, industrial, or other non-residential building, based on the size and nature of the operation
proposed in such commercial, industrial, or other non-residential building as compared to the demands of
a residential structure. The permit (or sewer connection fee) is calculated based on a form (Sewer
Connection Fee Worksheet) provided by the Town. Final approval or revision of all commercial, industrial
and other non-residential permit and inspection fees shall reside with the Town Council. No sewer
connection fee will be required for repair of an existing sewer service, although a Street Opening/Utility
Connection Permit will be required as applicable.
Section 4.4. Shared Building Sewers: A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for
every building except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private
sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or
driveway, in which case the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer. Separate clean outs shall be provided for both
buildings. Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 18
demonstrated by examination to be in full conformance with all requirements of this ordinance.
Section 4.5. Quality and Weight of Materials: The building sewer shall be cast iron pipe, PVC pipe or
other suitable materials approved by the Town and meeting current State Plumbing Code. The quality
and weight of materials shall conform to the specifications of the State Plumbing Code. All joints shall be
gastight and watertight. Where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots or is installed in
filled or unstable ground, the Town shall have the authority to stipulate such special pipe materials or
installation provisions as it deems necessary for the circumstances. Testing of the building sewer
installation shall be done at no cost to the Town, in the presence of the Town Representative and using a
Town approved method.
Section 4.6. Size and Slope of Sewer: The size and slope of the building sewer shall be regulated by
the State Plumbing Code, but in no event shall the diameter be less than 4 inches. The slope of a 4 inch
pipe shall not be less than one-quarter inch per foot. The slope of a six-inch pipe shall not be less than
one-eighth inch per foot.
Section 4.7. Elevation and Location of Sewer: Whenever possible, the building sewer service shall
exit the building below the basement finish floor elevation. No sewer service shall be installed parallel,
less than (3) three feet from a foundation wall. The sewer service shall exit the building perpendicular to
the foundation wall and be laid at a uniform slope draining away from the building in straight alignment
where possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with approved pipe and fittings. The sewer
service shall be a minimum of (5) five feet deep for frost protection or shall require rigid styrofoam
insulation at a rate of (2) two inches per foot of soil depth. Meaning, a sewer service with only 4 feet of
cover would require 2 inches of insulation, 3 feet of cover would require 4 inches of insulation, etc.
Section 4.8. Building Drains: In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow
to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and
discharged to the building sewer. Foundation or perimeter drains shall not be connected to the building
sewer system.
Section 4.9. Excavations and Backfilling: All excavations required for the installation of a building
sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the Town. Pipe laying and backfill shall
be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12 except that no backfill shall be placed until the
work has been inspected by the Town. Refer to Section VI of the Street Opening/Utility Connection
Ordinance for additional requirements.
Section 4.10. Joints and Connections:
4.10.1. Cast Iron Pipe: Cast iron pipe joints shall be of the push-on type and conform to ASTM 0564-
70 (Rubber Gaskets) and ANSI (A21.11). Fittings shall be of the type specifically manufactured for
the cast iron pipe used. Cast iron pipe, joints, and fittings shall be cement lined and double asphalt
coated inside and bituminous coated outside. Lubricants shall be suitable for lubricating the gasket to
facilitate assembly of the pipe joint. The lubricant shall be non-toxic, shall not support the growth of
bacteria and shall have no deteriorating affects on the gasket material.
4.10.2. Plastic Pipe:
4.10.2.1. ABS pipe fittings and connection shall conform to ASTM (D1527) for Schedule 40, 80,
120 or ASTM (2661) for DMV Schedule 40.
4.10.2.2. Schedule 40 PVC fittings and connections shall conform to ASTM (D2665) for DMV
Schedule 40 or ASTM (D1785) for Schedule 40, 80, 120 PVC. Fittings and connections shall be
installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s written instructions.
4.10.2.3. SDR 35 pipe fittings and accessories shall be as manufactured and furnished by the
pipe supplier or approved equal and have a bell and/or spigot configuration compatible with SDR
35 PVC. Joints shall meet the requirements of ASTM (D3212) “Joints for Drain and Sewer Plastic
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 19
Pipe Using Elastomeric Seals”.
4.10.3. Joints: All Joints shall be sealed with gaskets of rubber, or other approved elastomeric
material, as provided by the manufacturer of the pipe being installed. Joints shall be made up in
conformance with the manufacturer’s written installation instructions. Copies of the installation
instructions shall be submitted to the Town a minimum of one week prior to the construction.
4.10.4. Alternate Materials and Methods: Alternate jointing materials and methods may be used only
if of standard manufacture for the pipe and fittings being installed and submitted for approval to the
Town.
Section 4.11. Connections: Connections of a building sewer into a public sewer shall be made, at a
location determined by the Town.
4.11.1. Connections at Manholes: Where connection to the sewer main is not possible, connections
to a manhole are permitted. Tapping of pre-cast manholes shall be done with core drill or other
approved method. A flexible rubber pipe to manhole connector shall be employed in the connection of
service lines to pre-cast manholes. The connector shall be the sole element relied on to assure a
flexible watertight seal of the pipe to the manhole. No adhesives or lubricants shall be employed in
the installation of the connector into the manhole. The rubber for the connector shall comply with
ASTM C443 and ASTM C923 and consist of EPDM and elastomer designed to be resistant to ozone,
weather elements, chemicals, including acids, alkalis, animal and vegetable fats, oils and petroleum
products from spills.
All stainless steel elements of the connector shall be totally non-magnetic Series 304 Stainless,
excluding the worm screw for tightening the steel band around the pipe which shall be Series 305
Stainless. The worm screw for tightening the steel band shall be torqued by a break-away torque
wrench available from the pre-cast manhole supplier, and set 60 - 70 inch/lbs.
The connector shall be installed in the manhole wall by activating the expanding mechanism in strict
accordance with the recommendation of the connector manufacturer.
The connector shall be of a size specifically designed for the pipe material and size being utilized on
the project.
The contractor shall furnish evidence that materials meet or exceed the requirements given in ASTM
Specification C923-84, which covers rubber seals used in concrete sewer pipe and culvert Joints.
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES ASTM C-023 ACTUAL
I. Chemical Resistance
1 N Sulfuric Acid No weight loss No weight loss
1 N Hydrochloric Acid No weight loss No weight loss
II. Tensile, psi, min 1,200 psi 1,550 psi
Elongation at break 350% min 450% min
Hardness + 5 from the
manufacturer’s specified
hardness
44 + 5
III. Accelerated Oven Aging: 96 hrs @ l58°F
Tensile Change, % max 15 10.4
Elongation Change, % max 20 14.0
IV. Comp.Set, % max 25 19.6
V. Water Absorption: 48 hrs @158°F
Weight increase, % max
10 3.5
VI. Ozone Resistance
120 Hrs @ 100° + 02°F
0 0
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 20
VII. Low-temperature brittle point Fracture
@ -40°C
None None
VIII. Tear Resistance 200 lbf/in 200 lbf/in
On completion of the installation, the Contractor shall patch all cracks, gaps or other damage to the
manhole with non-shrink epoxy grout or other approved material. Following installation the contractor
shall pneumatically test the service per Article 5 - Section 5.4.2 of this Ordinance.
4.11.2. Connections at Wye Branches: When connecting a 4 or 6 inch building sewer to a public
sewer, an inline wye branch fitting or tapped gasketed saddle connection shall be used. The fitting
shall be of the proper design for the public sewer pipe materials. Any building sewer greater than 6
inch diameter shall be connected to the public sewer at a manhole. If a manhole is not available
within the project limits, the developer and/or owner shall install one at a location determined by the
Town. The manhole invert shall be reconfigured to accept the new pipe and direct flow downstream.
The tap shall be made with a hole saw and all rough edges sanded smooth. The tap location shall be
centered horizontally on the pipe spring line or above. The service shall extend horizontally from the
public sewer a distance not less than 2 feet.
The wye-saddle gasket shall be rubber or elastomeric material of section designed to provide a water
tight seal without transfer of significant stress to the sewer pipe. The wye-saddle shall be securely
clamped in place with a minimum of two each 3/4 inch wide, Type 304 stainless steel bonds.
4.11.3. Service Marker: Electronic markers shall be provided at the terminus points of all new
services or point of reconnection for all existing services. Marker disks shall be placed directly over
the point of termination at least 6 inches above the pipe. Depth of marker burial shall not be less than
4 feet or more than 6 feet. Markers shall be laid in a level position and hand backfilled to 1 foot above
the disk to prevent movement or damage.
Markers disks shall consist of a passive waterproof device capable of reflecting a specifically
designated repulse frequency turned to the utility being installed. Marker disks shall be color coded
green (for Sanitary) in accordance with AWPA Utility Location and Coordinating Council Standards.
Markers shall be of the brand and style specified by the Town.
4.11.4. Swing Ties: Swing ties locating the terminus points of all new services or point of reconnection
for all existing services shall be provided to the Town. Ties shall consist of measurements to
permanent structures tabulated on reproducible record drawings submitted to the Town at completion
of construction.
Section 4.12. Inspection and Connection to Public Sewers: The applicant for the building sewer
permit shall notify the Town when the building sewer is ready for inspection and prior to connection to the
public sewer. No public sewer shall be disturbed except under the supervision of the Town. The Town
shall be available to supervise and inspect the connection within 48 hours of notification of readiness.
4.12.1. Guarding of Excavations: All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
4.12.2. Restoration of Public Property: Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town.
Section 4.13. Building Sewers Requiring Frequent Maintenance: Maintenance of the building sewer,
as defined in section 1.0 of this Ordinance, shall be the responsibility of the property owner. Any building
sewer serving a school, hospital, or similar institution or public building, or serving a complex of
commercial or industrial buildings, or which, in the opinion of the Town, will receive sewage or industrial
wastes of such volume or character that frequent maintenance of said building sewer is anticipated, then
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 21
such building sewer shall be connected to the public sewer through a manhole. If required, a new
manhole shall be installed in the public sewer and the location of this manhole and the building sewer
connection to it or to any existing manhole shall be as specified by the Town.
4.13.1 Interceptors and Traps: Grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the Town, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease
in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; (except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units). All interceptors shall be
of a type and capacity approved by the Town and shall be located so as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors or traps shall be constructed of
impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall
be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which, when
bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight.
Section 4.14. Infiltration: The maximum acceptable infiltration rate for all sewers constructed after
enactment of this amendment shall be 100 gpd/in-mile of extent including service connection to the
building foundation.
The maximum acceptable infiltration rate for all existing private sewers shall be 1,000 gpd/in-mile of
extent, including service connection to the building foundation.
Infiltration rate measurements shall be made using manufacturer calibrated insert weirs and sound
engineering practices. Infiltration measurements shall be reported in tabular form, showing all reaches
monitored, antecedent precipitation, and groundwater conditions, and signed by a professional engineer
registered in the State of Maine. A current manufacturer’s calibration certificate for the weirs used to take
the infiltration measurements shall he included with the report.
Section 4.15. Costs and Expenses Borne by the Owner: All costs and expense incident to the
installation, connection and maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The costs for
verification of existing pipe condition for reuse shall also be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the Town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation, maintenance, or failure of the building sewer service.
ARTICLE 5
SEWER EXTENSIONS
Section 5.1. Sewer Extensions Constructed by the Town: Public sewer extensions may be
constructed by the Town under public contract if, in the opinion of the Town Council, the number of
properties to be served by such extension warrants its cost. Property owners may propose such sewer
extensions within the Town by drafting a written petition signed by a majority of the benefited property
owners, and filing it with the Town Council. The cost of such extensions may be assessed to the
benefited property owners in any lawful manner determined by the town council. Under this arrangement
the property owner shall pay for and install the building sewer from the public sewer to the property to be
served in accordance with the requirements of Article 4.
Section 5.2. Sewer Extensions Constructed by Private Developer: If the Town does not elect to
construct a sewer extension under public contract, the property owner, builder, or developer may
construct the necessary sewer extension, if such extension is approved by the Town Council and
constructed in accordance with the requirements of Section 5.3. The cost of sewer extensions thus made,
including all building sewers, shall be absorbed by the developers or property owners. Each building
sewer must be installed and inspected as previously required and the inspection fees shall be paid
therefore. Design of sewers shall be as specified in Section 5.3. and Section 5.3.1. The installation of the
sewer extension shall be subject to inspection by the Town and the expenses for this inspection shall be
paid for by the owner, builder or developer. The Town’s decision shall be final in matters of quality and
methods of construction. Before it may be used, the sewer as-constructed must pass the inspection
test(s) specified under Section 5.4.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 22
To the maximum extent practicable all sewerage extensions shall be constructed within approved street
right-of-ways. Otherwise, sewerage extensions shall be constructed centered in a 20 foot (minimum) wide
right-of-way deeded to the Town.
Section 5.3. Requirements for Extending Sanitary Sewer Systems: All extensions to the sanitary
sewer system shall be properly designed in accordance with this Ordinance and the most recent edition
of the Recommended Standards for for Wastewater Facilities, as adopted by the Great Lakes Upper
Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers. All design computations, plans and specifications
shall be stamped and signed by a professional engineer, currently registered in the State of Maine. Plans
and specifications and computations for sewer extension shall be submitted to and approval obtained
from the Town before construction may proceed. Plans and profiles of proposed sewer line construction
shall be a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch (1200:1) and a vertical scale of not more than 10
feet to the inch (120:1) . Topographic base mapping shall be controlled with minimum 2 foot contour
intervals. All mapping shall be based on MSL (Mean Sea Level) and Digital Data of GEO referenced
plans as described below: Submission of digital data/preparation of geo-referenced plans: The digital
submission should include all applicable sewer features (pipes, junctions, pumps, etc), topography,
property lines, streams with flow direction, wetlands, or any other applicable features as would be shown
on a printed plan. Features are to be GPS located using at least sub-meter accuracy GPS units. Plans
are to be geographically referenced using no less than four non-linear (dispersed across the area)
projected control points of at least sub-meter accuracy and shall be submitted in one of two acceptable
formats: 1) Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 19 meters, or 2) US State Plan Coordinate
System Maine Zone East 1983 feet. Accepted file types are ESRI .shp and associated files, AutoCAD
.dwg files. AutoCAD files must be purged of all empty layers and presented with model space objects
only. All files are to be submitted with clear layer names, such as “Sewer-Line-8inch”, that obviously
describe each layer (for example, “gp-pl-0” is not acceptable). Metadata should be included if available.
If not available, a text file should be included with the following: surveyor or engineer name and license
number, phone number, mailing address, email address, projection and datum used, date of preparation
of data, description of equipment used to collect data (make, model, manufacturer’s reported accuracy
level), any disclaimers, limitations, or other notes. Electronic files should be submitted on a CD, DVD or
flash drive. Submission of physical plan copies: No less than two physical copies in ARCH D or ARCH E
format will be provided on clear and legible media (suitable for microfilming).
5.3.1. All extensions of the sanitary sewer system constructed under Section 5.2 shall be designed to
provide gravity collection and flow from the development to the point of connection with the existing
public sewer system. Pump stations shall not be incorporated in the design of sewer systems in any
proposed development within the Town of Hampden, Maine except under the following conditions:
5.3.1.1 Lift stations serving individual single-family homes are exempt from the foregoing
requirements of Section 5.3.1, unless said homes are part of a common scheme of development,
such as a subdivision or group development.
5.3.1.2 The parcel of land on which the development is to be located shall be no more than 500
feet from an existing public gravity sewer line.
5.3.1.3 No force main shall exceed 2,000 feet in length unless prior approval has been obtained
from the Town Council upon their finding that such increased length is the only practicable option
to service the subject property, and upon their finding that any increased operations and
maintenance costs that would result from such increased length over the life of the infrastructure
will be offset by sewer fees to be paid by the user or users of the force main.
5.3.1.4 A force main sewer may only be constructed if determination is reached and agreed to by
all parties that a gravity sewer would not be feasible.For example: Although a 2” force main
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 23
sewer might be less expensive to install than an 8” gravity sewer, the gravity sewer must be not
feasible, not simply more expensive.
5.3.1.5 The private pump stations and sewer extensions must be maintained in perpetuity by
either a single private entity or a maintenance association.
5.3.1.6 Any private pump stations and sewer extension must be designed and stamped by a
duly licensed and qualified professional engineer, registered in the State of Maine.
5.3.1.7 The private pump station design, and the construction thereof, must include a redundant
sewage lift pump, backup electrical generator and approved alarm system to provide warning in
case of mechanical failure.
The Planning Board shall not approve any development or subdivision that includes private pump
stations or private sewer extensions unless the design thereof and the legal documents showing
evidence of their perpetual maintenance have been reviewed by the Public Works Director, Town
Manager, Town Attorney and Town engineering consultant with written recommendation to the Town
Council for final approval.
5.3.2. Materials, Joints and Connection to Building Sewers: Gravity sewer pipe and fittings shall be
Ductile Iron (DI) or Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) unless otherwise approved by the Town.
Minimum internal pipe diameter shall be 8 inches. DI pipe shall be a minimum of Class 51 conforming
to the requirements of ANSI A21.5 and ANSI A21.11 push on joints. Pipe shall be cement lined and
double asphalt seal coated inside and bituminous coated outside. PVC sewer pipe and fittings 15
inches or less in diameter shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D3034 or ASTM F789, sizes 18
inches through 27 inches shall conform to ASTM P679. Pipe wall thickness shall be sized in
accordance with ASTM D2412.
Pipe joining shall be bell and spigot with elastomeric gaskets. Pipe will be furnished in standard
lengths. PVC to be installed at a depth greater than 14 feet shall meet the requirements of AWWA
C900 (PVC Pressure Pipe). All Class 100 pipe shall meet the requirements or DR 25, Class 150 pipe
shall meet the requirements of DR 18 and Class 200 shall meet the requirements of DR 14.
Wye branch fittings shall be installed for connections to building sewers in accordance with Section
4.10.
5.3.3. Excavation: Excavation for pipe lines shall be true to line and grade and shall be carried to a
minimum of 6 inches below the bottom of the pipe. The Town may require additional excavation and
backfill with granular material if unstable soil conditions are encountered.
For pipe diameters 12 inches and less the trench width - two pipe diameters above the pipe invert -
shall be 36 inches. The trench width for diameters in excess of 12 inches - two pipe diameters above
the pipe invert - shall be the pipe outside diameter “0” plus 2 feet. The trench width for parallel pipes
in the same trench shall be 4 feet 6 inches, two pipe diameters above the highest pipe invert. The
trench width shall not exceed the above limits unless authorized by the Town.
All Excavated areas shall be properly shored and braced so that earth will not slide or settle and so
that all surrounding property and structures of any kind will be duly protected from damage. Work
shall be performed in accordance with all existing State and Federal safety requirements. If in the
opinion of the Town the work area and procedures are unsafe, the Town representative shall have
the right to notify the proper authorities. (i.e. OSHA)
5.3.4. Bedding Material: Pipe bedding shall consist of a foundation (6” minimum depth) and side-fill
to the top of the pipe embedment zone (12” min. over top of pipe) and accessories extending for the
full width between the undisturbed trench walls. The bedding material required beneath the pipe shall
be placed, graded and compacted to the pipe sub-grade profile over the entire width between
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 24
undisturbed trench walls. The pipe shall be placed and adjusted to proper grade on this prepared
bedding, then jointed, braced and blocked, as required. After pipe is graded into place, bedding
material shall be placed simultaneously on both sides of the pipe and worked carefully into place
without disturbing the pipe alignment or grade, to an elevation of 12" over the pipe.
PVC pipe shall be placed in accordance with latest Uni-Bell PVC Pipe Association Design and
Construction Standards.
Backfill in the embedment zone for PVC pipe shall be machine placed bedding material, placed in 6
inch layers and compacted to 90% of relative density as determined by ASTM-D2049. Bedding
material shall be crushed stone or gravel similar to MDOT Specification 703.06A Aggregate Base,
conforming to following gradation:
Sieve Size Percent Passing
1 1/2” 100
1/2 45-70
1/4” 30-55
No. 4 5-20
No. 200 0-5
Crushed stone without fine grained material will be allowed. Bedding Material – If crushed stone
material is used for pipe bedding in roadway areas, filter fabric shall be placed over the full trench
width and length just above the stone cover prior to placing backfill material.
Samples and a sieve analysis of the bedding material may be requested by the Town for approval
prior to use.
Additionally, sieve analyses of randomly drawn samples of placed bedding material at a frequency of
1 per 2000 LF of pipe shall be provided if in the judgment of the Town, there is an apparent change in
consistency of bedding material. All sampling and analyses specified herein shall be performed at no
cost to the Town.
5.3.5. Pipe Thickness and Field Strength: Pipe thickness and field strength shall be calculated on the
following criteria:
1. Safety factor: 1.9,
2. Load factor: 1.7,
3. Weight of soil: 120/cubic foot,
4. Wheel loading: 6,000 pounds.
Utilizing the above information, design shall then be made as outlined in Chapter IX of the Water
Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, “Design and Construction of Sanitary and
Storm Sewers,” current edition.
5.3.6. Manholes: Manholes shall be constructed at all changes in slope or alignment or at intervals
not exceeding 400 LF.
Components: Manhole components consist of: a pre-cast reinforced concrete base section with precast
invert channel and steps in either 2 foot or 4 foot lengths, 4 foot lengths will be required
whenever the pipe diameter is greater than 18 inches; pre-cast concrete transition rings from one
barrel diameter to another; a pre-cast reinforced concrete eccentric top section, with steps, in 4 foot
lengths; pre-cast concrete transition rings from one barrel diameter to another; pre-cast reinforced
concrete barrel sections, with steps, in 1 foot, 2 foot, 3 foot or 4 foot lengths; a boot type pipe to
manhole seal; concrete riser rings in 2 inch, 3 inch or 6 inch thickness; and a metal frame and cover.
No exterior face of the finished manhole above the base shall be inclined away from the vertical
manhole centerline.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 25
Concrete work shall be in accordance with applicable requirements of ACI 318 except as modified
herein. Concrete shall be normal weight (i.e., produced using normal weight aggregate) having a
minimum ultimate strength of 4,000 psi at 28 days. Maximum size of coarse aggregate shall he 3/4
inch. Cement shall be Type 1 conforming to ASTM C150. Reinforcement shall be Grade 40. The
finished concrete shall be durable, dense and water-resistant, free from honeycombs, voids, cracks,
pop-outs, scaling and dusting. All components shall be designed to accept H-20 loading. Four
concrete compression test specimens shall be made from the working mix and broken for each 100
vertical feet of manhole sections. All testing shall be done in conformance with applicable ASTM
requirements for sampling and testing concrete. Certified copies of the test results shall be submitted
to the Town.
Each section of the pre-cast manholes shall have cast in place pins for the purpose of lifting, handling
and setting.
The boot type pipe to manhole seal shall be of molded neoprene compound conforming to ASTM
C443, with 3/8 inch wall thickness throughout. A series of beads shall be molded into the boot
surfaces that contact the manhole part and pipe barrel to fill surface irregularities when clamped in
place. Boot attachment bands and draw bolts shall be corrosion resistant non-magnetic stainless
steel.
Manhole steps shall be copolymer polypropylene type designed for a minimum concentrated live load
of 300 pounds and meeting ASTM 2146 Polypropylene, BOWCO step and socket system or
approved equal, spaced vertically 12 inches on center. Irregular or non-vertical spacing of steps shall
be cause for rejection.
Pre-cast concrete manhole sections shall be of lapped joint construction. All joints shall he triple
sealed with:
1. Flexible butyl resin sealant on the inner lap conforming to Federal Specification SS-S-210A
and AASHTO M-1983. Minimum acceptable product application range shall be 10°F to
130°F.
2. Flexible strip consisting of butyl rubber-hydrocarbon (24+/-1%) and sodium bentonite (75+/-
1%) sealant on the outer lap. Minimum acceptable product application range shall be 5°F to
125°F.
3. Flexible 9 inch wide wrap consisting of 0.045 inch EPDM rubber backing supporting a 0.035
inch thick self-bonding butyl compound applied to the exterior face of the manhole and
centered on the joint.
All sealing compounds shall be applied to clean, dry, primed surfaces in accordance with
manufacturer’s instructions. All joint sealants shall be fully applied prior to vacuum testing.
Precast concrete grade rings will not be accepted. Brick and mortar (containing sand, portland
cement and lime, no pre-mixed mortar) will be used for final finish grade adjustment. Finish grade
adjustment with bricks and mortar shall not exceed 14 inches (not including frame height). If more
than 14 inches is needed to adjust to finish grade, an additional manhole barrel section shall be used.
Cast iron manhole frames and covers shall be cast of material conforming to the requirements of
ASTM A48 and be of uniform quality, free from blow-holes, porosity, hard spots, shrinkage distortion
or other defects. They shall be smooth and well-cleaned by shot-blasting or other approved method.
They shall be of heavy duty construction weighing not less than 300 pounds and machined on both
vertical and horizontal seating surfaces. Covers shall be of checkered top design embossed with the
word “SEWER” in 2 inch letters. Frames shall have a minimum clear opening of 23 3/4 inches.
Locking or watertight frames and covers shall conform to the above. In addition, covers shall be
gasketed and attached with four brass or stainless steel bolts.
Brick for manhole inverts shall meet Standard Specifications for Sewer Brick, AASHTO Designation
M91-42, Grade SA, Size No. 1, wire cut. Mortar shall be a mixture of sand ,cement and lime
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 26
consisting of one part lime, three parts cement and six parts clean, well-graded hard, durable sand,
and water. The amount of water shall be held to the minimum that yields a workable mortar.
5.3.7. Shop Drawings: Prior to issuance of the construction permit, shop drawings for all materials
and components to be incorporated in the work shall be submitted for review and approval of the
Town. No portion of the work shall be commenced unless and until shop drawings for materials and
components to be incorporated in the work have been approved.
Shop drawings shall consist of manufacturer’s standard product literature and technical data sheets
which clearly demonstrate the proposed materials and components to be in full compliance with the
requirements of this Ordinance.
Five sets of shop drawings shall be submitted to the Town for review and approval. Upon completion
of review two copies will be retained by the Town and the remaining three sets shall be returned to
the developer. The developer shall maintain one complete set of approved shop drawings at the job
site throughout the construction.
All shop drawings must be reviewed and approved or disapproved by the Town within four weeks of
receipt of same. Shop drawings held longer than four weeks shall be considered approved as
submitted.
5.3.8. Flushing: All completed sewer lines, manholes and appurtenances shall be flushed and cleaned
to remove grit and other debris. Care shall be taken to ensure that grit and debris are contained and
removed from the line. Under no circumstances shall grit and debris from installation be permitted to
enter Town sewers. Flushing shall be performed at no expense to the Town. Mandrel or CCTV shall
be used immediately following flushing as specified below.
Section 5.4. Testing: All public sewers shall conform to the requirement of the following tests before
they will be approved and sewage flow accepted from them by the Town. Final testing and retesting as
stipulated below shall be performed in the presence of the Town and at no expense to the Town. Results
of tests performed in the absence of the Town will not be accepted.
5.4.1. Vacuum Testing of Manholes: Each manhole shall be tested immediately after assembly or
modification, and prior to backfilling. All lift holes shall be plugged with an approved non-shrink epoxy
grout. All pipes entering the manhole shall be plugged, taking care to securely brace the plug from
being drawn into the manhole. The test head shall be placed at the inside of the top of the cone
section and the seal inflated in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. A vacuum of
10 inches of mercury shall be drawn and the vacuum pump shut off. With the valves closed, the time
shall be measured for the vacuum to drop to 9 inches. The manhole shall pass if the time is greater
than 60 seconds for 48 inch diameter, 75 seconds for 60 inch diameter and 90 seconds for 72 inch
diameter manholes. If the manhole fails the initial test it shall be repaired and retested until it passes.
5.4.2. Pneumatic Pipe Test: All newly installed, repaired or modified sewers shall pass a pneumatic
test prior to acceptance by the Town. Pneumatic testing shall be administered after installation and
capping of house service fittings and leads at their upper termination, and after completing backfill of
the gravity sewer trench.
Pneumatic testing shall be performed using equipment and procedures outlined herein.
Equipment used shall meet the following minimum requirements:
1. Pneumatic plugs shall have a sealing length equal to or greater than the diameter of the pipe
to be inspected.
2. Pneumatic plugs shall resist internal test pressures without requiring external bracing or
blocking.
3. All air used shall pass through a single control panel.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 27
4. Three individual hoses shall be used for the following connections:
a. From control panel to pneumatic plugs for inflation.
b. From control panel to sealed line for introducing the low pressure air.
c. From sealed line to control panel for continually monitoring the air pressure rise in the
sealed line.
5. Internal pipe pressure gauge shall have a psi range from 0 to 25 max.
All pneumatic plugs shall be seal tested before being used in the actual test installation. One length of
pipe shall be laid on the ground and sealed at both ends with pneumatic plugs to be checked. Air
shall be introduced into the plugs to 25 psig. The sealed pipe shall be pressurized to 5 psig. The
plugs shall hold against this pressure without bracing and without movement of the plugs out of the
pipe.
After a manhole to manhole reach of pipe has been backfilled and cleaned, and the pneumatic plugs
are checked by the above procedure, the plugs shall be placed in the line at each manhole and
inflated to 25 psig. Low pressure air shall be introduced into this sealed line until the internal air
pressure reaches 4 psig greater than the average back pressure of any groundwater that may be
over the pipe. At least two minutes shall be allowed for the air pressure to stabilize.
After the stabilization period (3.5 psig minimum pressure in the pipe), the air hose from the control
panel to the air supply shall be disconnected. The portion of line being tested shall he termed
“acceptable” if the time required in minutes for the pressure to decrease from 3.5 to 2.5 psig (greater
than the average back pressure of any groundwater that may be over the pipe) shall not be less than
the time shown for the given diameters in the following table:
Pipe Diameter in Inches Minutes
4 2.0
6 3.0
8 4.0
10 5.0
12 5.5
15 7.5
18 8.5
21 10.0
24 11.5
In areas where groundwater is known to exist, a 1/2 inch diameter capped pipe nipple, approximately
10 inches long, shall be installed through the manhole wall on top of one of the sewer lines entering
the manhole. This shall be done at the time the sewer line is installed. Immediately prior to the
performance of the Line Acceptance Test, the groundwater shall be determined by removing the pipe
cap, blowing air through the pipe nipple into the ground so as to clear it, and then connecting a clear
plastic tube to the nipple. The hose shall be held vertically and a measurement of the height in feet
shall be divided by 2.3 to establish the pounds of pressure that will be added to all readings. (For
example, if the height of water is 11 1/2 feet, then the added pressure will be 5 psig, and the 2.5 psig
increased to 7.5 psig. The allowable drop of one pound and the timing remain the same).
If the installation fails the pneumatic test, the source of leakage shall be determined and eliminated by
repair or replacement at no expense to the Town.
5.4.3. Deflection Test: An in-place deflection test shall be performed on all PVC gravity pipe by
drawing a gauge plug (mandrel) through each section of sewer. Equipment used shall meet the
following minimum requirements.
1. The gauge plug shall be constructed of durable, abrasion resistant material in a cylindrical
shape. The full diameter barrel length to pipe diameter ratio shall not be less than 1.5 and the
minimum barrel diameter shall be 5% less than the un-deflected base inside diameter of the
pipe being tested. Each end of the cylinder shall be radiused at not less than one-fourth of
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 28
the pipe diameter being tested. Each gauge shall have a 1/4 inch tie rod drilled through the
entire unit. Tie rod terminations shall be closed eyes. Upon prior approval of the Public Works
Director and under certain conditions only, (pipe grade 1% min. more than minimum slope,
pipe installation was inspected and properly installed, etc), if the 5% mandrel does not pass,
the 7-1/2% mandrel may be used. In no condition shall the 7-1/2% mandrel be acceptable
unless prior authorization by the Public Works Director is given.
2. Pull cord shall be attached to the gauge eyes with safety snaps. This cord shall be high
quality material with a minimum test strength of 250 pounds. Cord on each side of the gauge
shall be of sufficient length to span the maximum distance between any two adjacent
manholes at the project site. This cord shall be marked in such a way that the user can
determine the location of any constrictions found in the line as the test is being performed.
The gauge plug and pull cord shall be submitted to the Town Manager for approval prior to
use.
The deflection test shall be performed after the trench has been completely backfilled and
compacted, and adequate settlement of the area around the trench has occurred (not less
than 30 days following installation of the pipe).
To perform this test, the gauge is inserted into the pipe at the upstream manhole and slowly
drawn through the line to the downstream manhole. When a constriction is encountered the
cord shall be pulled with a force not to exceed 100 pounds, until it can go no further. Location
of the constriction shall be noted, the spindle shall be withdrawn to the upstream manhole,
and the section of pipe shall be excavated to correct the problem. When the area around the
new pipe section has adequately settled, the deflection test shall be performed again along
the entire section where the constriction occurred.
5.4.4 Video Testing: Video Testing may be acceptable to the Town in Lieu of pressure testing if the
newly installed sewer has active house services connected to the public sewer. This option is at the
discretion of the Town.
Testing shall consist of passing a video camera completely through the interior of the new sewer
from the upstream manhole to the downstream manhole, while recording and viewing the results.
The video camera shall be self powered and capable of rotating its lens to look into service
connections. A Written report noting any deficient area will be given to the Town upon completion of
the test with (2) electronic copies of the video. Video testing shall be done by a competent firm
approved by the Town.
A Town representative shall be present at the time of testing.
Section 5.5. Transfer of Ownership to the Town: All extensions of public sewerage shall become the
property of the Town through the following procedures initiated by the Developer:
The developer shall:
1. Request written approval from the Town indicating that all sewer improvements have been
completed as specified herein to their satisfaction.
2. Indicate in writing to the Manager that said improvements will be guaranteed against defects in
materials or workmanship for a period of 12 months from the time of acceptance by the Town.
3. Indicate in writing to the Manager that said sewer improvements are free and clear of any liens,
all right-of-ways have been deeded to the Town as shown on the approved subdivision plans.
4. Petition the Manager in writing to go before the Council to request acceptance of the sewer line.
After all the above items have been completed by the developer, the manager may then schedule the
item for review by the Town Council. The Town Council shall be the ruling authority on acceptance.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 29
Section 5.6. Privately Owned Sewer Extension: Privately owned sewer extensions of the public sewer
will be permitted with the following additional conditions:
5.6.1 Privately owned sewer extensions (associated with subdivisions or site plans) of the public
sewer may be permitted with prior approval by the Hampden Planning Board. All other privately
owned sewer extensions shall be approved by the Director of Public Works. If peer review is
needed, the Director of Public Works can solicit third party review at the expense of the applicant.
Said sewer shall be constructed in strict compliance with this ordinance and be inspected by
the Hampden Public Works Director or his/her designee during construction. All compliance with
State, local and federal regulations, maintenance and repair shall be the responsibility of the owner.
Section 5.7. Requirements for Building Permits: No builder or developer shall be issued a building
permit for new dwelling or structure requiring sanitary facilities within the Town, unless a suitable and
approved method of waste disposal has been constructed and is available for service.
ARTICLE 6
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
Section 6.1. Unlawful Deposits and Discharges; Use of Public Sewers Required:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary
manner on public or private property within the Town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
Town, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the Town, any wastewaters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with this Ordinance.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of domestic sewage.
D. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation or other purposes situated within the Town and abutting on any street, alley or right-of
–way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined
sewer of the Town is hereby required, at the owner’s expense, to install suitable plumbing
facilities therein, including but not limited to toilets, and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance within 90 days after date
of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the
property line.
Section 6.2. Storm Sewers: Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet, as approved in writing by
the Town Manager or his/her designee. All other discharges may be granted only with written approval of
the Town Manager or his/her designee.
Section 6.3. General Sewer Use Requirements:
6.3.1 General prohibitions. No discharger or user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the
POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through or interference. These general
prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW, whether or not they are subject to categorical
pretreatment standards or any other federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
The provisions of this section shall apply to wastewater originating in the Town of Hampden, which is
introduced to the Town’s POTW.
6.3.2. Specific prohibitions. No discharger or user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the
POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including but not limited to waste
streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. (60°C). using the test methods specified in
40 CFR 261.21
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 30
(2) Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 12.0 or otherwise causing corrosive structural
damage to the POTW or equipment. Any pH above 12.5 is considered hazardous under 40 CFR
261.22.
(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW
resulting in interference, but in no case shall solids greater than three inches or 7.6 centimeters in any
dimension be introduced to the POTW.
(4) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, COD, etc.), released in a discharge at a
flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will
cause interference with the POTW.
(5) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150º F. (65º C.) or which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature of the treatment plant influent of the POTW to exceed 104º F. (40º C.).
(6) Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will
cause interference or pass-through.
(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a
quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
(8) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the Town pursuant to
Section 3.6 of this ordinance.
(9) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, is sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life or prevent
entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair.
(10) Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as,
but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to
the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the City's MEPDES permit.
(11) Stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or any water from downspouts, yard
drains, fountains and ponds, swimming pool drainage, sump pumps, septic tanks, lawn sprays or
geothermal-type heating or cooling systems, unless such drainage from such sources is discharged
into drains specifically designated for such purposes by the Town. Industrial cooling water may be
discharged only after written approval and to a receptor site designated by the Town. Such industrial
cooling water discharges shall comply with the requirements of 38 M.R.S.A. § 413 and be approved
by the Pretreatment Coordinator.
(12) Sludges, screenings or other residues or by-products from the pretreatment of industrial wastes.
(13) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes, except as specifically approved by
the Town. Such approval shall only be given upon certification by the discharger or user that
applicable federal and state regulations concerning such wastewater have been complied with before
such a discharge. Radioactive waste includes, but is not limited to, any substance required by the
United States Department of Transportation to have Type A or B packaging, pursuant to 49 CFR
173.426.
(14) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Town in a wastewater discharge permit.
(15) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to
fail a toxicity test.
(16) Fats, oil or greases of animal or vegetable origin or oil and grease and other petroleum or
mineral oil products in concentrations greater than 200 mg/l.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 31
(17) Toxic pollutants or any other toxic substances hereinafter determined by the Town not to be
amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes of the Town or which
might interfere with the effectiveness of the POTW's processes or which might limit the potential end
uses of the POTW's sludges.
(18) Any substance or material prohibited under 40 CFR 403, in particular 403.5(a) and (b). Also any
other substance or material the discharge of which results in a violation by the Town of the
regulations, now or herein after existing, of any public entity, including the EPA, or results in a
violation of the City's MEPDES permit.
(19) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases.
(20) Any garbage except properly shredded garbage.
(21) Any hazardous waste.
6.3.3 Action by Town outflow metering.
(1) If any wastewater or other wastes are discharged or proposed to be discharged to the public
sewers, which wastewaters or other wastes contain the substances or possess the characteristics
enumerated in this section and which in the judgment of the Town may have a deleterious effect upon
the Town's POTW processes, equipment or receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to
life or constitute a public nuisance, the Town may:
(a) Reject the wastewater or other wastes;
(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the POTW;
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
(d) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes; and/or
(e) Take any appropriate enforcement action against an industrial user or user which violates the
prohibitions of this section.
(2) If the Town permits the pretreatment or flow equalization of waste flows, the design and
installation of the plant and equipment for such pretreatment or flow equalization shall be subject to
the review and approval of the Town and subject to the requirements of all applicable Town, state
and federal codes, ordinances and laws. The Town's approval, if granted, shall not be deemed to
relieve the discharger of its responsibility to comply with its wastewater discharge permit
requirements and shall not constitute an acceptance of the adequacy of the pretreatment process
equipment selected. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any
wastewater or other wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at the owner's expense.
(3) Outflow metering.
(a) Whenever the Town has reason to believe that a particular discharger is discharging
unmetered flows into the Town's POTW or public sewers in the form of storm runoff,
groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage or from any other source listed in Subsection
6.3.2(11) of this section or otherwise and that the volume of such flows, on a percentage basis,
exceeds the Town-wide average for such flows, the Town may install, or require the discharger
to install, an outflow metering device and may thereafter charge the discharger the Town's cost,
if any, of installing the outflow metering device and the Town's cost of treating such flows as
provided in the Town's approved schedule of sewer fees. All charges imposed by the Town
under this Subsection 6.3.3(3) shall be collected in the same manner as other sewer fees
established under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5405.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 32
(b) Prior to imposing charges under this Subsection, the Town shall give the discharger written
notice of a show cause hearing, as provided in Section 6.10.4 of this Ordinance. At the show
cause hearing, the discharger shall be afforded an opportunity to show that its discharges into
the Town's POTW or public sewers do not include excessive unmetered flows or that such flows
were caused by an upset or unavoidable malfunction. For this purpose, the term "unavoidable
malfunction" shall be defined as provided in 38 M.R.S.A. § 359, Subsection 9. In the event of
excessive unmetered flows caused by an unavoidable malfunction, the Town shall issue an
order directing correction of the malfunction within 90 days of the order date. This period may be
extended for an additional period of up to 90 days if the malfunction cannot be corrected within
the original ninety-day period due to winter weather conditions. If the malfunction remains
uncorrected upon expiration of the specified period, the Town shall impose the additional
charges provided in this Subsection retroactively to the date of the Town's order.
(c) Imposition of additional charges as provided in this Subsection 6.3.3(3) shall not bar or be a
prerequisite for other enforcement action under Sections 6.10, 6.11 or 6.12 of this Ordinance.
6.3.4 Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Town, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, sand or
other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private residential
living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Town
and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
6.3.5 No discharger or user shall increase the use of potable or process water, in any way, for the
purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
compliance with the standards set forth in this Ordinance. Pollutants, substances or wastewater
prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in a manner that would allow it to be
discharged to the POTW.
6.3.6 Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The categorical pretreatment standards found at
Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, are
incorporated herein by reference. These standards must be adhered to by dischargers to, or users of,
the POTW.
(1) When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of pollutant
concentrations, an industrial user may request that the Town convert the limits to equivalent mass
limits. The determination to convert concentration limits to mass limits is within the discretion of the
Town. The Town may establish equivalent mass limits only if the industrial user meets all the
conditions set forth in Subsection 6.2.6(a) through (c) below.
(a) To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the industrial user must:
[1] Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water conservation methods and technologies
that substantially reduce water use during the term of its individual wastewater discharge
permit;
[2] Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the
applicable pretreatment standard and not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment;
[3] Provide sufficient information to establish the facility's actual average daily flow rate for all
wastestreams, based on data from a continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the
facility's long-term production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-term
average production rate must be representative of current operating conditions;
[4] Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollution levels that vary so significantly that
equivalent mass limits are not appropriate to control the discharge; and
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 33
[5] Have consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards during
the period prior to the industrial user's request for equivalent mass limits.
(b) An industrial user subject to equivalent mass limits must:
[1] Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve
compliance with the equivalent mass limits;
[2] Continue to record the facility's flow rates through the use of a continuous flow monitoring
device;
[3] Continue to record the facility's production rates and notify the Town whenever production
rates are expected to vary by more than 20% from its baseline production rates determined in
Section 6.2.6. Upon notification of a revised production rate, the Town will reassess the
equivalent mass limit and revise the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the
facility; and
[4] Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation methods and technologies
as those implemented pursuant to Subsection 6.3.6 (1)(a)[1] so long as it discharges under an
equivalent mass limit.
(c) When developing equivalent mass limit, the Town:
[1] Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the actual average daily flow rate of
the regulated process(es) of the industrial user by the concentration-based daily maximum
and monthly average standard for the applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the
appropriate unit conversion factor;
[2] Upon notification of a revised production rate, will reassess the equivalent mass limit and
recalculate the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and
[3] May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent individual wastewater discharger
permit terms if the industrial user's actual average daily flow rate was reduced solely as a
result of the implementation of water conservation methods and technologies, and the actual
average daily flow rates used in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not
based on the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to Section 6.3.5. The
industrial user must also be in compliance Section 6.13.3 regarding the prohibition of bypass.
(2) Once included in its permit, the industrial user must comply with the equivalent limitations
developed as per this section in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from which the
equivalent limitations were derived.
(3) Any industrial user operating under a permit incorporating equivalent mass or concentration
limits calculated from a production-based standard shall notify the Town within two business days
after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change
within the next calendar month. Any user not notifying the Town of such anticipated change will be
required to meet the mass or concentration limits in its permit that were based on the original
estimate of the long-term average production rate.
6.3.7. Local limits.
(1) Limits for certain pollutants will be established to protect against pass-through or interference.
No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the instantaneous maximum
allowable discharge limits as identified on the user's wastewater discharge permit. All discharge
local limits shall be technically based and approved by the DEP.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 34
(2) Local limits may be set for the following pollutants: arsenic, barium, cadmium, chromium,
copper, cyanide, lead, mercury, nickel, fats, oils or other greases of animal or vegetable origin or
oil and grease and other petroleum or mineral oil products, silver, TTO and zinc. This list may be
amended or local limits may be developed for any other pollutants deemed appropriate, including
pollutants that can cause pass- through, interference, worker health and safety problems, fume
toxicity, etc. The Town will provide advanced written notice of new local limits to users prior to
initiating enforcement actions.
(3) The discharge local limits must be met at the point where the user's wastewater is discharged
to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless otherwise
indicated on the wastewater discharge permit. The Town may impose mass limitations in addition
to or in place of concentration-based limitations.
(4) The Town may develop best management practices (BMPs) and mass-based limits by
ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits, to implement local limits and any other
general discharge prohibitions as regulated in Section 6.2.
6.3.8. Town's right of revision. The Town reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in
wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the
POTW.
6.3.9. Special agreement. The Town reserves the right to enter into special agreements with
users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the POTW. In no case will a
special agreement waive compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. However, the
user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR
403.15. A user may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from the
approval authority. Such a request will be approved only if the user can prove that the factors
relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA when
establishing that categorical pretreatment standard. A user requesting a fundamentally different
factor variance must comply with the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13.
The Town is authorized to set appropriate fees or other charges for such agreements.
6.3.10. Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with this Ordinance and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in this Ordinance within the time limitations
specified by the EPA, the state or the Town, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities required to
pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the Town shall be provided, operated and maintained
at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the Town for review and shall be approved by the Town before
construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way
relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
acceptable discharge to the Town's POTW under the provisions of this Ordinance.
6.3.11. Accidental discharge/slug control plans. The Town may require any user to develop and
implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. At least once every two years the Town
shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs such a plan. Any user required to
develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan shall submit a plan which
addresses, at a minimum, the following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including non routine batch discharges;
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug discharge. Such
notification must also be given for any discharge which would violate any of the prohibited
discharges in this section of this Ordinance; and
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 35
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such
procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling
and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker
training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants (including solvents) and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
Section 6.4. Wastewater Surveys.
6.4.1. It shall be unlawful to discharge wastewater to any public or private sewer within the Town of
Hampden where such discharged wastewater reaches the Town's POTW without having first
complied with the provisions of this Ordinance.
6.4.2. When requested by the Town, all users must complete a wastewater survey form, on a form
supplied by the Town, which contains information on the nature and characteristics of their
wastewater. This form must be submitted to the Town prior to discharge of the user's wastewater into
the Town's POTW. The Town is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically
require users to update the survey. Failure to complete this wastewater survey form shall be
reasonable grounds for terminating service to the user and shall be considered a violation of this
Ordinance. Existing industrial dischargers shall file wastewater survey forms within 30 days after
being notified by the Town and proposed new dischargers shall file such forms at least 90 days prior
to connecting to the POTW. The information to be supplied to the Town by the user shall include, but
not be limited to, the following information:
(1) The name, address and location of the user and the number of employees.
(2) The SIC of the user.
(3) The known or suspected to be present wastewater constituents and characteristics, including
but not limited to those mentioned in this Ordinance. Any sampling and analysis that is required by
the Town shall be performed in accordance with standard methods and/or those contained in 40
CFR 136. The costs of all such sampling, analysis and reporting shall be fully borne by the user.
(4) The time and duration of discharges.
(5) The average daily and instantaneous peak wastewater flow rates, in gallons per day, including
daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any. All flows shall be as actually measured unless other
verifiable techniques are approved by the Town due to cost or non-feasibility.
(6) The site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers,
sewer connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location
and elevation adjacent to or at the user's premises.
(7) The activities, facilities and plant process on the premises, including all materials which are or
may be discharged to the POTW.
(8) The nature and concentration of any known or suspected pollutants or materials prohibited by
this Ordinance from being included in the discharge, together with a statement regarding whether or
not compliance is being achieved with this Ordinance on a consistent basis and, if not, whether
additional O&M activities and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to comply with this
Ordinance.
(9) The identification of each product produced by the user by type, amount, process or processes
and rate of production.
(10) The type and amount of raw materials utilized, average and maximum per day, by the user.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 36
6.4.3. All disclosure forms and any periodic reports submitted by a user shall be signed by the
principal executive officer of the user and shall contain the following certification: "I certify under
penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision
in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate
the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the persons who manage the system, or those
persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of
my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties
for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing
violations."
6.4.4. The Town will evaluate the completed wastewater survey forms and material safety data sheets
furnished by the user and may require the user to furnish additional information. The user shall
provide all requested additional information within 15 days after receiving notification from the Town
that additional information is required. After full evaluation and acceptance of all submitted data, the
Town shall make the determination as to whether the user is subject to EPA pretreatment
requirements. If the Town determines that the user is subject to EPA pretreatment requirements, the
Town shall require the user to apply for a wastewater discharge permit as required by Section 6.5 of
this Ordinance. The user shall make application for a wastewater discharge permit, on a form provided
by the Town, within 30 days after having received notification from the Town to do so. The user shall
provide, with the permit application, at the user's own expense, the results of all sampling and analysis
of the user's wastewater effluent as the Town may be required to accompany the permit application. If
so requested by the Town, the user shall collect all required samples in the presence of the Town.
Section 6.5. Wastewater Discharge Permits.
6.5.1. Every new or existing user of the Town's POTW or wastewater plant which is determined to be
a categorical user or significant industrial user as defined in Section 1.1 of this Ordinance, is required
to obtain a wastewater discharge permit from the Town.
6.5.2. The Town may prescribe special license, disclosure and reporting requirements for
nonindustrial users of high-strength conventional waste distinct from the requirements imposed on
industrial users under this section. Such requirements shall not be more burdensome than the
requirements imposed on industrial users by this section.
6.5.3. Wastewater discharge permits shall be subject to all provisions of this Ordinance and all other
regulations, user charges and fees established by the Town. The conditions of wastewater discharge
permits shall be enforced in accordance with this Ordinance and applicable state and federal
regulations.
6.5.4. Wastewater discharge permits may impose effluent restrictions or limits on the user if the Town
determines that such limits are necessary to protect the quality of the treatment plant influent, effluent
or sludge or to maintain compliance with any applicable federal or state law, including requirements
under the Town's NPDES permit and national categorical pretreatment standards for new and existing
sources set out in Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 401
through 471.
6.5.5. The Town will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information to
complete the user's wastewater discharge permit application. Within 14 days of receipt of a complete
wastewater discharge permit application, the Town will determine whether a wastewater discharge
permit is required and, if so, whether a wastewater discharge permit should be issued. The Town may
deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. The Town shall notify the user, in writing, of
the decision on the wastewater discharge permit application.
6.5.6. Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five
years. Each wastewater discharge permit shall indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 37
6.5.7. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific operation. A wastewater discharge
permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner or a new user, different premises
or a new or changed operation. To facilitate the issuance of new, separate permits, the Town may
allow new owners or individuals to operate under an existing wastewater discharge permit for a period
not to exceed 90 days.
6.5.8. Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed
necessary by the Town to prevent pass-through or interference, protect the quality of the water body
receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management
and disposal and protect against damage to the POTW.
(1) Wastewater discharge permits shall contain the following conditions:
(a) A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit duration.
(b) A statement that indicates that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable pursuant
to Section 6.5.7 of this section and a provision requiring any new owner or operator to be
furnished with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit by the prior user.
(c) Pretreatment standards and effluent limits based on the general and specific prohibited
discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, including best
management practices and mass-based limitations, and all applicable law.
(d) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements. These
requirements shall include a sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state and
local law.
(e) A statement of applicable penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements
and any required compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by federal, state or local law.
(f) Other specific conditions the Town deems necessary to ensure compliance with this
Ordinance and federal and state regulations and statutes.
(2) Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions:
(a) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge and/or
requirements for flow regulation and flow equalization.
(b) Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or maximum concentration, mass
or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or properties.
(c) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control or construction
of appropriate containment devices, any of which would be designed to reduce, eliminate or
prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW.
(d) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill and/or slug control plans or
other special conditions, including management practices necessary to adequately prevent
accidental, unanticipated or routine discharge.
(e) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of
pollutants discharged to the POTW by the user.
(f) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the user's
wastewater discharged to the POTW.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 38
(g) Requirements for the installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and
equipment.
(h) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the
permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment
standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge
permit.
(i) Identification by the user of the location of the user's outfall to the POTW.
(j) Other specific conditions the Town deems necessary to ensure compliance with this
Ordinance and federal and state regulations and statutes.
6.5.9. Any aggrieved person, including the user, may file a petition with the Town, in writing, to
reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit or the denial of a wastewater discharge permit
application within 15 days of the permit's issuance or notification of the Town’s denial.
(1) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of any
administrative appeal.
(2) In its petition, the petitioner must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected
to, the reasons for this objection and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the
wastewater discharge permit. A petitioner seeking review of a permit denial must specifically allege
reasons why a permit should be issued, along with conditions of issuance that the petitioner
believes should satisfy any concerns the Town may have about the suitability of the user's
wastewater for discharge to the Town's POTW.
(3) The requirements or conditions of any wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed by the
Town pending the outcome of the administrative appeal.
(4) Upon receipt of the petition, the Town may act to grant the petitioner's request. Said action must
take place within 14 days of receipt of the petition. If the Town refuses to grant the petitioner's
request, however, the Town Manager shall notify, in writing, the Town Council.
(a) The Town Council shall schedule an administrative hearing, which shall be recorded within
30 days of notification by the Town Manager or as soon thereafter as may be arranged. The
Town Council shall conduct the hearing so as to develop an adequate administrative record, and
the Town Council may choose to limit the asking of questions to the members of the Town
Council only. The petitioner will bear the burden of proof at the hearing and will present its case
first.
(b) The Town Council shall issue its decision, in writing, within 45 days of the hearing. The Town
Council's decision must be guided by the provisions of this Ordinance. Failure by the Town
Council to issue a decision within that time period shall constitute a denial of the administrative
appeal; however, the record of the administrative hearing, including any exhibits, shall be made
a part of any further judicial reviews. Town Council decisions not to reconsider a wastewater
discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, not to modify a wastewater
discharge permit or to issue a modified wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final
administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
(5) Parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative action must do so by filing a complaint
with the Penobscot County Superior Court pursuant to Maine Rules of Civil Procedure 80B.
6.5.10. Modifications.
(1) The Town may modify at any time the wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including
but not limited to the following:
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 39
(a) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.
(b) To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes or
wastewater volume or character since the issuance of the wastewater discharge permit.
(c) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination
of the authorized discharge.
(d) Information is received by the Town indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the Town's POTW, Town personnel or the receiving waters.
(e) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit.
(f) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater survey form,
wastewater discharge permit application or in any other required reporting.
(g) Revision of, or a grant of a variance from, categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40
CFR 403.13.
(h) To correct typographical or other errors or omissions in the wastewater discharge permit.
(2) Challenges to any such modifications can be made pursuant to the provisions of Subsection I of
this section.
6.5.11. Any user which violates any condition of its permit or of this Ordinance or of applicable state
and federal statutes and regulations may have its permit revoked by the Town. Violations subjecting a
user to possible revocation of its permit include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Failure of a user to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its
discharge.
(2) Failure of a user to report significant changes in operations or its wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
(3) Refusal of reasonable access by the Town to the user's premises during regular business hours
for the purpose of inspection or monitoring.
(4) Violations of the conditions of the permit.
(5) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of the ownership of a permitted user.
(6) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit
application, any required wastewater surveys or other required reporting.
(7) Falsifying monitoring reports or tampering with monitoring equipment.
(8) Failure to pay surcharges, user fees, permit fees, fines or other required payments.
(9) Failure to meet the requirements of a compliance schedule.
6.5.12. Compliance schedules.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 40
(1) Where additional pretreatment and/or O&M activities will be required to comply with this
Ordinance, the user shall provide a declaration of the shortest schedule by which the user will
provide such additional pretreatment and/or implementation of additional O&M activities.
(2) The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
comply with the requirements of this Ordinance, including but not limited to dates relating to hiring
an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major
components, commencing construction, completing construction and all other acts necessary to
achieve compliance with this Ordinance.
(3) Under no circumstances shall the Town permit a time increment for any single step directed
toward compliance which exceeds nine months.
(4) No later than 14 days following each milestone date in the schedule and the final date for
compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the Town, including, at a minimum, a
statement as to whether or not it complied with the increment of progress represented by that
milestone date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress,
the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the
approved schedule. In no event shall more than none months elapse between such progress
reports to the Town.
Section 6.6. Reporting Requirements:
6.6.1. Baseline monitoring reports.
(1) Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or the final
administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall be
required to submit to the Town a report which contains the information listed in Subsection 6.5.1(2)
below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources and sources that
become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard
shall be required to submit to the Town a report which contains the information listed in Subsection
6.5.1(2) below. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of
pollutants discharged.
(2) Users described in Subsection 6.6.1(1) above shall submit the information set forth below:
(a) The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner.
(b) A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
(c) A brief description of the nature, average rate of production and SIC of the operations carried
out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates
points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
(d) Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day,
to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of
the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(e) Categorical pretreatment standards; sampling results.
[1] The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.
[2] The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration and/or mass,
where required by the standard or by the Town, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from
each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average concentrations
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 41
or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be sampled and analyzed in accordance with the provisions of Sections
6.6.9 and 6.6.10 of this section.
(f) A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified
professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and,
if not, whether additional O&M and/or pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment
standards and requirements.
(g) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards,
the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M.
The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for
the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet
the requirements set out in Section 6.5.12 of this Ordinance.
(h) All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 6.4.3
of this Ordinance.
6.6.2. Compliance schedule progress report. The requirements imposed by Section 6.5.12 of this
Ordinance shall apply to the compliance schedule required by Subsection 6.6.1(2)(g) of this section.
6.6.3. Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following
the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a
new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the Town a report containing
the information described in Subsection 6.6(2)(d) through (f) of this section. For users subject to
equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR
403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all
other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production or other measure of operation, this report shall include the user's
actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with Section 6.4.3 of this Ordinance.
6.6.4. Periodic compliance reports.
(1) All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the Town, but in no case less
than twice per year in June and December, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration
of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or
estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the
pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution
prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the Town or the
pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. All periodic
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 6.4.3 of this Ordinance.
(2) All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring
and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good
working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order
shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
(3) If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more
frequently than required by the POTW, using the analytical requirements and sampling procedures
prescribed in Sections 6.6.9 and 6.6.10 of this section, the results of this monitoring shall be
included in the report.
6.6.5. Report of changed conditions. Each user must notify the Town of any planned significant
changes to the user's operations or process systems which might alter the nature, quality or volume of
its wastewater at least 60 days before the change.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 42
(1) The Town may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to
evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit
application under Section 6.5 of this Ordinance.
(2) The Town may issue a wastewater discharge permit under Section 6.5 of this Ordinance or
modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under Section 6.5.10 of this Ordinance in response
to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
(3) No user shall implement the planned changed conditions until and unless the Town has
responded, in writing, to the user's notice.
(4) For purposes of this subsection, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow
increases of 10% or greater and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.
6.6.6. Reports of potential problems.
(1) In the case of any discharge, including but not limited to hazardous waste discharges,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine or episodic nature, a non-customary batch
discharge or a slug load that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall
immediately notify the Town of the incident by telephone, email or other reliable means. This
notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if
known, and corrective actions taken by the user.
(2) Within five days following such a discharge, the user shall submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage
or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources or
other damage to person or property, nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines,
penalties or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this Ordinance.
(3) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place
advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in Subsection 6.5.6(1)
above. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(4) Significant industrial users are required to notify the Town immediately of any changes at their
facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge.
6.6.7. Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. In addition to all other requirements of this
Ordinance, any user which discharges hazardous waste into the POTW shall notify the POTW, the
EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and Maine hazardous waste authorities, in
writing, within five days of the discharge, of any such discharge. Such notification must include the
name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, the type
of discharge (continuous, batch or other) and the user's plan to avoid future discharges of the same or
other hazardous waste. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or
other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources or other
damage to person or property, nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties or
other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this Ordinance.
6.6.8. Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user or the POTW
indicates a violation, the user must notify the Town within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to
the Town within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if
the POTW monitors at the user's facility at least once a month or if the POTW samples between the
user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 43
6.6.9. Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or a report required by this Ordinance shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in
an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in
accordance with appropriate procedures approved by the EPA.
6.6.10. Sample collection.
(1) Except as indicated in Subsection 6.6.10(2) below, the user must collect wastewater samples
using twenty-four-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the Town. Where time-proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the Town, the samples must be
representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40
CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a twenty-fourhour
period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and
sulfides, the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and
oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other
parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA
methodologies may be authorized by the Town, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be
required to show compliance with instantaneous limits.
(2) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, toxicity, sulfides and volatile
organic chemicals must be obtained using grab sample collection techniques.
(3) For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety-day compliance reports
required in Sections 6.6.1 and 6.6.3 of this section and 40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d), a minimum of
four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile
organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for
which historical data are available, the Town may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports
required by Section 6.6.4 of this section and 40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h), the industrial user is
required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
6.6.11. Determination of noncompliance. The Town will use appropriate sampling to determine
noncompliance with pretreatment standards, including the use of standard methods.
6.6.12. Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For
reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal
Service, the date of receipt of the report shall control.
6.6.13. Recordkeeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this Ordinance shall retain and
make available for inspection and copying all records or information obtained pursuant to any
monitoring activities, including documentation associated with BMPs, required by this Ordinance and
any additional records or information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user
independent of such requirements. Records shall include, but not be limited to, the date, exact place,
method and time of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the
results of such analyses. These records shall be retained by the user for a period of at least three
years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user
or the POTW or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Town.
6.6.14. State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges to the POTW shall be
met by all users which are subject to such requirements and limitations; provided, however, that such
requirements and limitations are more stringent than the provisions of this Ordinance or federal law
requirements or limitations.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 44
6.6.15. Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge
permit shall provide appropriate reports to the Town upon the request of the Town.
6.6.16. Certification of permit applications, user reports and initial monitoring waiver. The following
certification statement is required to be signed and submitted by users submitting permit applications
in accordance with Section 6.4.4, users submitting baseline monitoring reports under Section 6.6.1,
users submitting reports on compliance with the categorical pretreatment standard deadlines under
Section 6.6.3, and users submitting periodic compliance reports required by Section 6.6.4. The
following certification statement must be signed by an authorized representative as defined in Section
1.1:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the
system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate,
and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing
violations."
Section 6.7. Compliance Monitoring; Right of Entry.
6.6.1. Inspection and sampling. The Town/City shall have the right to enter the facilities of any user to
ascertain whether the purpose of this Ordinance, and any permit or order issued hereunder, is being
met and whether the user is complying with all requirements thereof. All users shall allow the Town
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, records examination
and copying and the performance of any additional duties as the Town Manager deems necessary.
(1) Each user shall provide and operate, at its own expense, a monitoring facility to allow
inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the user's wastewater discharge to the POTW.
(2) Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards
so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the Town will be permitted to enter without
delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities, such as compliance monitoring.
(3) The Town shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. The user
shall bear the costs of such setup or installation.
(4) The Town shall require the user to install monitoring equipment as the Town deems necessary.
The user's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow
and quality shall be calibrated quarterly (four times per year) to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to the safe and easy access to the facility to be
inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of
the Town and the obstruction shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
borne by the user.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Town access to the user's premises shall be a violation of
this Ordinance.
(7) In the event that the user is in or has previously been in noncompliance with this Ordinance or
with the user's wastewater discharge permit, the user shall be required to pay the full cost of all
additional sampling and analysis that the Town may conduct to determine the user's compliance
with this Ordinance.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 45
(8) All monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable
construction codes, standards or specifications. Construction, if required, shall be completed within
120 days of receipt of the wastewater discharge permit by the user.
6.7.2. Administrative inspection warrants. If the Town has been refused access to any building,
structure or property, or any part thereof, for the purpose of inspecting, sampling or otherwise
monitoring compliance with this Ordinance, the Town shall seek to secure an administrative inspection
warrant pursuant to Maine Rules of Civil Procedure 80E. The warrant, if issued by the District Court,
shall be executed pursuant to Maine Rules of Civil Procedure 80E, and the Town shall be
accompanied by a uniformed Town police officer during said execution.
Section 6.8. Confidential Information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit and
monitoring programs and from the Town’s inspection and sampling activities shall be available to the
public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Town, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or
methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets or proprietary information of the user under
applicable state law. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such
information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose such confidential
information shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available
immediately upon request to state and federal governmental agencies for uses related to the MEPDES
program or pretreatment program and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data, as defined by 40 CFR 2.302,
will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction.
Section 6.9. Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance.
The Town shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides a meaningful public
notice within the jurisdiction served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at any time during the
previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" as defined in Section 1.1 shall be applicable to all
significant industrial users (or any other industrial user) as defined in Section 1.1 of this Ordinance.
Section 6.10 Administrative Enforcement Remedies.
6.10.1. At the time of enactment of this Ordinance, the Town will have developed an enforcement
response plan (ERP) which outlines the Town's general procedure for the enforcement of this
Ordinance. The ERP shall be initially adopted by Town Council order and may be subsequently
amended by order. The Town will follow the ERP to the greatest extent possible when contemplating
compliance with and enforcement of this Ordinance; however, nothing in the ERP or this Ordinance
will preclude or otherwise limit the Town from taking any action, including emergency actions or other
enforcement actions, prior to undertaking any initial enforcement procedure in the ERP, including
issuance of a notice of violation (NOV).
6.10.2. Notice of violation (NOV). When the Town finds that a user has violated or continues to violate
any provision of this Ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Town may serve upon that user a written NOV. Within 30
days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, which must include specific required actions, shall be submitted by
the user to the Town. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations
occurring before or after receipt of the NOV.
6.10.3. Consent orders. The Town may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance
or other documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such
documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a
time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued pursuant to Sections 6.10.5 and 6.10.6 of this section and shall include
language which make them judicially enforceable. Such orders may require the payment of
administrative fines pursuant to Section 6.10.7 of this section.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 46
6.10.4. Show cause hearing. The Town may order a user which has violated or continues to violate
any provision of this Ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement to appear before the Town and show cause why the proposed
enforcement should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for
the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action and a request that the user
show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting
shall be served personally by the Town or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at
least 14 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the
user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user. Failure to appear for a show cause hearing may be grounds for revocation of the
user's wastewater discharge permit and disconnection from or termination of discharge to the POTW.
6.10.5. Compliance orders. When the Town finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any
provision of this Ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Town may issue an order to the user responsible for the
discharge directing that the user comes into compliance within 30 days. If the user does not come into
compliance within 30 days, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may
also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring
and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW. A
compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a federal pretreatment
standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation,
including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
6.10.6. Cease and desist orders.
(1) When the Town determines that a user violated or continues to violate any provision of this
Ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the Town may issue an
order to the user directing it to cease and desist any such violations and directing the user to:
(a) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(b) Take such appropriate remedial or preventative action as may be needed to properly address
a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge
to the POTW.
(2) Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user.
6.10.7. Administrative fines.
(1) When the Town finds that a user violated or continues to violate any provision of this Ordinance,
a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, including a user's failure to obtain a wastewater discharge permit pursuant to Section
6.5 of this Ordinance, the Town may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $2,500 per day.
Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense subject to fine. In the case of monthly or
other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of
violation. In the case of failure to obtain a required wastewater discharge permit, the fine shall
accrue on a daily basis commencing on the day the user first was notified or became aware of the
need for such a permit. The Town may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement
actions, such as notices and orders, to any fine assessed.
(2) Any and all unpaid charges, fines and penalties under this Ordinance shall, after 30 calendar
days from the due date, be assessed an additional penalty of 12% of the unpaid balance, and
interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 1% per month. A lien against the user's property may be
sought for unpaid charges, fines and penalties as allowed under state law.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 47
(3) Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the Town to reconsider the
fine along with full payment of the fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine. The Town
shall convene an administrative hearing on the matter and conduct said hearing in accordance with
the procedures delineated in Section 6.5.9 of this Ordinance. Failure to file a timely request for an
administrative hearing constitutes a waiver of any administrative appeal. The decision of the Town
Council conducting the administrative hearing, including a decision to not reduce the fine, shall be
final, and any appeal must follow the requirements of Maine Rules of Civil Procedure 80B. In the
event that the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto,
shall be returned to the user.
(4) Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user.
6.10.8. Emergency suspensions. The Town may immediately suspend a user's discharge either with
or without written or verbal notice to the user whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of the public. The Town may also immediately
suspend a user's discharge, either with or without written or verbal notice, that threatens to interfere
with the operation of the POTW or which presents or may present an endangerment to the
environment.
(1) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its
discharge to the POTW. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the Town shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the connection to the POTW, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its
receiving waters or endangerment to any persons. The Town shall allow the user to recommence
its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Town that the period of
endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in Section 6.10.9 of this section are
initiated against the user.
(2) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement to the Town describing the causes of the
harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. Said report must be
submitted as least seven days prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing held
pursuant to Sections 6.10.4 and 6.10.9 of this section.
(3) Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency
suspension under this subsection.
6.10.9. Termination of discharge.
(1) In addition to the provisions in Section 6.5.11 of this Ordinance, any user that violates the
following conditions is subject to termination of the user's discharge to the POTW:
(a) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(b) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of the user's
discharge;
(c) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and
characteristics prior to discharge;
(d) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring
or sampling; or
(e) Violation of the pretreatment standards in Section 6.3 of this Ordinance.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 48
(2) Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an
opportunity to show cause pursuant to Section 6.10.4 of this section why the proposed action
should not be taken. Additionally, the user may request an administrative hearing, in writing, within
30 days of the decision of the show cause hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance
with the procedures delineated in Subsection 6.10.7(3) of this section. Exercise of this option by
the Town shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
Section 6.11. Judicial Enforcement Remedies.
6.11.1. Injunctive relief. When the Town determines that a user has violated or continues to violate
any provision of this Ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Town may request that the Town Attorney seek appropriate
injunctive relief pursuant to the laws of this state which restrains or compels the specific performance
of the conditions of the wastewater discharge permit, order or other requirements imposed by this
Ordinance on activities of the user. The Town may also seek such other action as is appropriate for
legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental
remediation. The decision whether to seek injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against a user.
6.11.2. Civil penalties and criminal referral.
(1) Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance shall be subject to civil penalties
pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452, as well as applicable civil or criminal penalties pursuant to 38
M.R.S.A. §§ 349 and 1319-T. The penalties in those statutes shall be in addition to the specific
penalties in this Ordinance.
(2) A user which has violated or continues to violate any provision of this Ordinance, a wastewater
discharge permit or other permit issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement shall be required to pay a fine of not less than $1,000 per day and not more than
$2,500 per day for each and every day of a violation for a first offense. These fines shall increase to
a minimum of $2,500 per day and a maximum of $25,000 per day for a second offense of the same
or a similar nature occurring within two years of the first offense. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense subject to fine. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average
discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
(3) Pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 and Maine Rules of Civil Procedure 80K, the Town may seek
reasonable attorney fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the
Town.
(4) In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall be asked to take into account all
relevant circumstances, including but not limited to the extent of harm caused by the violation, the
magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective
actions undertaken by the user, the compliance history of the user and any other factor as justice
requires.
(5) No person shall willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or
prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment or other part of, or otherwise harm, the
POTW. Penalties for violations of this provision of this Ordinance shall be a minimum fine of $1,000
for the first offense. A second offense committed within five years shall be punished by a minimum
fine of $10,000. These penalties are in addition to any penalties associated with other civil or
criminal provisions of state and federal law which said person may be subject to for such action.
6.11.3. Filing a suit for civil penalties or making a criminal referral shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
6.11.4. The Town reserves the right to make appropriate referrals for criminal prosecution pursuant to
the provisions of 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 349 and 1319-T, as well as any other applicable federal or state law.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 49
Additionally, enforcement of this Ordinance shall not preclude criminal prosecution for other violations
of state or federal law, and the Town will cooperate in any such prosecutions.
6.11.5. The provisions of Sections 6.10 and 6.11 of this Ordinance are not exclusive remedies. The
Town reserves the right to take any and all enforcement actions or combinations thereof against a
noncompliant user.
Section 6.12. Supplemental Enforcement Action.
6.12.1. Performance bonds. The Town may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit
to any user which has failed to comply with any provision of this Ordinance, a previous wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement unless
such user first files a satisfactory bond with the Town, payable to the Town, in a sum not to exceed a
value determined by the Town to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance with this Ordinance.
6.12.2. Liability insurance. The Town may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to
any user which has failed to comply with any provision of this Ordinance, a previous wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder or any pretreatment standard or requirement unless the
user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage
to the POTW caused by its discharge, which shall include naming the Town as an additional insured.
6.12.3. Water supply severance. Whenever a user violates or continues to violate any provision of this
Ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the Town will work with the Water District to sever water service to the user
under district regulations, if applicable. Service will only recommence at the user's expense, after the
user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply with this Ordinance.
Section 6.13. Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations.
6.13.1. Upset.
(1) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of Subsection 6.13.1(2) below are met.
(2) A user which wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through
properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence, that:
(a) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
(b) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in
compliance with applicable O&M procedures; and
(c) The user has submitted the following information to the Town within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the upset. If this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided
within five days.
[1] A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
[2] The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the
anticipated time period the noncompliance is expected to continue; and
[3] Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the
noncompliance.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 50
(3) In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall
have the burden of proof.
(4) Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an
enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
(5) Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance
with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until
the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in
the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is
reduced, lost or fails.
6.13.2 Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement
action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in Section 6.3.1 of this
Ordinance or the specific prohibitions in Subsection. 6.3.2(3) through (18) and (20) of this Ordinance if
it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction
with discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or interference and that either:
(1) A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit
directly prior to, and during, the pass-through or interference; or
(2) No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from
the user's prior discharge when the Town was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit and,
in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
6.13.3. Bypass.
(1) For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BYPASS - The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE - Any substantial physical damage to property, damage to the
treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable or substantial and permanent loss of
natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe
property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
(2) A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or
requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient
operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of Subsections 6.13.3(3) and 6.13.3(4).
(3) Notice.
(a) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the Town at
least 10 days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
(b) A user shall submit oral notice to the Town of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds
applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass.
A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware
of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the
duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times and, if the bypass has not been
corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce,
eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Town may waive the written report on a
case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
(4) Enforcement action.
(a) Bypass is prohibited, and the Town may take an enforcement action against a user for a
bypass, unless:
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 51
[1] Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage;
[2] There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment
facilities, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been
installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
[3] The user submitted notices as required under Subsection 6.13.3.(3).
(b) The Town may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering the adverse effects, if the
Town determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in Subsection 6.13.3(4)(a).
ARTICLE 7
PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE
Section 7.1. Tampering with Town’s Publicly Owned Works: No person shall maliciously, willfully, or
negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is part of or will affect operation of the Town’s POTW. Any person violating this provision
shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct, and shall be subject to any of the
penalty provisions of this Ordinance or State law.
Section 7.2. Contractor’s Liability Insurance: A contractor must present a certificate showing proof of
liability insurance before a permit will be issued for construction of building sewers, sewer extensions, or
disposal of private sewage.
ARTICLE 8
TOWN OF HAMPDEN
INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE
Section 8.1. Purpose:
The purpose of this plan is to document a well defined, legally defensible sequence of steps to be
followed when dealing with industrial users who are out of compliance with the Town of Hampden’s
Industrial Pretreatment Program and Sewer Ordinance. These formal enforcement actions will help to
resolve any confusion between the Town and its Industrial Users as to consequences of one-time,
repeated or continuing non-compliance and are intended to ensure equitable treatment of Industrial
Users.
EPA regulations require the Town to take specific enforcement action against Industrial Users found to be
in Significant Non-Compliance with the pretreatment requirements of this Ordinance. This Enforcement
Response Plan defines the conditions under which the Town must cite a User for Significant Non-
Compliance and lists appropriate enforcement measures to remedy such situations.
EPA guidelines also require that the selected enforcement response be appropriate to the extent of the
Pretreatment Program violation. While a telephone call to the Industry might be appropriate for a late
submission, a more severe response is needed for a more serious violation which, for example, might
result in an upset of the Wastewater Treatment Plant caused by an Industrial discharge. This EPA
guideline based Enforcement Response Plan will consider the Following criteria when assessing the
appropriateness of a particular response:
A). Magnitude of the violation;
B). Duration of the violation;
C). Effect of the violation on the receiving water;
D). Effect of the violation on the Treatment Plant
E). Compliance history of the Industrial User;
F). Good faith efforts on the part of the Industrial User; and
G). Degree of the Industrial User’s responsibility for the violation.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 52
8.2 Significant Non-Compliance:
EPA requires the Town to identify Industrial Users that are in Significant Non-Compliance (SNC) with the
requirements of the federally mandated Pretreatment Program regulations. Users found to be in SNC are
subject to enforcement action by the Town, and to public notification of the violation(s) once per year in
the newspaper. Federal regulations define Significant Non-Compliance as violations which meet at least
one of the following criteria:
8.2.1. Chronic Violations- Sixty six percent (66%) or more of all the measurements taken for the
same pollutant parameter during a six month period exceed by any magnitude a numeric
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement including Instantaneous Limits as defined in Section 1.1
of the Sewer Ordinance.
8.2.2. Technical Review Criteria (TRC) Violations- Thirty three percent (33%) or more of
wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six month period equals
or exceeds the product of the numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement including
Instantaneous Limits, as defined in Section. 1.1 of the Sewer Ordinance multiplied by the
applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except
pH).
8.2.3. Any other violation of a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement as defined by Sec. 1.1
(Daily Maximum, long-term average, Instantaneous Limit, or narrative standard) that the Town or
Pretreatment Coordinator determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public as defined by Section. 1.1 of the Sewer Ordinance.
8.2.4. Any discharge of a pollutant that caused imminent danger to human health, including the
health of the Town’s or City’s POTW personnel, or to the environment or has required an exercise
of the Town’s emergency authority to halt the discharge under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vi)(B).
8.2.5. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule
milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for
starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance.
8.2.6. Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including
baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical Pretreatment Standard
deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance schedules.
8.2.7. Failure to accurately report any non-compliance with permit requirements.
8.2.8. Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of Best
Management Practices, which the Town determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the Town’s pretreatment program.
8.3 Selection of Enforcement Responses:
Table 1 attached to this Ordinance represents an Enforcement Response Guide based on EPA
recommended response measures for varying degrees of permit violations. The Guide will be
used by the Town to determine appropriate measures in the event of a violation of the Town’s
Pretreatment Program and/or Sewer Ordinance. Selection of appropriate enforcement response
will be based on the following steps:
8.3.1. The Town will locate the type of non-compliance in the first column (1) of the Response
Guide.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 53
8.3.2. Using column two (2), the Town will identify the most accurate description of the nature of
the violation.
8.3.3. The Town will assess the appropriateness of the recommended responses in column three
(3). First time offenders, or those demonstrating “good faith” progress may merit a more lenient
response. Similarly, repeat or frequent offenders or those demonstrating negligence may require
a more stringent response. Furthermore, the Town will judge the violation by seven (7) additional
criteria:
(1). Magnitude- Generally, an isolated instance of non-compliance can be addressed with
an informal response or Notice of Violation (NOV). However, since even an isolated
violation could threaten human health and/or the environment, the Treatment Plant,
damage public and private property, or threaten the integrity of the Town’s or Bangor’s
Pretreatment Program (i.e., falsifying a self-monitoring report) all instances of Significant
Non-Compliance will be responded to with an Administrative Order (AO) which requires a
return to compliance by a specific deadline.
(2). Duration- Violations, regardless of severity, which continue over prolonged periods of
time will subject the violator to escalated enforcement actions. Minor violations which are
chronic in nature are one form of Significant Non-Compliance and will be dealt with
through the use of AOs.
(3). Effects to the Receiving Water- Any violation which causes environmental harm will
be met at a minimum with an AO and a fine. Environmental harm will be presumed
whenever an industrial discharge:
a). Passes through the Treatment Plant;
b). Is directly responsible for causing a violation of the Town of Hampden
NPDES/MEPDES permit, including its’ water quality standards; or
c). Has a toxic effect upon the receiving waters, such as fish kill.
In addition, the response will be designed to recover any NPDES/MEPDES fines paid by the Town,
which are the result of the industry’s discharge violation.
(4). Effects on the POTW- Any violation having a negative impact on the Treatment Plant
and/or Collection System (such as increased treatment costs, harm to personnel or
equipment, pipe corrosion, etc.), which hinders the operation of the Treatment Plant
or Collections System; and/or which contaminates the Treatment Plant’s sludge,
thereby reducing sludge disposal options, will be met with a fine of civil penalty as
well as the recovery of additional costs and expenses involved.
(5). Compliance History of the User- A pattern of recurring violations of any program
requirements may indicate either that the user’s treatment system is inadequate or
that the user has taken a lackadaisical approach to operating and maintaining its’
treatment system. These indications should alert the Town to the likelihood of future
Significant Non-Compliance. Accordingly, stronger enforcement responses should
be applied against users exhibiting consistent compliance problems than against
those with only an occasional problem.
(6) “Good Faith” of the User- Generally, a users’ demonstrated willingness to comply
should predispose the Town to select one of the less stringent enforcement actions
specified, provided the violation has not caused serious Treatment Plant upset or
resulted in environmental damage. However, good faith does not eliminate the
necessity of enforcement action, and compliance with previous enforcement orders
should not necessarily be considered good faith.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 54
(7). Responsibility of the User- Although Industrial Users should always be held
accountable for their violations, some consideration should be given to whether the
violation was the result of an unforeseeable accident, was preventable or was
intentional on the part of the User. This will affect the enforcement response
selection by the Town from the range of responses provided.
8.3.4. Column four (4) designates personnel responsible for the action.
8.3.5. The Town will document, in writing to the User, the rationale for selecting the particular
enforcement response applied.
8.3.6. The Town will apply the enforcement response to the violator. The Town will specify the
corrective action or other response required by the User, including response time limits.
8.3.7. The Town will document any Users’ responses and the resolution of non-compliance.
8.3.8 The Town will follow up with escalated enforcement action if a Users’ response is not
received within thirty (30) days or sooner if appropriate or severe violations continue.
8.3.9 The Town normally will issue an NOV to the violator as a first step in enforcement
proceedings. However, the Town may elect to by-pass this procedure in favor of an AO
when it appears that the violation requires immediate remedial action.
Section 8.4 – Enforcement Response Plan Definitions:
AO Administrative Order
Civil Litigation Civil litigation against the User, seeking equitable relief, monetary penalties,
and actual damages.
Criminal Prosecution Pursuing punitive measures against an individual and/or organization
through a court of law.
Fine Monetary penalty assessed by the Town.
IU Industrial User of the POTW.
Meeting Informal meeting with the User to resolve non-compliance.
NOV Notice of Violation of the City of Bangor’s Industrial Pretreatment Program
and/or the Sewer Use Ordinance.
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
PC Pretreatment Coordinator of the City of Bangor.
POTW Publicly Owned Treatment Works
S Superintendent for the City of Bangor WWTP.
Show Cause Hearing Formal meeting requiring the User to attend and demonstrate why the
Town should not take proposed enforcement action. The meeting may also
Serve as a forum to discuss corrective actions and corrective actions.
SV Significant Violation of the City of Bangor’s Industrial Pretreatment
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 55
Program and/or Sewer Use Ordinance.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 56
SECTION 8.5
SELECTION OF ENFORCEMENT RESPONSES:
TABLE 1
NON-COMPLIANCE NATURE OF VIOLATION INITIAL RESPONSE; FOLLOW UP PERSONNEL
A. ILLEGAL DISCHARGE
1) Unpermitted discharge Discharger unaware of permit NOV and application, or AO issued within 14 days of PC
(no permit) requirement; no harm to POTW identifying the violation; requires a permit application
or to the environment. within 30 days and the results of wastewater analysis
within 60 days; proposed fine of $300-$500.
Results in violation of POTW NPDES AO issued as soon as possible, but in any case within PC
permit, or dangerous situation- SNC 5 days to immediately halt discharge. Fine or civil S
litigation seeking penalties of $1000 to $2500 per day.
Terminate service.
2) Non-permitted discharge Failure to apply for permit renewal. Telephone call and NOV should be made within 5 days PC
(expired permit) No damage to POTW or environment. of detection.
Results in violation of POTW NPDES AO issued as soon as possible, but in any case within PC
permit, or dangerous situation- SNC 5 days to immediately halt discharge. Fine or civil S
litigation seeking penalties of $1000 to $2500 per day.
Terminate service.
B. DISCHARGE PERMIT VIOLATIONS
1) Exceedance of discharge Isolated, non-significant Telephone call and NOV issued within 5 days of receipt PC
limits (local or categorical) of laboratory results requiring written report with
corrective and preventative action taken to prevent
recurrence. (1st/2nd offense)
Frequent, non-significant Meeting with violator or show cause hearing requested PC
(repeated offense) within 14 days of detection of violation. Meeting will be
held within 30 days of detection of the violation. Proposed
fine of $300-$500.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 57
NON-COMPLIANCE NATURE OF VIOLATION INITIAL RESPONSE; FOLLOW UP
SNC AO issued within 5 days with compliance schedule; fine PC
of $1000 per day of violation, or civil litigation seeking S
penalties of $1000 to $2500 per day.
Caused known damage to POTW or AO issued within 5 days to immediately halt discharge; PC
environment, or worker health hazard fine, civil litigation, or criminal prosecution. S
2) Slug load discharge Isolated without known damage. NOV; AO issued within 14 days to develop a Spill Control PC
Plan within 30 days.
Isolated with known damage, Fine or civil litigation seeking penalties of $500 to $700 PC
interference, pass-through. SNC per day and recovery of costs. Terminate service. S
Recurring SNC. Fine or civil litigation seeking penalties of $1000 to PC
$2500 per day and recovery of costs. Terminate service. S
C. SAMPLING, MONITORING, AND REPORTING VIOLATIONS
1) Minor sampling, Isolated or infrequent (1st/2nd offense) Telephone call and NOV issued within 14 days of PC
monitoring or reporting detection.
deficiencies.
Frequent or continuous NOV issued within 5 days; proposed fine $100-$300. PC
2) Major sampling, Isolated or infrequent (1st/2nd offense) NOV issued within 5 days of detection; meeting with PC
monitoring or reporting violator requested within 14 days. Proposed fines of
deficiencies. $300 to $500.
Frequent or continuous; SNC Meeting with Show Cause Hearing requested within 14 PC
days of detection. Fine or civil litigation seeking penalties S
of $500.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 58
NON-COMPLIANCE NATURE OF VIOLATION INITIAL RESPONSE; FOLLOW UP PERSONNEL
3) Complete failure to SNC AO with compliance schedule issued within 5 days of PC
sample, monitor or report detection; civil litigation and/or criminal prosecution S
is more than 30 days late. seeking penalties of $1000-$2500 per day. Terminate
service.
4) Failure to submit Violation of AO. Fine; civil litigation and/or criminal prosecution seeking S
schedule of compliance penalties of $1000-$2500 per day until schedule is filed.
5) Failure to notify of Isolated or infrequent, no known NOV; AO issued within 14 days of detection. PC
discharge limit violation Effects.
slug discharge.
Frequent or continued violation-SNC Show Cause Hearing requested within 14 days; AO PC
issued within 5 days of detection; civil litigation seeking S
penalties of $1000 per day per violation; criminal
Prosecution.
6) Failure to install Continued SNC AO issued within 5 days of detection; temporarily PC
monitoring equipment suspend service if agreed upon compliance date is S
exceeded by 30 days.
D. COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE VIOLATIONS
1) Missed milestone date Will not effect other milestone dates, or Telephone call and NOV issued within 5 days of PC
final date. milestone date passage.
Will effect other milestones or final Meeting requested within 14 days or prior to next mile- PC
date. stone date; AO issued within 5 days of missed milestone S
date.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 59
NON-COMPLIANCE NATURE OF VIOLATION INITIAL RESPONSE; FOLLOW UP PERSONNEL
Will effect other milestones or final Show Cause Hearing requested within 14 days or prior PC
date. to next milestone date; fine or seek civil penalties of S
Violation not for good cause $500-$2500 per day of violation.
2) Failure to meet Did not submit report, but did Telephone call and NOV issued within 14 days of PC
compliance schedule complete milestone. Detection.
reporting requirements
Did not submit report or complete NOV; AO issued within 5 days of missed milestone date; PC
milestone. proposed fines of $300-$500. S
3) Missed final date Good cause Telephone call and NOV issued within 5 days of missed PC
date.
30 days or more outstanding; failure or Show Cause Hearing requested within 14 days of detec- PC
refusal to comply without good cause. tion; AO with fines; judicial action. S
4) Reporting false Any instance SNC. Referral to prosecutor for criminal investigation; civil S
information litigation and/or criminal prosecution seeking
maximum penalties allowed by State law (at least
$1000 per day per violation); Termination of service
E. SPILL INCIDENTS
1) Spill incident Reported and investigated NOV issued at time of inspection; meeting requested PC
within 14 days of detection; AO
Failure to report spill NOV; meeting within 14 days of detection; AO with PC
proposed fines of $300-$500.
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 60
NON-COMPLIANCE NATURE OF VIOLATION INITIAL RESPONSE; FOLLOW UP PERSONNEL
2) Repeated spills Failure to develop or upgrade Spill NOV; AO with fines; Show Cause Hearing to be held PC
Prevention Plan within 30 days of notification.
Failure to act on a decision of Judicial action; terminate service.
compliance meeting and results in
known damage to POTW or
environment.
F. VIOLATIONS DETECTED DURING FIELD INSPECTIONS/INVESTIGATIONS
1) Minor violation of Any instances Telephone call and NOV issued within 14 days of receipt PC
analytical procedures of monitoring results.
2) Major violation of No evidence of negligence or intent. NOV; meting to be held within 30 days of notification. PC
analytical procedures AO issued within 14 days of receipt of monitoring results.
Evidence of negligence or intent-SNC AO or civil action and penalty; possible criminal prosecu- PC
tion. S
3) Minor violation of permit No evidence of negligence or intent NOV; AO for immediate corrective action required. PC
condition
Evidence of negligence or intent AO or civil litigation and penalties; possible criminal PC
prosecution. Terminate service. S
4) Major violation of permit Evidence of negligence or intent-SNC AO or civil litigation and penalties; possible criminal S
condition prosecution. Terminate service.
G. OTHER PERMIT VIOLATIONS
1) Wastestreams are diluted Initial violation AO with fines PC
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 61
ARTICLE 9
PENALTIES - RESIDENTIAL
Section 9.1. Violation of Sewer Ordinance: Any person found to be violating any provision of this
Ordinance, except Section 7.1, shall be served by the Town with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall,
within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
Section 9.2. Fines: Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance other than
those provisions pertaining to the payment of charges for services established herein shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. The
continued violation of any provision of any section of this Ordinance, other than those pertaining to the
payment of charges for services established herein, shall constitute a separate offense for each and
every day such violation of any provision hereof shall continue. If the Town prevails in the prosecution of
an offense hereunder, it shall be reimbursed for the attorney’s fees and costs.
Section 9.3. Alternate Penalties: As an alternative, upon violation of this Ordinance, the proper
authorities of the Town, in addition to other remedies may institute any appropriate action or proceedings
including an injunction to prevent such unlawful use, construction, or maintenance of cesspools, septic
tanks, sewage disposal systems, pipes or drains, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, or to prevent
the occupancy of any building, structure or land where said violations of this Ordinance are found.
Section 9.4. Liabilities to the Town: Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall
become liable to the Town for any and all expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the Town by reason
of such violation.
ARTICLE 10
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE
Section 10.1. Establishment of a Sewer Service Charge: The source of the revenue for retiring debt
services and for capital expenditures, operation and maintenance of the public sewage works shall be a
sewer service charge. The public sewage works service area and the nature of buildings required to have
sanitary facilities shall be as defined in Section 2.4 thereof. In the case of a building not connected to the
public system, such charge shall be deemed a “ready to serve” charge levied to aid in defraying expense
incurred in making service available to the property. In the case of a connected building not in active use
or occupancy and having no discharge during a given billing period, the portion related to capital
expenditures and retirement of debt service shall be regarded as minimum charge. In the case of a
connected building actively discharging to the public system for all or part of any given billing period, the
charge shall be increased to include the cost of operation and maintenance of the public sewage works.
Section 10.2. Sewer Service Charge Rate: Sewer service charge rates shall be determined by the
Town Council on a year-to-year basis and, in general, such charges will be determined on a rate structure
based on water consumption. The sewer service charge will be computed and billed at regular intervals
throughout each calendar year, as established by the Town Council in accordance with the Town of
Hampden Fees Ordinance. There shall be no discounts or abatements given for sewer use charges
unless such discounts or abatements are provided in accordance with the provisions outlined in Section
10.3.
Users shall be given annual notification of the rates and distribution of costs between capital expenditures
and operation and maintenance charges. Any revenue from Sewer Service Charges in excess of cost
must be retained in the sewerage account and cannot be used to defray costs in other functions of the
Town.
Section 10.3. Abatements: Abatements for use of water for lawn sprinklers, garden hoses, filling of
swimming pools, or other uses of significant volumes of water, which do not enter the public sewer, may
be made on application to the Town. The adjusted billing determined shall not be less than the highest
billing or adjusted billing applicable to the property during the previous three quarters. The Town shall
Town of Hampden Maine
Sewer Ordinance
6 62
require verification of the significant sewer usage which is cause for the requested abatement. The Town
Manager or his/her designee shall approve or deny abatements. No more than one (1) abatement can be
given in one (1) calendar year except upon petition to the Town Council.
Section 10.4. Special Charge for Industrial Organizations: A Special Sewer Service Charge shall he
assigned to any industrial firm or organization, the strength or other characteristic of whose waste varies
significantly from that of normal domestic sewage. In general, such charges will be based on equitable
prorating of costs for conveying and treating such waste, taking into account, but not necessarily limited
to, the effect of volume, BOD, suspended solids, settleable solids, chlorine demand, toxicity, and pH.
Pretreatment by the industry may also be a requirement if necessary to make the waste compatible with
flow in the sewer system. The Town Council, after appropriate study, and advice from the Town Manager,
shall assign a Special Sewer Charge to the industrial firm by separate agreement with said firm. The
applicable portions of the preceding sections, as well as the equitable rights of the public, shall be the
basis for such an arrangement.
10.4.1. Additional Special Charge: In addition to the Special Sewer Service Charge, which is
concerned solely with the cost to the Town for debt service, capital expenditures, operation and
maintenance of the public sewage works, there shall be a special charge to nongovernmental users
of the public sewage works in accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance identified in
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, prepared by the Federal Government Office of
Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following divisions:
Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing
Division B - Mining
Division D - Manufacturing
Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services
Division I - Services
Section 10.5. Reserved Right to Charge Sewer Service Charge: The Town Council reserves the right
from time-to-time to change Sewer Service Charges originally or previously assigned to any property
owner.
Section 10.6. Charge for Property Owners Outside Town Limits: All property owners outside the
Town limits who, by their own request, are served by sanitary sewers must pay a Sewer Service Charge
in accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance.
Shoreland Zoning
Ordinance
Hampden Maine
Effective December 4, 2019

Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
-i-
Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
TABLE OF CONTENTS
NOTE: This document is based on Chapter 1000 Guidelines for Municipal Shoreland Zoning Ordinances.
Page
1. Purposes.................................................................................................................................................. 1
2. Authority ................................................................................................................................................ 1
3. Applicability ........................................................................................................................................... 1
4. Effective Date ......................................................................................................................................... 1
5. Availability ............................................................................................................................................. 1
6. Severability ............................................................................................................................................. 2
7. Conflicts with Other Ordinances ............................................................................................................ 2
8. Amendments ........................................................................................................................................... 2
9. Districts and Zoning Map ....................................................................................................................... 2
A. Official Shoreland Zoning Map ....................................................................................................... 2
B. Scale of Map .................................................................................................................................... 2
C. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map .............................................................................. 2
D. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning Map .............................................................................. 2
10. Interpretation of District Boundaries ...................................................................................................... 2
11. Land Use Requirements ......................................................................................................................... 2
12. Nonconformance .................................................................................................................................... 3
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................................. 3
B. General ............................................................................................................................................. 3
C. Nonconforming Structures ............................................................................................................... 3
D. Nonconforming Uses ....................................................................................................................... 6
E. Nonconforming Lots ........................................................................................................................ 6
13. Establishment of Districts....................................................................................................................... 7
A. Resource Protection District ............................................................................................................ 7
B. Limited Residential District ............................................................................................................. 8
C. General Development 1 District ...................................................................................................... 8
D. General Development 2 District ...................................................................................................... 8
E. Stream Protection District ................................................................................................................ 8
14. Table of Land Uses ................................................................................................................................. 9
15. Land Use Standards .............................................................................................................................. 11
A. Minimum Lot Standards ................................................................................................................ 11
B. Principal and Accessory Structures ............................................................................................... 11
C. Campgrounds ................................................................................................................................. 14
D. Individual Private Campsites ......................................................................................................... 14
E. Commercial and Industrial Uses .................................................................................................... 14
F. Parking Areas ................................................................................................................................. 15
G. Roads and Driveways .................................................................................................................... 15
H. Signs............................................................................................................................................... 17
I. Storm Water Runoff ....................................................................................................................... 17
J. Septic Waste Disposal.................................................................................................................... 17
K. Essential Services........................................................................................................................... 17
L. Mineral Exploration and Extraction ............................................................................................... 18
M. Agriculture ..................................................................................................................................... 18
...........................................................................................................................................................
Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
-ii-
...........................................................................................................................................................
N. Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other than Timber Harvesting ........................ 19
O. Hazard Trees, Storm-Damaged Trees, and Dead Tree Removal ................................................... 21
P. Exemptions to Clearing and Vegetation Removal Requirements .................................................. 22
Q. Revegetation Requirements ........................................................................................................... 23
R. Erosion and Sedimentation Control ............................................................................................... 25
S. Soils ............................................................................................................................................... 26
T. Water Quality. ................................................................................................................................ 26
U. Archaeological Site. ....................................................................................................................... 26
16. Administration ...................................................................................................................................... 26
A. Administering Bodies and Agents ................................................................................................. 26
B. Permits Required ............................................................................................................................ 26
C. Permit Application ......................................................................................................................... 27
D. Procedure for Administering Permits ............................................................................................ 27
E. Special Exceptions ......................................................................................................................... 28
F. Expiration of Permit ....................................................................................................................... 29
G. Installation of Public Utility Service .............................................................................................. 29
H. Appeals .......................................................................................................................................... 29
I. Enforcement ................................................................................................................................... 32
17. Definitions ............................................................................................................................................ 33
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 1 -
Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
1. Purposes. The purposes of this Ordinance are to further the maintenance of safe and healthful
conditions; to prevent and control water pollution; to protect fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird
and other wildlife habitat; to protect buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion; to
protect archaeological and historic resources; to protect commercial fishing and maritime industries;
to protect freshwater and coastal wetlands; to control building sites, placement of structures and land
uses; to conserve shore cover, and visual as well as actual points of access to inland and coastal
waters; to conserve natural beauty and open space; and to anticipate and respond to the impacts of
development in shoreland zones.
2. Authority. This Ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 38 sections
435-449 of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated (M.R.S.A.).
3. Applicability. This Ordinance applies to (see Exhibit 1):
A. All land areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of
• the normal high-water line of any great pond or river, which in Hampden includes Ben Annis
Pond, Hammond Pond, Hermon Pond, Patten Pond, Souadabscook Stream, and the West
Branch of Souadabscook Stream from the confluence with Brown Brook downstream;
• the upland edge of a coastal wetland, including all areas affected by tidal action, which in
Hampden is the Penosbscot River; or
• the upland edge of a freshwater wetland.
B. All land areas within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream.
C. This ordinance does not apply to any structure built on, over or abutting a dock, wharf, pier, or
other structure extending or located below the normal high-water line of a water body or within a
wetland; such structures are subject to other regulatory bodies.
4. Effective Date
A. Effective Date of Ordinance and Ordinance Amendments. This Ordinance, which was
adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Hampden on November 4, 2019, will not be
effective unless approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection.
A certified copy of the Ordinance, or Ordinance Amendment, attested and signed by the Town
Clerk, must be forwarded to the Commissioner for approval. If the Commissioner fails to act on
this Ordinance or Ordinance Amendment, within 45 days of his/her receipt of the Ordinance, or
Ordinance Amendment, it will be automatically approved.
Any application for a permit submitted to the Town within the 45 day period will be governed by
the terms of this Ordinance, or Ordinance Amendment, if the Ordinance, or Ordinance
Amendment, is approved by the Commissioner.
B. Repeal of Prior Shoreland Zoning Provisions. Upon the effective date of this Ordinance
pursuant to Section 4(A) above, the “Town of Hampden, Maine Shoreland Zoning Ordinance”
adopted March 1, 2010 as amended August 15, 2011, and July 12, 2014 is hereby repealed.
5. Availability. A certified copy of this Ordinance will be filed with the Town Clerk and is accessible to
any member of the public. Copies will be made available to the public at reasonable cost at the
expense of the person making the request. Notice of availability of this Ordinance will be posted.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 2 -
6. Severability. Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be
invalid, such decision will not invalidate any other section or provision of the Ordinance.
7. Conflicts with Other Ordinances or Between Provisions of This Ordinance. Whenever a
provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision of this Ordinance
or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute administered by the Town, the more restrictive
provision controls.
8. Amendments. This Ordinance may be amended by majority vote of the Town Council. Copies of
amendments, attested and signed by the Town Clerk, must be submitted to the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection following adoption by the Town Council and will not be
effective unless approved by the Commissioner. If the Commissioner fails to act on any amendment
within 45 days of his/her receipt of the amendment, the amendment is automatically approved. Any
application for a permit submitted to the Town within the 45 day period will be governed by the terms
of the amendment, if such amendment is approved by the Commissioner.
9. Districts and Shoreland Zoning Map
A. Official Shoreland Zoning Map. The areas to which this Ordinance is applicable are hereby
divided into the following districts as shown on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map which is
made a part of this Ordinance:
(1) Resource Protection (RP)
(2) Limited Residential (LR)
(3) General Development 1 (GD1)
(4) General Development 2 (GD2)
(5) Stream Protection (SP)
B. Scale of Map. The Official Shoreland Zoning Map is to be drawn at a scale of not less than 1
inch = 2,000 feet. District boundaries are to be clearly delineated and a legend indicating the
symbols for each district is to be placed on the map.
C. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map. The Official Shoreland Zoning Map must be
certified by the attested signature of the Town Clerk and must be located in the municipal office.
D. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning Map. If amendments, in accordance with Section 8,
are made in the district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Shoreland Zoning
Map, such changes must be made on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map within thirty (30) days
after the amendment has been approved by the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection.
10. Interpretation of District Boundaries. Unless otherwise set forth on the Official Shoreland Zoning
Map, district boundary lines are the boundaries of the shoreland area as defined herein. Where
uncertainty exists as to the exact location of district boundary lines, the Board of Appeals is the final
authority as to location. Property owners who disagree with the boundaries as depicted on the map
may file an application for a determination of the boundaries in question with the Board of Appeals.
11. Land Use Requirements. Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure or land may
hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof may hereafter be erected,
constructed, expanded, moved, or altered and no new lot may be created except in conformity with all
of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located, unless a variance is granted.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 3 -
12. Nonconformance
A. Purpose. It is the intent of this Ordinance to promote land use conformities, except that
nonconforming conditions that existed before the effective date of this Ordinance (March 1,
2010) or amendments thereto will be allowed to continue, subject to the requirements set forth in
Section 12. Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, a nonconforming condition will not
be permitted to become more nonconforming.
B. General
(1) Transfer of Ownership. Nonconforming structures, lots, and uses may be transferred, and
the new owner may continue the nonconforming use or continue to use the nonconforming
structure or lot, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
(2) Repair and Maintenance. This Ordinance allows, without a permit, the normal upkeep and
maintenance of nonconforming uses and structures including repairs or renovations that do
not involve expansion of the nonconforming use or structure, and such other changes in a
nonconforming use or structure as federal, state, or local building and safety codes may
require.
C. Nonconforming Structures
(1) Expansions. A nonconforming structure may be added to or expanded after obtaining a
permit from the same permitting authority as that for a new structure, if such addition or
expansion does not increase the nonconformity of the structure and is in accordance with
subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) below.
(a) No structure that is located within 25 feet of the normal high-water line of a water body,
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland can be expanded such that any portion of
the expansion is within 25 feet of the resource.
(b) Notwithstanding paragraph (a), above, if a legally existing nonconforming principal
structure is entirely located less than 25 feet from the normal high-water line of a water
body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, that structure may be expanded as
follows, as long as all other applicable municipal land use standards are met and the
expansion is not prohibited by Section 12(C)(1).
(i) The maximum total footprint for the principal structure may not be expanded to a
size greater than 800 square feet or 30% larger than the footprint that existed on
January 1, 1989, whichever is greater.
(ii) The maximum height of the principal structure may not be made greater than 15 feet
or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater.
(c) All other legally existing nonconforming principal and accessory structures that do not
meet the water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback requirements may be expanded
or altered as follows, as long as other applicable municipal land use standards are met and
the expansion is not prohibited by Section 12(C)(1) or Section 12(C)(1)(a), above.
(i) For structures located less than 75 feet from the normal high-water line of a water
body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, the maximum combined total
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 4 -
footprint for all structures may not be expanded to a size greater than 1,000 square
feet or 30% larger than the footprint that existed on January 1, 1989, whichever is
greater. The maximum height of any structure may not be made greater than 20 feet
or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater.
(ii) For structures located less than 100 feet from the normal high-water line of a great
pond classified as GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified as GPA, the
maximum combined total footprint for all structures may not be expanded to a size
greater than 1,500 square feet or 30% larger than the footprint that existed on January
1, 1989, whichever is greater. The maximum height of any structure may not be made
greater than 25 feet or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater. Any
portion of those structures located less than 75 feet from the normal high-water line
of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland must meet the footprint
and height limits in Section 12(C)(1)(b)(i) and Section 12(C)(1)(c)(i), above.
(iii) In addition to the limitations in subparagraphs (i) and (ii), for structures that are
legally nonconforming due to their location within the Resource Protection District
when located at less than 250 feet from the normal high-water line of a water body or
the upland edge of a wetland, the maximum combined total footprint for all structures
may not be expanded to a size greater than 1,500 square feet or 30% larger than the
footprint that existed at the time the Resource Protection District was established on
the lot, whichever is greater. The maximum height of any structure may not be made
greater than 25 feet or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater,
except that any portion of those structures located less than 75 feet from the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland must
meet the footprint and height limits in Section 12(C)(1)(b)(i) and Section
12(C)(1)(c)(i), above.
(d) An approved plan for expansion of a nonconforming structure must be recorded by the
applicant with the registry of deeds, within 90 days of approval. The recorded plan must
show the existing and proposed footprint of the nonconforming structure, the existing and
proposed structure height, the footprint of any other structures on the parcel, the
shoreland zone boundary and evidence of approval by the municipal review authority.
(2) Foundations. Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is constructed under a
nonconforming structure, the structure and new foundation must be placed such that the
setback requirement is met to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer (CEO), basing his decision on the criteria specified in Section 12(C)(3)
Relocation, below.
(3) Relocation. A nonconforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries of the parcel
on which the structure is located provided that the site of relocation conforms to all setback
requirements to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer,
and provided that the applicant demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage disposal
system meets the requirements of State law and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules (Rules), or that a new system can be installed in compliance with the law and
said Rules. In no case may a structure be relocated in a manner that causes the structure to be
more nonconforming.
In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback to the greatest practical
extent, the Code Enforcement Officer will consider the size of the lot, the slope of the land,
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 5 -
the potential for soil erosion, the location of other structures on the property and on adjacent
properties, the location of the septic system and other on-site soils suitable for septic systems,
and the type and amount of vegetation to be removed to accomplish the relocation.
When it is necessary to remove vegetation within the water or wetland setback area in order
to relocate a structure, the Code Enforcement Officer will require replanting of native
vegetation to compensate for the destroyed vegetation in accordance with Section 15(Q). In
addition, the area from which the relocated structure was removed must be replanted with
vegetation. Replanting will be required as follows:
(a) Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted with at least one native
tree, three feet in height, for every tree removed. If more than five trees are planted, no
one species of tree can make up more than 50% of the number of trees planted. Replaced
trees must be planted no further from the water or wetland than the trees that were
removed.
Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and ground cover, that are removed or
destroyed in order to relocate a structure must be re-established. An area at least the same
size as the area where vegetation and/or ground cover was disturbed, damaged, or
removed must be reestablished within the setback area. The vegetation and/or ground
cover must consist of similar native vegetation and/or ground cover that was disturbed,
destroyed or removed.
(b) Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel the original location of the
structure must be replanted with vegetation which may consist of grasses, shrubs, trees,
or a combination thereof.
(4) Reconstruction or Replacement. Any nonconforming structure which is located less than
the required setback from a water body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed,
or damaged or destroyed, regardless of the cause, by more than 50% of the market value of
the structure before such damage, destruction or removal, may be reconstructed or replaced
provided that a permit is obtained within 12 months of the date of said damage, destruction,
or removal, and provided that such reconstruction or replacement is in compliance with the
water body, tributary stream or wetland setback requirement to the greatest practical extent
as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with the purposes of this
Ordinance. No structure can be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its
nonconformity. If the reconstructed or replacement structure is less than the required setback
it cannot be any larger than the original structure, except as allowed pursuant to Section
12(C)(1) above, as determined by the nonconforming footprint of the reconstructed or
replaced structure at its new location. If the total footprint of the original structure can be
relocated or reconstructed beyond the required setback area, no portion of the relocated or
reconstructed structure can be replaced or constructed at less than the setback requirement
for a new structure. When it is necessary to remove vegetation in order to replace or
reconstruct a structure, vegetation must be replanted in accordance with Section 12(C)(3)
above.
Any nonconforming structure which is located less than the required setback from a water
body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed by 50% or less of the market value,
or damaged or destroyed by 50% or less of the market value of the structure, excluding
normal maintenance and repair, may be reconstructed in place if a permit is obtained from the
Code Enforcement Officer within one year of such damage, destruction, or removal.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 6 -
In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the setback to the
greatest practical extent the Code Enforcement Officer will consider, in addition to the
criteria in Section 12(C)(3) above, the physical condition and type of foundation present, if
any.
(5) Change of Use of a Nonconforming Structure. The use of a nonconforming structure may
not be changed to another use unless the Planning Board, after receiving a written
application, determines that the new use will have no greater adverse impact on the water
body, tributary stream, or wetland, or on the subject or adjacent properties and resources than
the existing use.
In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, written documentation from the
applicant must be submitted to the Planning Board regarding the probable effects on public
health and safety, erosion and sedimentation, water quality, fish and wildlife habitat,
vegetative cover, visual and actual points of public access to waters, natural beauty,
floodplain management, archaeological and historic resources, and commercial fishing and
maritime activities, and other functionally water-dependent uses.
D. Nonconforming Uses
(1) Expansions. Expansions of nonconforming uses are prohibited, except that nonconforming
residential uses may, after obtaining a permit from the Planning Board, be expanded within
existing residential structures or within expansions of such structures as allowed in Section
12(C)(1) above.
(2) Resumption Prohibited. A lot, building or structure in or on which a nonconforming use is
discontinued for a period exceeding one year, or which is superseded by a conforming use,
may not again be devoted to a nonconforming use except that the Planning Board may, for
good cause shown by the applicant, grant up to a one year extension to that time period. This
provision does not apply to the resumption of a use of a residential structure provided that the
structure has been used or maintained for residential purposes during the preceding five year
period.
(3) Change of Use. An existing nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming
use provided that the proposed use has no greater adverse impact on the subject and adjacent
properties and resources than the former use, as determined by the Planning Board. The
determination of no greater adverse impact will be made according to criteria listed in Section
12(C)(5) above.
E. Nonconforming Lots
(1) Nonconforming Lots: A nonconforming lot of record as of March 1, 2010 may be built
upon, without the need for a variance, provided that such lot is in separate ownership and not
contiguous with any other lot in the same ownership, and that all provisions of this Ordinance
except lot area, lot width and shore frontage can be met. Variances relating to setback or
other requirements not involving lot area, lot width or shore frontage are obtained by action
of the Board of Appeals.
(2) Contiguous Built Lots: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in a single or joint
ownership of record as of March 1, 2010, if all or part of the lots do not meet the dimensional
requirements of this Ordinance, and if a principal use or structure exists on each lot, the
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 7 -
nonconforming lots may be conveyed separately or together, provided that the State Minimum
Lot Size Law (12 M.R.S.A. sections 4807-A through 4807-D) and the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules are complied with.
If two or more principal uses or structures existed on a single lot of record on March 1, 2010,
each may be sold on a separate lot provided that the above referenced law and rules are
complied with. When such lots are divided each lot thus created must be as conforming as
possible to the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance.
(3) Contiguous Lots - Vacant or Partially Built: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are
in single or joint ownership of record as of March 1, 2010, if any of these lots do not
individually meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance or subsequent amendments,
and if one or more of the lots are vacant or contain no principal structure, the lots must be
combined to the extent necessary to meet the dimensional requirements.
This provision does not apply to two or more contiguous lots, at least one of which is
nonconforming, owned by the same person or persons on December 16, 1991 and recorded in
the registry of deeds if the lot is served by a public sewer or can accommodate a subsurface
sewage disposal system in conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules; and
(a) Each lot contains at least 100 feet of shore frontage and at least 20,000 square feet of lot
area; or
(b) Any lots that do not meet the frontage and lot size requirements of Section 12(E)(3)(a)
are reconfigured or combined so that each new lot contains at least 100 feet of shore
frontage and 20,000 square feet of lot area.
13. Establishment of Districts
A. Resource Protection District (RP). The Resource Protection District includes areas in which
development would adversely affect water quality, productive habitat, biological ecosystems, or
scenic and natural values. This district includes the following areas that fall within 250 feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of any great pond or river (see the definitions of
“great pond” and “river” for a listing of these in Hampden), or of the upland edge of the
Penobscot River (classified as coastal wetland), or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland,
except where other shoreland districts apply:
(1) Floodplains along rivers including artificially formed great ponds along rivers, and adjacent
to tidal waters (the Penobscot River) defined by the 100 year (a.k.a. 1% chance in any given
year) floodplain as designated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA)
Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in the
absence of these, by soil types identified as recent floodplain soils.
(2) Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of 20% or greater.
(3) Areas of two or more contiguous acres supporting wetland vegetation and hydric soils, which
are not part of a freshwater or coastal wetland as defined, and which are not surficially
connected to a water body during the period of normal high water.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 8 -
(4) Land areas along rivers subject to severe bank erosion, undercutting, or river bed movement,
and lands adjacent to tidal waters which are subject to severe erosion or mass movement,
such as steep coastal bluffs.
B. Limited Residential District (LR). The Limited Residential District includes those areas within
250 feet, horizontal distance, of the shoreline that are suitable for residential and recreational
development. It includes areas other than those in the Resource Protection or Stream Protection
Districts and areas which are used less intensively than those in the General Development
Districts.
C. General Development 1 District (GD1). The General Development 1 District includes the
following types of existing, intensively developed areas:
(1) Areas of two or more contiguous acres devoted to commercial, industrial or intensive
recreational activities, or a mix of such activities, including but not limited to the following:
(a) Areas devoted to manufacturing, fabricating or other industrial activities;
(b) Areas devoted to wholesaling, warehousing, retail trade and service activities, or other
commercial activities; and
(c) Areas devoted to intensive recreational development and activities, such as, but not
limited to amusement parks, race tracks and fairgrounds.
(2) Areas otherwise discernible as having patterns of intensive commercial, industrial or
recreational uses.
(3) Portions of the General Development 1 District may also include residential development, but
such residential uses may not be a majority of the uses in the district.
D. General Development 2 District (GD2). The General Development 2 District includes the same
types of areas as the General Development 1 District but is to be used whenever any new areas
are to be designated General Development (i.e. any area to be designated GD is automatically
GD2, for the purpose of differentiating between those areas already developed as of the original
date of adoption of shoreland zoning and newly developing areas).
There will be no newly established GD2 districts, including as expansions of existing GD1
districts, in areas adjacent to great ponds classified GPA or adjacent to rivers flowing to great
ponds classified GPA.
E. Stream Protection District (SP). The Stream Protection District includes all land areas within 75
feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream, exclusive of those areas zoned
Resource Protection. See the definition of “stream” for a list of streams in Hampden.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 9 -
14. Table of Land Uses. All land use activities, as indicated in Table 1, Land Uses in the Shoreland
Zone, must conform with all of the applicable land use standards in Section 15. The district
designation for a particular site is determined from the Official Shoreland Zoning Map.
Key to Table 1:
Yes - Allowed (no shoreland permit required; must comply with other ordinances and
codes.)
No - Prohibited
PB - Allowed with permit issued by the Planning Board.
CEO - Allowed with permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
LPI - Allowed with permit issued by the Local Plumbing Inspector
District Abbreviations:
SP - Stream Protection
RP - Resource Protection
LR - Limited Residential
GD - General Development
(includes GD1 & GD2)
Note: A permit from the Department of Environmental Protection is
required for any of the following activities, pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A.
section 480-C, if the activity occurs in, on, over or adjacent to any
freshwater or coastal wetland, great pond, river, stream or brook and
operates in such a manner that material or soil may be washed into the
resource area: A. Dredging, bulldozing, removing or displacing soil,
sand, vegetation or other materials; B. Draining or otherwise dewatering;
C. Filling, including adding sand or other material to a sand dune; or D.
Any construction or alteration of any permanent structure.
Continued on the next page.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 10 -
TABLE 1. LAND USES IN THE SHORELAND ZONE
DISTRICT
LAND USES SP RP LR GD
1. Non-intensive recreational uses not requiring structures such as hunting, fishing and
hiking
yes
yes
yes
yes
2. Motorized vehicular traffic on existing roads and trails yes yes yes yes
3. Clearing or removal of vegetation for activities other than timber harvesting CEO13 CEO1, 13 yes13 yes13
4. Fire prevention activities yes yes yes yes
5. Wildlife management practices yes yes yes yes
6. Soil and water conservation practices yes yes yes yes
7. Mineral exploration no yes2 yes2 yes2
8. Mineral extraction including sand and gravel extraction no PB3 PB PB
9. Surveying and resource analysis yes yes yes yes
10. Emergency operations yes yes yes yes
11. Agriculture yes PB yes yes
12. Aquaculture PB PB PB yes
13. Principal structures and uses
A. One and two family residential, including driveways
PB4
PB9
CEO
CEO
B. Multi-unit residential no no PB PB
C. Commercial no10 no10 no10 PB
D. Industrial no no no PB
E. Governmental and institutional no no PB PB
F. Small non-residential facilities for educational, scientific, or nature
interpretation purposes PB4 PB CEO CEO
14. Structures accessory to allowed uses PB4 PB CEO yes
15. Conversions of seasonal residences to year-round residences LPI LPI LPI LPI
16. Home occupations PB PB PB yes
17. Private sewage disposal systems for allowed uses LPI LPI LPI LPI
18. Essential services - - - -
A. Roadside distribution lines (34.5kV and lower) CEO6 CEO6 yes12 yes12
B. Non-roadside or cross-country distribution lines involving 10 poles or less in
the shoreland zone PB6 PB6 CEO CEO
C. Non-roadside or cross-country distribution lines involving eleven or more poles
in the shoreland zone PB6 PB6 PB PB
D. Other essential services PB6 PB6 PB PB
19. Service drops, as defined, to allowed uses yes yes yes yes
20. Public and private recreational areas involving minimal structural development PB PB PB CEO
21. Individual, private campsites CEO CEO CEO CEO
22. Campgrounds no no7 PB PB
23. Road construction PB no8 PB PB
24. Parking facilities no no7 PB PB
25. Marinas PB no PB PB
26. Filling and earth moving of <10 cubic yards CEO CEO yes yes
27. Filling and earth moving of >10 cubic yards PB PB CEO CEO
28. Signs yes yes yes yes
29. Uses similar to allowed uses CEO CEO CEO CEO
30. Uses similar to uses requiring a CEO permit CEO CEO CEO CEO
31. Uses similar to uses requiring a PB permit PB PB PB PB
Footnotes:
1 In RP not allowed within 75 feet horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of great ponds, except to remove safety hazards.
2 Requires permit from the Code Enforcement Officer if more than 100 square feet of surface area, in total, is disturbed.
3 In RP not allowed in areas so designated because of wildlife value.
4 Provided that a variance from the setback requirement is obtained from the Board of Appeals.
5 Functionally water-dependent uses and uses accessory to such water dependent uses only (See note on previous page).
6 See further restrictions in Section 15( K)(2).
7 Except when area is zoned for resource protection due to floodplain criteria in which case a permit is required from the PB.
8 Except as provided in Section 15(G)(4).
9 Single family residential structures may be allowed by special exception only according to the provisions of Section 16(E), Special
Exceptions. Two-family residential structures are prohibited.
10 Except for commercial uses otherwise listed in this Table, such as marinas and campgrounds, that are allowed in the respective
district.
11 Excluding bridges and other crossings not involving earthwork, in which case no permit is required.
12 Permit not required, but must file a written “notice of intent to construct” with CEO.
13 All clearing activities must be supervised by a licensed forester or arborist.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 11 -
15. Land Use Standards. All land use activities within the shoreland zone must conform to the
following provisions.
A. Minimum Lot Standards
(1) Area and Shore Frontage Minimum Lot
Area (sq. ft.)
Minimum Shore
Frontage (ft.)
(a) Residential per dwelling unit:
(i) When NOT connected to both municipal
water and municipal sewer service:
(1) Adjacent to Tidal Areas 30,000 150
(2) Adjacent to Non-Tidal Areas 40,000 200
(i) When connected to both municipal water
and municipal sewer service:
(1) Adjacent to Tidal Areas 18,000 125
(2) Adjacent to Non-Tidal Areas 18,000 125
(b) Governmental, Institutional, Commercial or
Industrial per principal structure:
(i) Adjacent to Tidal Areas 40,000 200
(ii) Adjacent to Non-tidal Areas 60,000 300
(c) Public and Private Recreational Facilities:
(i) Adjacent to Tidal and Non-Tidal Areas 40,000 200
(2) Land below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and land
beneath roads serving more than two lots cannot be included toward calculating minimum lot
area.
(3) Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road are considered each a separate tract or
parcel of land unless such road was established by the owner of land on both sides thereof after
September 22, 1971.
(4) The minimum width of any portion of any lot within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland must be equal to or greater
than the shore frontage requirement for a lot with the proposed use.
(5) If more than one residential dwelling unit, principal governmental, institutional, commercial or
industrial structure or use, or combination thereof, is constructed or established on a single
parcel, all dimensional requirements must be met for each additional dwelling unit, principal
structure, or use.
B. Principal and Accessory Structures
(1) Minimum Shoreline Setback Requirements1,2:
RP District 250 feet3
GD District (includes GD1 & GD2) 25 feet
Great Ponds (GPA) (Ben Annis, Hammond, Hermon, and Patten Ponds) 100 feet
Rivers that flow to Great Ponds (GPA) (Souadabscook upstream of
Hammond Pond and West Branch Souadabscook downstream of Brown Brook)
100 feet
Rivers (Souadabscook downstream of Hammond Pond) 75 feet
Streams, including tributary streams4 75 feet
Wetland (the Penobscot River5 or a freshwater wetland as defined) 75 feet
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 12 -
Footnotes:
1. Does not apply to structures which require direct access to the waterbody or wetland as an
operational necessity, such as piers, docks, and retaining walls, nor to other functionally water
dependent uses.
2. On a nonconforming lot of record on which only a residential structure exists, and it is not possible to
place an accessory structure meeting the required water body, tributary stream or wetland setbacks,
the code enforcement officer may issue a permit to place a single accessory structure, with no utilities,
for the storage of yard tools and similar equipment. Such accessory structure must not exceed 80
square feet in area nor eight feet in height, and must be located as far from the shoreline or tributary
stream as practical and must meet all other applicable standards, including lot coverage and
vegetation clearing limitations. In no case can the structure be located closer to the shoreline or
tributary stream than the principal structure.
3. Except for structures, roads, parking spaces, or other regulated objects specifically allowed in that
district in which case the setback requirements specified below apply.
4. These setback requirements only apply where the waterbody is within the Shoreland Zone as defined
and mapped.
5. For principal structures, water and wetland setback measurements are to be taken from the top of a
coastal bluff that has been identified on Coastal Bluff maps as being “highly unstable” or “unstable”
by the Maine Geological Survey pursuant to its “Classification of Coastal Bluffs” and published on
the most recent Coastal Bluff map. If the applicant and the permitting official(s) are in disagreement
as to the specific location of a “highly unstable” or “unstable” bluff, or where the top of the bluff is
located, the applicant may at his or her expense, employ a Maine Registered Professional Engineer, a
Maine Certified Soil Scientist, a Maine State Geologist, or other qualified individual to make a
determination. If agreement is still not reached, the applicant may appeal the matter to the board of
appeals.
(2) Height. Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing structures which are
permitted in the Resource Protection, Limited Residential, and Stream Protection Districts,
must not exceed 35 feet in height. This provision does not apply to structures such as
transmission towers, windmills, antennas, and similar structures having no floor area.
(3) Floodplain. All development located in the special Flood Hazard Area as depicted on Flood
Insurance Rate Maps must comply with the Town of Hampden Floodplain Management
Ordinance.
(4) Non-vegetated Surface Coverage. With the exception of any General Development District
located adjacent to tidal waters (the Penobscot River), non-vegetated surfaces must not
exceed a total of 20% of the portion of the lot located within the shoreland zone. This
limitation does not apply to public boat launching facilities regardless of the district in which
the facility is located.
In any General Development District located adjacent to tidal waters, non-vegetated surfaces
must not exceed a total of 70% of the portion of the lot located within the shoreland zone.
For the purposes of calculating lot coverage, non-vegetated surfaces include, but are not
limited to the following: structures, driveways, parking areas, and other areas from which
vegetation has been removed. Naturally occurring ledge and rock outcroppings are not
counted as nonvegetated surfaces when calculating lot coverage for lots of record on March
24, 1990 and in continuous existence since that date.
(5) Retaining Walls. Retaining walls that are not necessary for erosion control must meet the
structure setback requirement, except for low retaining walls and associated fill provided all
of the following conditions are met. If the wall and associated soil disturbance occurs within
75 feet, horizontal distance, of a water body, tributary stream, or coastal wetland, a permit
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 13 -
pursuant to the Natural Resource Protection Act is required from the Department of
Environmental Protection.
(a) The site has been previously altered and an effective vegetated buffer does not exist;
(b) The wall(s) is(are) at least 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of
a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland;
(c) The site where the retaining wall will be constructed is legally existing lawn or is a site
eroding from lack of naturally occurring vegetation, and which cannot be stabilized with
vegetative plantings;
(d) The total height of the wall(s), in the aggregate, are no more than 24 inches;
(e) Retaining walls are located outside of the 100-year floodplain on rivers, streams, coastal
wetlands, and tributary streams, as designated on the Federal Emergency Management
Agency’s (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood
of record, or in the absence of these, by soil types identified as recent floodplain soils.
(f) The area behind the wall is revegetated with grass, shrubs, trees, or a combination
thereof, and no further structural development will occur within the setback area,
including patios and decks; and
(g) A vegetated buffer area is established within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland when a
natural buffer area does not exist. The buffer area must meet the following characteristics:
(i) The buffer must include shrubs and other woody and herbaceous vegetation. Where
natural ground cover is lacking the area must be supplemented with leaf or bark mulch;
(ii) Vegetation plantings must be in quantities sufficient to retard erosion and provide
for effective infiltration of stormwater runoff;
(iii) Only native species may be used to establish the buffer area;
(iv) A minimum buffer width of 15 feet, horizontal distance, is required, measured
perpendicularly to the normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland;
(v) A footpath not to exceed the standards in Section 15(P)(2)(a), may traverse the buffer;
(6) Structures for Shoreline Access. Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or
similar structures may be allowed with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, to provide
shoreline access in areas of steep slopes or unstable soils provided: that the structure is limited
to a maximum of four feet in width; that the structure does not extend below or over the normal
high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland, (unless permitted by the
Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, 38
M.R.S.A. section 480-C); and that the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable access
alternative exists on the property. All applications for structures for shoreline access must be
accompanied by an engineering report that contains an analysis of soil conditions, addresses
stormwater analysis for the installation area, contains installation details and necessary best
management practices to assure stable soil conditions both during construction and thereafter.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 14 -
C. Campgrounds. Campgrounds must conform to the minimum requirements imposed under State
licensing procedures and the following:
(1) Minimum Size. Campgrounds must contain a minimum of 5,000 square feet of land per campsite,
plus land area for common areas, roads, and driveways. Land supporting wetland vegetation, and
land below the normal high-water line of a water body is not to be included in calculating land
area per site.
(2) Shoreline Setback. The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or shelter,
and utility and service buildings must be located outside of the shoreline buffer.
D. Individual Private Campsites. Individual private campsites not associated with campgrounds
are allowed provided the following conditions are met:
(1) When an individual private campsite is proposed on an undeveloped lot, the lot must contain a
minimum of 30,000 square feet per campsite within the shoreland zone, unless the lot existed
prior to March 1, 2010, in which case one campsite is permitted even if the lot has less than
30,000 square feet within the shoreland zone.
(2) When an individual private campsite is proposed on a lot that contains another principal use
and/or structure, the minimum lot size must be a minimum of that required for the principal
structure (from Section 15(A)) plus that required for the campsite (30,000 sq ft).
(3) Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a recreational vehicle or tent
platform, must be outside of the shoreline buffer.
(4) Only one recreational vehicle is allowed on a campsite. The recreational vehicle must not be
located on any type of permanent foundation except for a gravel pad, and no structure except
a canopy is to be attached to the recreational vehicle.
(5) The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter in a
Resource Protection District is limited to 1,000 square feet.
(6) A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and location of sewage
disposal is required for each campsite and must be approved by the Local Plumbing
Inspector. Where disposal is off-site, written authorization from the receiving facility or land
owner is required.
(7) When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed on-site for more than 120 days per
year, all requirements for residential structures must be met, including the installation of a
subsurface sewage disposal system in compliance with the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules unless served by public sewage facilities.
E. Commercial and Industrial Uses. The following new commercial and industrial uses are
prohibited within the shoreland zone adjacent to great ponds classified GPA, and rivers and
streams which flow to great ponds classified GPA:
(1) Auto washing facilities
(2) Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations, including body shops
(3) Chemical or bacteriological laboratories
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 15 -
(4) Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers, other than amounts
normally associated with individual households or farms
(5) Commercial painting, wood preserving, and furniture stripping
(6) Dry cleaning establishments
(7) Electronic circuit assembly
(8) Laundromats, unless connected to a sanitary sewer
(9) Metal plating, finishing, or polishing
(10) Petroleum or petroleum product storage and/or sale except storage on same property as use
occurs and except for storage and sales associated with marinas
(11) Photographic processing
(12) Commercial printing
F. Parking Areas for all uses
(1) Parking areas must meet the shoreline and tributary stream setback requirements for
structures for the district in which such areas are located. The setback requirement for parking
areas serving public boat launching facilities in districts other than any General Development
District must be no less than 50 feet, horizontal distance, from the shoreline or tributary
stream if the Planning Board finds that no other reasonable alternative exists further from the
shoreline or tributary stream.
(2) Parking areas are to be adequately sized for the proposed use and must be designed to prevent
stormwater runoff from flowing directly into a water body, tributary stream, local stream or
wetland and where feasible, to retain all runoff on-site.
(3) Compliance With Zoning Ordinance. In determining the appropriate size and minimum
number of proposed parking spaces, the parking layouts and handicap parking configurations
must comply with the Town of Hampden Zoning Ordinance standards, except that parking
spaces for a vehicle with a boat trailer must be 40 feet long.
G. Roads and Driveways. The following standards apply to the construction of roads and/or
driveways and drainage systems, culverts and other related features.
(1) Except as provided in item (3) below, roads and driveways must be located outside of the
shoreline buffer unless no reasonable alternative exists as determined by the Planning Board.
If no other reasonable alternative exists, the road and/or driveway setback requirement must
be no less than 50 feet, horizontal distance, upon clear showing by the applicant that
appropriate techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the water body, tributary
stream, or wetland. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, the installation of
settling basins or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed so as
to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, local stream, or wetland.
On slopes of greater than 20% the road or driveway setback is increased by 10 feet,
horizontal distance, for each 5% increase in slope above 20%.
Section 15 (G)(1) does not apply to approaches to water crossings or to roads or driveways
that provide access to permitted structures and facilities located nearer to the shoreline or
tributary stream due to an operational necessity, excluding temporary docks for recreational
uses. Roads and driveways providing access to permitted structures within the setback area
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 16 -
must comply fully with the requirements of Section 15(G)(1) except for that portion of the
road or driveway necessary for direct access to the structure.
(2) Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right of way regardless of their
setback from a water body, tributary stream or wetland.
(3) New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection District except that the
Planning Board may grant a permit to construct a road or driveway to provide access to
permitted uses within the district. A road or driveway may also be approved by the Planning
Board in a Resource Protection District, upon a finding that no reasonable alternative route or
location is available outside the district. When a road or driveway is permitted in a Resource
Protection District the road and/or driveway must be set back as far as practicable from the
normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, local stream, or upland edge of a
wetland.
(4) Road and driveway banks must be no steeper than a slope of two horizontal to one vertical,
and must be graded and stabilized in accordance with the provisions for erosion and
sedimentation control contained in Section 15(R).
(5) Road and driveway grades must be no greater than 10% except for segments of less than 200
feet.
(6) In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from directly entering water bodies,
tributary streams or wetlands, roads and driveways must be designed, constructed, and
maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip at least 50 feet plus two times the
average slope, in width between the outflow point of the ditch or culvert and the normal highwater
line of a water body, tributary stream, local stream, or upland edge of a wetland.
Surface drainage which is directed to an unscarified buffer strip must be diffused or spread
out to promote infiltration of the runoff and to minimize channelized flow of the drainage
through the buffer strip.
(7) Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnouts must be installed in a
manner effective in directing drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before the flow gains
sufficient volume or head to erode the road, driveway, or ditch. To accomplish this, the
following provisions apply:
(a) Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water turnouts must be spaced along
the road, or driveway at intervals no greater than indicated in the following table:
Grade (%) Spacing (feet)
0-2 250
3-5 200-135
6-10 100-80
11-15 80-60
16-20 60-45
21 + 40
(b) Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only where the grade is 10
percent or less.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 17 -
(c) On sections having slopes greater than 10%, ditch relief culverts must be placed at
approximately a 30 degree angle downslope from a line perpendicular to the centerline of
the road or driveway.
(d) Ditch relief culverts must be sufficiently sized and properly installed in order to allow for
effective functioning, and their inlet and outlet ends must be stabilized with appropriate
materials.
(8) Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other storm water runoff control
installations associated with roads and driveways must be maintained on a regular basis to
assure effective functioning.
H. Signs. Sign locations, size, configuration and lighting must comply with the Town of Hampden
Zoning Ordinance, with the following exceptions:
(1) Real estate signs within the RP, LR, and SP districts for residential properties are limited to a
maximum of three square feet.
(2) Posting signs within the shoreland zone related to trespassing or hunting are limited to two
square feet in area.
(3) Signs related to public safety are allowed without restriction within the shoreland zone.
(4) Signs within the shoreland zone related to goods or services sold on the premises are limited
to six square feet in area.
(5) Unless otherwise restricted in the Zoning Ordinance, signs within the shoreland zone are
limited to 20 feet from the ground to the top of the sign.
I. Storm Water Runoff
(1) All new construction and development must be designed to minimize storm water runoff
from the site in excess of the natural predevelopment conditions. Where possible, existing
natural runoff control features, such as berms, swales, terraces and wooded areas, are to be
retained in order to reduce runoff and encourage infiltration of stormwaters.
(2) Storm water runoff control systems must be maintained as necessary to ensure proper
functioning.
J. Septic Waste Disposal
(1) All subsurface sewage disposal systems must be installed in conformance with the State of
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, and the following:
(a) clearing or removal of woody vegetation necessary to site a new system and any
associated fill extensions, must not extend closer than 75 feet, horizontal distance, from
the normal high-water line of a water body or the upland edge of a wetland; and
(b) a holding tank is not allowed for a first-time residential use in the shoreland zone.
K. Essential Services
(1) Where feasible, the installation of essential services is to be within existing public ways and
existing service corridors.
(2) The installation of essential services, other than road-side distribution lines, is not allowed in
a Resource Protection or Stream Protection District, except to provide services to a permitted
use within said district, or except where the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 18 -
alternative exists. Where allowed, such structures and facilities must be located so as to
minimize any adverse impacts on surrounding uses and resources, including visual impacts.
(3) Damaged or destroyed public utility transmission and distribution lines, towers and related
equipment may be replaced or reconstructed without a permit.
L. Mineral Exploration and Extraction. Mineral exploration to determine the nature or extent of
mineral resources is to be accomplished by hand sampling, test boring, or other methods which
create minimal disturbance of less than 100 square feet of ground surface. A permit from the
Code Enforcement Officer is required for mineral exploration which exceeds the above
limitation. All excavations, including test pits and holes, must be immediately capped, filled or
secured by other equally effective measures to restore disturbed areas and to protect the public
health and safety.
Mineral extraction may be permitted under the following conditions:
(1) A reclamation plan must be filed with and approved by the Planning Board before a permit is
granted. Such plan must describe in detail procedures to be undertaken to fulfill the
requirements of Section 15 (L)(3) below.
(2) No part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff control features, is to be
permitted within the shoreline buffer. Minimum distances from property lines for extraction
operations are established in the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Hampden Maine.
(3) Within 12 months following the completion of extraction operations at any extraction site,
which operations are to be deemed complete when less than 100 cubic yards of materials are
removed in any consecutive 12 month period, ground levels and grades must be established in
accordance with the following:
(a) All debris, stumps, and similar material must be removed for disposal in an approved
location, or may be buried on-site. Only materials generated on-site may be buried or
covered on-site.
(b) The final graded slope must be two and one-half to one (2.5:1) slope or flatter within the
shoreland zone.
(c) Top soil or loam must be retained to cover all disturbed land areas, which must be seeded
and stabilized with vegetation native to the area. Additional topsoil or loam must be
obtained from off-site sources if necessary to complete the stabilization project.
(4) In keeping with the purposes of this Ordinance, the Planning Board may impose such
conditions as are necessary to minimize the adverse impacts associated with mineral
extraction operations on surrounding uses and resources.
M. Agriculture
(1) All spreading of manure must be accomplished in conformance with the Manure Utilization
Guidelines published by the former Maine Department of Agriculture on November 1, 2001,
and the Nutrient Management Law (7 M.R.S. sections 4201-4209).
(2) Manure must not be stored or stockpiled within the shoreline buffer. All manure storage areas
within the shoreland zone must be constructed or modified such that the facility produces no
discharge of effluent or contaminated storm water.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 19 -
(3) Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than 40,000 square feet in surface area,
within the shoreland zone requires a Conservation Plan to be filed with the Planning Board.
Nonconformance with the provisions of said plan will be considered to be a violation of this
Ordinance.
(4) There is to be no new tilling of soil within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of a great pond classified GPA; within 75 feet, horizontal distance, from other
water bodies and coastal wetlands; nor within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of tributary
streams, and freshwater wetlands. Operations within these distance limits that were in
existence prior to March 1, 2010 may be maintained.
(5) Newly established livestock grazing areas are not permitted within 100 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA; within 75 feet,
horizontal distance, of other water bodies and coastal wetlands, nor within 25 feet, horizontal
distance, of tributary streams, and freshwater wetlands. Livestock grazing associated with
ongoing farm activities, and which are not in conformance with the above setback provisions
may continue, provided that such grazing is conducted in accordance with a Conservation Plan
that has been filed with the Planning Board.
N. Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting
(1) All Shoreland Districts are subject to this section N. Clearing or removal of vegetation for
activities other than timber harvesting must be supervised by a licensed forester. Supervision
must include marking of trees for cutting and written verification by the licensed forester
post-cut stating that the cutting was in keeping with the original markings.
(2) In a Resource Protection District abutting a great pond, there must be no cutting of vegetation
within the strip of land extending 75 feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal highwater
line, except to remove hazard trees as described in Section O.
Elsewhere, in any Resource Protection District the cutting or removal of vegetation must be
limited to that which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that district.
(3) Except in areas as described in Section N(2), above, in order to maintain the vegetation in the
shoreline buffer (see definitions), clearing or removal of vegetation within the shoreline
buffer for allowed activities (including associated construction and related equipment
operation within the shoreland zone) must comply with the following:
(a) There must be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet in the forest canopy (or
other existing woody vegetation if a forested canopy is not present) as measured from the
outer limits of the tree or shrub crown. However, a single footpath not to exceed six feet
in width as measured between tree trunks and/or shrub stems is allowed for accessing the
shoreline provided that a cleared line of sight to the water through the buffer strip is not
created.
(b) Selective cutting of trees is allowed provided that a well-distributed stand of trees and
other natural vegetation is maintained. For the purposes of Section 15(N)(3)(b) a "welldistributed
stand of trees" adjacent to a great pond classified GPA or a river or stream
flowing to a great pond classified GPA, is defined as maintaining a rating score of 24 or
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 20 -
more in each 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular (1250 square feet) area as determined by the
following rating system.
Diameter of Retained Tree at
4.5 feet Above Ground Level
(DBH) Points
2 to < 4 inches 1
4 to < 8 inches 2
8 to < 12 inches 4
12 inches or greater 8
Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands, a "well-distributed stand
of trees" is defined as maintaining a minimum rating score of 16 per 25-foot by 50-foot
rectangular area.
The following governs in applying this point system:
(i) The 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular plots must be established where the landowner or
lessee proposes clearing within the required buffer;
(ii) Each successive plot must be adjacent to, but not overlap a previous plot;
(iii) Any plot not containing the required points must have no vegetation removed except
as otherwise allowed by this Ordinance;
(iv) Any plot containing the required points may have vegetation removed down to the
minimum points required or as otherwise allowed by is Ordinance;
(v) Where conditions permit, no more than 50% of the points on any 25-foot by 50-foot
rectangular area may consist of trees greater than 12 inches in diameter.
For the purposes of Section 15(N)(3)(b) “other natural vegetation” is defined as retaining
existing vegetation under three feet in height and other ground cover and retaining at least
five saplings less than two inches DBH for each 25-foot by 50-foot rectangle area. If five
saplings do not exist, no woody stems less than two inches in diameter can be removed
until five saplings have been recruited into the plot.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than 40% of the total volume of trees
four inches or more DBH may be removed in any 10 year period.
(c) In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing vegetation under three feet
in height and other ground cover, including leaf litter and the forest duff layer, must not
be cut, covered, or removed, except to provide for a footpath or other permitted uses as
described in Section 15(N) paragraphs (3) and (3)(a) above.
(d) Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom one-third of the tree is allowed.
(e) When the removal of storm-damaged, dead or hazard trees results in the creation of
cleared openings, these openings must be replanted with native tree species in accordance
with Section O, below, unless existing new tree growth is present.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 21 -
(4) In the area within the shoreland zone but outside of the shoreline buffer, selective cutting of
up to 40% of the volume of trees four inches or more DBH is allowed in any 10 year period.
Tree removal in conjunction with the development of permitted uses must be included in the
40% calculation. For the purposes of these standards volume may be considered to be
equivalent to basal area.
Cleared openings for any purpose, including but not limited to, principal and accessory
structures, driveways, lawns and sewage disposal areas, must not exceed in the aggregate,
25% of the lot area within the shoreland zone or 10,000 square feet, whichever is greater,
including land previously cleared. This provision applies to the portion of a lot within the
shoreland zone, including the shoreline buffer area, but does not apply to any General
Development District.
Notwithstanding the general requirement that clearing and removal of vegetation be
supervised by a licensed forester, clearing for construction of a new single-family residence
does not require supervision by a licensed forester if the home builder adheres to a maximum
limit of 25% of the lot area in the shoreland zone or 10,000 square feet, whichever is greater.
(5) Legally existing nonconforming cleared openings may be maintained, but must not be
enlarged, except as allowed by this Ordinance.
(6) Fields and other cleared openings which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees, or other
woody vegetation are regulated under the provisions of Section 15(N).
O. Hazard Trees, Storm-Damaged Trees, and Dead Tree Removal
(1) Hazard trees in the shoreland zone may be removed without a permit after consultation with
the Code Enforcement Officer if the following requirements are met:
(a) Within the shoreline buffer, if the removal of a hazard tree results in a cleared opening in
the tree canopy greater than 250 square feet, replacement with native tree species is
required, unless there is new tree growth already present. New tree growth must be as
near as practicable to where the hazard tree was removed and be at least two inches DBH.
If new growth is not present, then replacement trees must consist of native species and be
at least four feet in height, and be no less than two inches in diameter. Stumps may not be
removed.
(b) Outside of the shoreline buffer, when the removal of hazard trees exceeds 40% of the
volume of trees four inches or more DBH in any 10 year period, and/or results in cleared
openings exceeding 25% of the lot area within the shoreland zone, or 10,000 square feet,
whichever is greater, replacement with native tree species is required, unless there is new
tree growth already present. New tree growth must be as near as practicable to where the
hazard tree was removed and be at least two inches DBH. If new growth is not present,
then replacement trees must consist of native species and be at least two inches DBH.
(c) The removal of standing dead trees, resulting from natural causes, is permissible without
the need for replanting or a permit, as long as the removal does not result in the creation
of new lawn areas, or other permanently cleared areas, and stumps are not removed. For
the purposes of this provision dead trees are those trees that contain no foliage during the
growing season.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 22 -
(d) The Code Enforcement Officer may require the property owner to submit an evaluation
from a licensed forester or arborist before any hazard tree can be removed within the
shoreland zone.
(e) The Code Enforcement Officer may require more than a one–for-one replacement for
hazard trees removed that exceed eight inches DBH.
(2) Storm-damaged trees in the shoreland zone may be removed without a permit after
consultation with the Code Enforcement Officer if the following requirements are met:
(a) Within the shoreline buffer, when the removal of storm-damaged trees results in a cleared
opening in the tree canopy greater than 250 square feet, replanting is not required, but the
area is required to naturally revegetate, and the following requirements must be met:
(i) The area from which a storm-damaged tree is removed does not result in new lawn
areas, or other permanently cleared areas;
(ii) Stumps from the storm-damaged trees may not be removed;
(iii) Limbs damaged from a storm event may be pruned even if they extend beyond the
bottom one-third of the tree; and
(iv) If after one growing season, no natural regeneration or regrowth is present, replanting
of native tree seedlings or saplings is required at a density of one seedling per every
80 square feet of lost canopy.
(b) Outside of the shoreline buffer, if the removal of storm damaged trees exceeds 40% of
the volume of trees four inches or more DBH in any 10 year period, or results, in the
aggregate, in cleared openings exceeding 25% of the lot area within the shoreland zone or
10,000 square feet, whichever is greater, and no natural regeneration occurs within one
growing season, then native tree seedlings or saplings must be replanted on a one-for-one
basis.
(c) The Code Enforcement Officer may require the property owner to submit an evaluation
from a licensed forester or arborist before any hazard tree can be removed within the
shoreland zone.
P. Exemptions to Clearing and Vegetation Removal Requirements
The following activities are exempt from the clearing and vegetation removal standards set forth
in Section 15(N), provided that all other applicable requirements of this chapter are complied
with, and the removal of vegetation is limited to that which is necessary:
(1) The removal of vegetation that occurs at least once every two years for the maintenance of
legally existing areas that do not comply with the vegetation standards in this chapter, such as
but not limited to cleared openings in the canopy or fields. Such areas must not be enlarged,
except as allowed by this section. If any of these areas, due to lack of removal of vegetation
every two years, reverts back to primarily woody vegetation, the requirements of Section
15(N) apply;
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 23 -
(2) The removal of vegetation from the location of allowed structures or allowed uses, when the
shoreline setback requirements of section 15(B) are not applicable;
(3) The removal of vegetation from the location of public swimming areas associated with an
allowed public recreational facility;
(4) The removal of vegetation associated with allowed agricultural uses, provided best
management practices are utilized, and provided all requirements of section 15(N) are
complied with;
(5) The removal of vegetation associated with brownfields or voluntary response action program
(VRAP) projects provided that the removal of vegetation is necessary for remediation
activities to clean-up contamination on a site in any General Development district or other
equivalent zoning district approved by the Commissioner that is part of a state or federal
brownfields program or a voluntary response action program pursuant 38 M.R.S. section 343-
E, and that is located along:
(a) A coastal wetland; or
(b) A river that does not flow to a great pond classified as GPA pursuant to 38 M.R.S.
section 465-A.
(6) The removal of non-native invasive vegetation species, provided the following minimum
requirements are met:
(a) If removal of vegetation occurs via wheeled or tracked motorized equipment, the wheeled
or tracked motorized equipment is operated and stored at least 25 feet, horizontal
distance, from the shoreline, except that wheeled or tracked equipment may be operated
or stored on existing structural surfaces, such as pavement or gravel;
(b) Removal of vegetation within 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the shoreline occurs via
hand tools; and
(c) If applicable clearing and vegetation removal standards are exceeded due to the removal
of non-native invasive species vegetation, the area must be revegetated with native
species to achieve compliance.
(7) The removal of vegetation associated with emergency response activities conducted by the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
the U.S. Coast Guard, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the Maine or Federal Emergency
Management Agencies, or their agents.
Q. Revegetation Requirements
When revegetation is required in response to violations of the vegetation standards set forth in
Section 15(N), to address the removal of non-native invasive species of vegetation, or as a
mechanism to allow for development that may otherwise not be permissible due to the vegetation
standards, including removal of vegetation in conjunction with a shoreline stabilization project,
the revegation must comply with the following requirements.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 24 -
(1) The property owner must submit a revegetation plan, prepared with and signed by a qualified
professional, that describes revegetation activities and maintenance. The plan must include a
scaled site plan, depicting where vegetation was or is to be removed, where existing
vegetation is to remain, and where vegetation is to be planted, including a list of all
vegetation to be planted.
(2) Revegetation must occur along the same segment of shoreline and in the same area where
vegetation was removed and at a density comparable to the pre-existing vegetation, except
where a shoreline stabilization activity does not allow revegetation to occur in the same area
and at a density comparable to the pre-existing vegetation, in which case revegetation must
occur along the same segment of shoreline and as close as possible to the area where
vegetation was removed:
(3) If part of a permitted activity, revegetation must occur before the expiration of the permit. If
the activity or revegetation is not completed before the expiration of the permit, a new
revegetation plan must be submitted with any renewal or new permit application.
(4) Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for trees and saplings:
(a) All trees and saplings removed must be replaced with native noninvasive species;
(b) Replacement vegetation must at a minimum consist of saplings;
(c) If more than three trees or saplings are planted, then at least three different species must
be used;
(d) No one species is to make up 50% or more of the number of trees and saplings planted;
(e) If revegetation is required for a shoreline stabilization project, and it is not possible to
plant trees and saplings in the same area where trees or saplings were removed, then trees
or sapling must be planted in a location that effectively reestablishes the screening
between the shoreline and structures; and
(f) A survival rate of at least 80% of planted trees or saplings is required for a minimum five
year period.
(5) Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for woody vegetation and other
vegetation under three feet in height:
(a) All woody vegetation and vegetation under three feet in height must be replaced with
native noninvasive species of woody vegetation and vegetation under three feet in height
as applicable;
(b) Woody vegetation and vegetation under three feet in height must be planted in quantities
and variety sufficient to prevent erosion and provide for effective infiltration of
stormwater;
(c) If more than three woody vegetation plants are to be planted, then at least three different
species must be planted;
(d) No one species is to make up 50% or more of the number of planted woody vegetation
plants; and
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 25 -
(e) Survival of planted woody vegetation and vegetation under three feet in height must be
sufficient to remain in compliance with the standards contained within this chapter for a
minimum five year period.
(6) Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for ground vegetation and
ground cover:
(a) All ground vegetation and ground cover removed must be replaced with native
herbaceous vegetation in quantities and variety sufficient to prevent erosion and provide
for effective infiltration of stormwater;
(b) Where necessary due to a lack of sufficient ground cover, an area must be supplemented
with a minimum four inch depth of leaf mulch and/or bark mulch to prevent erosion and
provide for effective infiltration of stormwater; and
(c) Survival and functionality of ground vegetation and ground cover must be sufficient to
remain in compliance with the standards contained within this chapter for a minimum
five year period.
R. Erosion and Sedimentation Control
(1) All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or other similar activities which result
in unstabilized soil conditions and which require a permit also require a written soil erosion
and sedimentation control plan. The plan must reference and conform to the Maine Erosion
and Sedimentation Control Best Management Practices Handbook. The plan must be
submitted to the permitting authority for approval and must include, where applicable,
provisions for:
(a) Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
(b) Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt fencing or diversion ditches.
(c) Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or rip-rap.
(2) In order to minimize the potential for erosion, development is to be designed to fit with the
topography and soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be
required must be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours are to be followed as
closely as possible.
(3) Erosion and sedimentation control measures apply to all aspects of the proposed project
involving land disturbance, and must be in operation during all stages of the activity. The
amount of exposed soil at every phase of construction must be minimized to reduce the
potential for erosion.
(4) Any exposed ground area must be temporarily or permanently stabilized within one week
from the time it was last actively worked, by use of riprap, sod, seed, and mulch, or other
effective measures. In all cases permanent stabilization must occur within nine months of the
initial date of exposure. In addition:
(a) Where mulch is used, it must be applied at a rate of at least one bale per 500 square feet
and must be maintained until a catch of vegetation is established.
(b) Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable method may be
required to maintain the mulch cover.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 26 -
(c) Additional measures must be taken where necessary in order to avoid siltation into the
water. Such measures may include the use of staked hay bales and/or silt fences.
(5) Natural and man-made drainage ways and drainage outlets must be protected from erosion
from water flowing through them. Drainageways must be designed and constructed in order
to carry water from a 25 year storm or greater, and must be stabilized with vegetation or lined
with riprap.
S. Soils. All land uses are to be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or structures can
be established or maintained without causing adverse environmental impacts, including severe
erosion, mass soil movement, improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during or after
construction. Proposed uses requiring subsurface sewage disposal, and commercial or industrial
development and other similar intensive land uses, require a soils report based on an on-site
investigation and be prepared by state-certified professionals. Certified persons may include Maine
Certified Soil Scientists, Maine Registered Professional Engineers, Maine State Certified
Geologists and other persons who have training and experience in the recognition and evaluation
of soil properties. The report is to be based upon the analysis of the characteristics of the soil and
surrounding land and water areas, maximum ground water elevation, presence of ledge, drainage
conditions, and other pertinent data which the evaluator deems appropriate. The soils report must
include recommendations for a proposed use to counteract soil limitations where they exist.
T. Water Quality. No activity is allowed to deposit on or into the ground or discharge to the waters
of the State any pollutant that, by itself or in combination with other activities or substances, will
impair designated uses or the water classification of the water body, tributary stream, local
stream, or wetland.
U. Archaeological Site. Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil
disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, as determined by the permitting authority, must be submitted by the applicant to
the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment, at least 20 days prior to
action being taken by the permitting authority. The permitting authority must consider comments
received from the Commission prior to rendering a decision on the application.
16. Administration
A. Administering Bodies and Agents
(1) Code Enforcement Officer. A Code Enforcement Officer must be appointed or reappointed
annually by July 1st.
(2) Board of Appeals. A Board of Appeals must be created in accordance with the provisions of
30-A M.R.S. section 2691.
(3) Planning Board. A Planning Board must be created in accordance with the provisions of
State law.
B. Permits Required. After the effective date of this Ordinance no person may, without first
obtaining a permit, engage in any activity or use of land or structure requiring a permit in the
district in which such activity or use would occur; or expand, change, or replace an existing use
or structure; or renew a discontinued nonconforming use. A person who is issued a permit
pursuant to this Ordinance must have a copy of the permit on site while the work authorized by
the permit is performed.
(1) A permit is not required for the replacement of an existing road culvert as long as:
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 27 -
(a) The replacement culvert is not more than 25% longer than the culvert being replaced;
(b) The replacement culvert is not longer than 75 feet; and
(c) Adequate erosion control measures are taken to prevent sedimentation of the water, and
the crossing does not block fish passage in the watercourse.
(2) A permit is not required for an archaeological excavation as long as the excavation is
conducted by an archaeologist listed on the State Historic Preservation Officer’s Level 1 or
Level 2 approved list, and unreasonable erosion and sedimentation is prevented by means of
adequate and timely temporary and permanent stabilization measures.
(3) Any permit required by this Ordinance is in addition to any other permit required by other
law or ordinance.
C. Permit Application
(1) Every applicant for a permit must submit a written application, including a scaled site plan,
on a form provided by the Town of Hampden to either the Code Enforcement Officer or the
Planning Board as stipulated in Section 14.
(2) All applications must be signed by an owner or individual who can show evidence of right,
title or interest in the property or by an agent, representative, tenant, or contractor of the
owner with authorization from the owner to apply for a permit hereunder, certifying that the
information in the application is complete and correct.
(3) All applications must be dated, and the town staff is to note upon each application the date
and time of its receipt.
(4) If the property is not served by a public sewer, a valid plumbing permit or a completed
application for a plumbing permit, including the site evaluation approved by the Local
Plumbing Inspector, must be submitted whenever the nature of the proposed structure or use
would require the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system.
(5) Other Information as Required. The Code Enforcement Officer and the Planning Board have
the authority to require additional information which may reasonably be necessary for them
to make their decision and inform the facts of the application.
D. Procedure for Administering Permits. For permits granted by the Code Enforcement Officer,
the application must be acted upon (approved, approved with conditions, or denied) within 35
days of the date of receiving a written application, unless the applicant agrees to an extension to
correct any deficiencies identified by the Code Enforcement Officer. For permits granted by the
Planning Board, the application must be acted upon within 90 days of the date of receiving a
written application, which time frame includes the holding of a public hearing in the event the
Planning Board determines the proposed activity would cause disturbances significant enough
that a public hearing is necessary.
The applicant has the burden of proving that the proposed land use activity is in conformity with
the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 28 -
For permits granted by the Planning Board, the Board may approve an application or approve it
with conditions only if it makes a positive finding based on the information presented that the
proposed use:
(1) Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
(2) Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to surface waters;
(3) Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
(4) Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird or other wildlife
habitat;
(5) Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points of access to inland and coastal
waters;
(6) Will protect archaeological and historic resources as designated in the comprehensive plan;
(7) Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development and use; and
(8) Is in conformance with the provisions of Section 15, Land Use Standards.
If a permit is either denied or approved with conditions, the reasons as well as conditions must be
stated in writing. No approval is to be granted for an application involving a structure if the
structure would be located in an unapproved subdivision or would violate any other local
ordinance, regulation or statute administered by the Town of Hampden.
E. Special Exceptions. In addition to the criteria specified in Section 16(D) above, excepting
structure setback requirements, the Planning Board may approve a permit for a single family
residential structure in a Resource Protection District provided that the applicant demonstrates
that all of the following conditions are met:
(1) There is no location on the property, other than a location within the Resource Protection
District, where the structure can be built.
(2) The lot on which the structure is proposed is undeveloped and was established and recorded
in the registry of deeds of the county in which the lot is located before the adoption of the
Resource Protection District.
(3) All proposed buildings, sewage disposal systems and other improvements are:
(a) Located on natural ground slopes of less than 20%; and
(b) Located outside the floodway along rivers and artificially formed great ponds along rivers
and outside the velocity zone in areas subject to tides, based on detailed flood insurance
studies and as delineated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's Flood
Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps; all buildings, including
basements, are elevated at least one foot above the 100-year floodplain elevation; and the
development is otherwise in compliance with the Town of Hampden, Maine Floodplain
Management Ordinance.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 29 -
If the floodway is not shown on the Federal Emergency Management Agency Maps, it is
deemed to be one-half the width of the 100-year floodplain.
(4) The total footprint, including cantilevered or similar overhanging extensions, of all principal
and accessory structures is limited to a maximum of 1,500 square feet. This limitation must
not be altered by variance.
(5) All structures, except functionally water-dependent structures, are set back from the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland to the greatest
practical extent, but not less than 75 feet, horizontal distance. In determining the greatest
practical extent, the Planning Board is to consider the depth of the lot, the slope of the land,
the potential for soil erosion, the type and amount of vegetation to be removed, the proposed
building site's elevation in regard to the floodplain, and its proximity to moderate-value and
high-value wetlands.
F. Expiration of Permit. Permits expire one year from the date of issuance if a substantial start is
not made in construction or in the use of the property during that period. If a substantial start is
made within one year of the issuance of the permit, the applicant has one additional year to
complete the project, at which time the permit expires.
G. Installation of Public Utility Service. A public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility
company of any kind may not install services to any new structure located in the shoreland zone
unless written authorization attesting to the validity and currency of all local permits required under
this or any previous Ordinance has been issued by the appropriate Town officials or other written
arrangements have been made between the Town officials and the utility.
H. Appeals
(1) Powers and Duties of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals is governed by the
provisions of the Town of Hampden Board of Appeals Ordinance including but not limited to
filing deadlines, application requirements, fees, appeal procedures, decisions of the Board of
Appeals and subsequent appeals to Superior Court. The Board of Appeals has the following
powers with regard to this Ordinance:
(a) Administrative Appeals: All administrative appeals are subject to the provisions of the
Town of Hampden Board of Appeals Ordinance including but not limited to filing
deadlines, application requirements, fees, appeal procedures, decisions of the Board of
Appeals and subsequent appeals to Superior Court. The Board of Appeals will hear and
decide administrative appeals. To hear and decide administrative appeals, on an appellate
basis, where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by, or failure to act by, the Planning Board in
the administration of this Ordinance; and to hear and decide administrative appeals on a de
novo basis where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement
Officer in his or her review of and action on a permit application under this Ordinance. Any
order, requirement, decision or determination made, or failure to act, in the enforcement of
this ordinance is not appealable to the Board of Appeals.
(b) Variance Appeals: To authorize variances upon appeal, within the limitations set forth in
this Ordinance and the Town of Hampden Board of Appeals Ordinance.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 30 -
(2) Variance Appeals. All variance appeals are subject to the provisions of the Town of Hampden
Board of Appeals Ordinance including but not limited to filing deadlines, application
requirements, fees, appeal procedures, decisions of the Board of Appeals and subsequent
appeals to Superior Court. The Board of Appeals will hear and decide variance appeals. A
variance from the provisions of the Ordinance may only be granted by the Board of Appeals in
accordance with the following conditions:
(a) Variances may be granted only from dimensional requirements including, but not limited to,
minimum lot width, maximum structure height, percent of lot coverage, shoreline
setback requirements, lot area, and shore frontage.
(b) Variances must not be granted for establishment of any uses otherwise prohibited by this
Ordinance.
(c) The Board must not grant a variance unless it finds that:
(i) The proposed structure or use would meet the provisions of Section 15 except for the
specific provision which has created the nonconformity and from which relief is
sought; and
(ii) The strict application of the terms of this Ordinance would result in undue hardship.
The term "undue hardship" means:
a. That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is
granted;
b. That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and
not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
c. That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality;
and
d. That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
(d) Notwithstanding Section 16(H)(2)(c)(ii) above, the Code Enforcement Officer may grant a
variance to an owner of a residential dwelling for the purpose of making that dwelling
accessible to a person with a disability who resides in or regularly uses the dwelling,
pursuant to Section 6.2.2.3.2 of the Hampden Zoning Ordinance. Any variance granted
under this subsection is restricted solely to the installation of equipment or the construction
of structures necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling by the person with the
disability. The CEO may impose conditions on the variance, including limiting the variance
to the duration of the disability or to the time that the person with the disability lives in the
dwelling. The term “structures necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling"
includes railing, wall or roof systems necessary for the safety or effectiveness of the
structure. Any permit issued pursuant to this subsection is subject to Sections 16(H)(2)(f)
and 16(H)(4)(b)(iv) below.
(e) The Board of Appeals must limit any variances granted as strictly as possible in order to
ensure conformance with the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance to the greatest
extent possible, and in doing so may impose such conditions to a variance as it deems
necessary. The party receiving the variance must comply with any conditions imposed.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 31 -
(f) A copy of each variance request, including the application and all supporting information
supplied by the applicant, must be forwarded by Town officials to the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection at least 20 days prior to action by the Board of
Appeals. Any comments received from the Commissioner prior to the action by the Board
of Appeals must be made part of the record and are to be taken into consideration by the
Board of Appeals.
(3) Administrative Appeals
When the Board of Appeals reviews a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer the Board of
Appeals will hold a “de novo” hearing. At this time the Board may receive and consider new
evidence and testimony, be it oral or written. When acting in a “de novo” capacity the Board of
Appeals will hear and decide the matter afresh, undertaking its own independent analysis of
evidence and the law, and reaching its own decision.
When the Board of Appeals hears a decision of the Planning Board, it will hold an appellate
hearing, and may reverse the decision of the Planning Board only upon finding that the decision
was contrary to specific provisions of the Ordinance or contrary to the facts presented to the
Planning Board. The Board of Appeals may only review the record of the proceedings before
the Planning Board. The Board of Appeals must not receive or consider any evidence which
was not presented to the Planning Board, but the Board of Appeals may receive and consider
written or oral arguments. If the Board of Appeals determines that the record of the Planning
Board proceedings are inadequate, the Board of Appeals may remand the matter to the Planning
Board for additional fact finding.
(4) Appeal Procedure
(a) Making an Appeal
(i) An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an
aggrieved party from any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning
Board, except for enforcement-related matters as described in Section 16(H)(1)(a)
above. Such an appeal must be taken within 30 days of the date of the official, written
decision appealed from, and not otherwise, except that the Board, upon a showing of
good cause, may waive the 30 day requirement.
(ii) Applications for appeals must be made by filing with the Board of Appeals a written
notice of appeal which includes:
a. A concise written statement indicating what relief is requested and why the appeal
or variance should be granted.
b. A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of existing buildings and
structures and other physical features of the lot pertinent to the relief sought.
(iii) Upon receiving an application for an administrative appeal or a variance, the Code
Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as appropriate, must transmit to the Board of
Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the decision appealed from.
(iv) The Board of Appeals must hold a public hearing on an administrative appeal or a
request for a variance within 35 days of its receipt of a complete written application,
unless this time period is extended by the parties.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 32 -
(b) Decision by Board of Appeals
(i) A majority of the full voting membership of the Board constitutes a quorum for the
purpose of deciding an appeal.
(ii) The person filing the appeal has the burden of proof.
(iii) The Board must decide all administrative appeals and variance appeals within 35 days
after the close of the hearing, and must issue a written decision on all appeals.
(iv) The Board of Appeals must state the reasons and basis for its decision, including a
statement of the facts found and conclusions reached by the Board. The Board must
cause written notice of its decision to be mailed or hand-delivered to the applicant and
to the Department of Environmental Protection within seven days of the Board’s
decision. Copies of written decisions of the Board of Appeals must be given to the
Planning Board, Code Enforcement Officer, and the municipal officers.
(5) Appeal to Superior Court. Except as provided by 30-A M.R.S. section 2691(3)(F), any
aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings before the Board of Appeals
may take an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State laws within 45 days from the
date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
(6) Reconsideration. In accordance with 30-A M.R.S. section 2691(3)(F), the Board of Appeals
may reconsider any decision within 45 days of its prior decision. A request to the Board to
reconsider a decision must be filed within 10 days of the decision that is being reconsidered. A
vote to reconsider and the action taken on that reconsideration must occur and be completed
within 45 days of the date of the vote on the original decision. Reconsideration of a decision
requires a positive vote of the majority of the Board members originally voting on the decision,
and proper notification to the landowner, petitioner, planning board, code enforcement officer,
and other parties of interest, including abutters and those who testified at the original
hearing(s). The Board may conduct additional hearings and receive additional evidence and
testimony.
Appeal of a reconsidered decision to Superior Court must be made within 15 days after the
decision on reconsideration.
I. Enforcement
(1) Nuisances. Any violation of this Ordinance is deemed to be a nuisance.
(2) Code Enforcement Officer
(a) It is the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance. If the Code Enforcement Officer finds that any provision of this Ordinance is
being violated, he or she must notify in writing the person responsible for such violation,
indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it,
including discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures, or work being
done, removal of illegal buildings or structures, and abatement of nuisance conditions. A
copy of such notices must be submitted to the municipal officers and be maintained as a
permanent record.
(b) The Code Enforcement Officer must conduct on-site inspections to ensure compliance with
all applicable laws and conditions attached to permit approvals. The Code Enforcement
Officer must also investigate all complaints of alleged violations of this Ordinance.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 33 -
(c) The Code Enforcement Officer must keep a complete record of all essential transactions of
the office, including applications submitted, permits granted or denied, variances granted or
denied, revocation actions, revocation of permits, appeals, court actions, violations
investigated, violations found, and fees collected.
(3) Legal Actions. When the above action does not result in the correction or abatement of the
violation or nuisance condition, the Municipal Officers, upon notice from the Code
Enforcement Officer, are hereby directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings, either
legal or equitable, including seeking injunctions of violations and the imposition of fines, that
may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance in the name of the
municipality. The municipal officers, or their authorized agent, are hereby authorized to enter
into administrative consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating violations of this
Ordinance and recovering fines without Court action. Such agreements must not allow an
illegal structure or use to continue unless there is clear and convincing evidence that the illegal
structure or use was constructed or conducted as a direct result of erroneous advice given by an
authorized municipal official and there is no evidence that the owner acted in bad faith, or
unless the removal of the structure or use will result in a threat or hazard to public health and
safety or will result in substantial environmental damage.
(4) Fines. Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner's agent or a
contractor, who violates any provision or requirement of this Ordinance is to be penalized in
accordance with 30-A, M.R.S. section 4452.
17. Definitions
Accessory structure or use - a use or structure which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use
or structure. Accessory uses, when aggregated, must not subordinate the principal use of the lot. A deck
or similar extension of the principal structure or a garage attached to the principal structure by a roof or
a common wall is considered part of the principal structure.
Aggrieved party - an owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly affected by the granting or
denial of a permit or variance under this Ordinance; a person whose land abuts land for which a permit
or variance has been granted; or any other person or group of persons who have suffered particularized
injury as a result of the granting or denial of such permit or variance.
Agriculture - the production, keeping or maintenance for sale or lease of plants or animals, including,
but not limited to, forages and sod crops, grains and seed crops, dairy animals and dairy products, poultry
and poultry products, livestock, fruits and vegetables and ornamental green-house products. Agriculture
does not include forest management, timber harvesting activities, or cultivation of
marijuana (medical or otherwise).
Aquaculture - the growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater, estuarine, or marine plant or
animal species.
Basal Area - the area of cross-section of a tree stem at 4.5 feet above ground level and inclusive of
bark.
Basement - any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of six feet or more and having more
than 50% of its volume below the existing ground level.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 34 -
Boat Launching Facility - a facility designed primarily for the launching and landing of watercraft,
and which may include an access ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for vehicles and trailers.
Bureau of Forestry – State of Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry, Bureau
of Forestry.
Campground - any area or tract of land to accommodate two or more parties in temporary living
quarters, including, but not limited to tents, recreational vehicles or other shelters.
Canopy – the more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a wooded area.
Coastal wetland - all tidal and subtidal lands; all lands with vegetation present that is tolerant of salt
water and occurs primarily in a salt water or estuarine habitat; and any swamp, marsh, bog, beach, flat
or other contiguous low land that is subject to tidal action during the highest tide level for the year in
which an activity is proposed as identified in tide tables published by the National Ocean Service.
Coastal wetlands may include portions of coastal sand dunes. In Hampden, this includes the Penobscot
River.
Commercial use - the use of land, buildings, or structures, other than a "home occupation" as defined
below, the intent and result of which activity is the production of income from the buying and selling
of goods and/or services except for any business related to marijuana (including medical marijuana) or
the rental of dwelling units or other residential buildings.
Conservation Plan – a plan which sets forth conservation practices to meet both natural resource
needs and the landowner’s land management goals, including methods and best practices for the
agricultural activity proposed within the shoreland zone, specifically dealing with the tillage of the soil
(refer to §15.M(3)).
DBH – Diameter at Breast Height, the diameter of a standing tree measured 4.5 feet from ground level
at the base of the tree.
Development – a change in land use involving alteration of the land, water or vegetation, or the
addition or alteration of structures or other construction not naturally occurring.
Dimensional requirements - numerical standards relating to spatial relationships including but not
limited to setback, lot area, shore frontage and height.
Disability - any disability, infirmity, malformation, disfigurement, congenital defect or mental
condition caused by bodily injury, accident, disease, birth defect, environmental conditions or illness;
and also includes the physical or mental condition of a person which constitutes a substantial
handicap as determined by a physician or in the case of mental handicap, by a psychiatrist or
psychologist, as well as any other health or sensory impairment which requires special education,
vocational rehabilitation or related services.
Driveway - a vehicular access-way less than 500 feet in length serving a maximum of two singlefamily
dwellings.
Emergency operations - operations conducted for the public health, safety or general welfare, such
as protection of resources from immediate destruction or loss, law enforcement, and operations to
rescue human beings, property and livestock from the threat of destruction or injury.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 35 -
Essential services - gas, electrical or communication facilities; steam, fuel, electric power or water
transmission or distribution lines, towers and related equipment; telephone cables or lines, poles and
related equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry or other similar pipelines; municipal sewage lines, collection
or supply systems; and associated storage tanks. Such systems may include towers, poles, wires,
mains, drains, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarms and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and
similar accessories, but does not include service drops or buildings which are necessary for the
furnishing of such services.
Expansion of a structure - an increase in the footprint of a structure, including all extensions such
as, but not limited to: attached decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
Expansion of use - the addition of one or more months to a use's operating season; or the use of more
footprint of a structure or ground area devoted to a particular use.
Family - means an individual occupying a single dwelling unit, or a group of two or more persons
occupying a single dwelling unit and living together as a single housekeeping unit, including the sharing
of common living, sleeping, cooking and eating facilities. When occupancy of a dwelling unit is by a
group of two or more persons, the group of persons occupying the dwelling must either be:
a. Related by blood, adoption, domestic partnership, or marriage; or
b. Comprised of two persons who are not related by blood, domestic partnership, adoption or
marriage, and any children related to either or both of them by blood, adoption or marriage;
c. Comprised of persons, whether or not related to each other by blood, domestic partnership,
adoption or marriage, but not to exceed four unrelated persons. Family does not include a
group of unrelated persons occupying a boarding home, rooming house, hotel/motel, tourist
home or inn.
d. A Community Living Arrangement as defined by Title 30-A, Section 4357-A.
NOTE: For the purposes hereof, the number of unrelated persons occupying a dwelling unit is
calculated as follows: Any persons related by blood, adoption or marriage plus one unrelated
person is considered to constitute a total of two unrelated persons, and each additional unrelated
person is to be added to determine the total number of unrelated persons occupying the dwelling
unit. By way of example, two or more related persons occupying a dwelling unit combined with
two unrelated persons occupying the dwelling unit yields a total of three unrelated persons
occupying the dwelling unit.
Floodway - the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved
in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than the height designated in the Hampden Floodplain Management Ordinance.
Floor area - the sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by exterior walls.
Footprint - the entire area of ground covered by the structure(s) on a lot, including but not limited to
cantilevered or similar overhanging extensions, as well as unenclosed structures, such as patios and decks.
Forested wetland - a freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six meters tall
(approximately 20 feet) or taller.
Foundation - the supporting substructure of a building or other structure, excluding wooden sills and
post supports, but including basements, slabs, frostwalls, or other base consisting of concrete, block,
brick or similar material.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 36 -
Freshwater wetland - freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, other than forested
wetlands, which:
(1) are 10 or more contiguous acres; or less than 10 contiguous acres and are adjacent to a
surface water body, excluding any river, stream or brook, such that in a natural state, the
combined surface area is in excess of 10 acres; and
(2) are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration
sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils.
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not conform to
the criteria of this definition.
Functionally water-dependent uses - those uses that require, for their primary purpose, location on
submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location in, coastal or inland waters and that
cannot be located away from these waters. The uses include, but are not limited to, commercial and
recreational fishing and boating facilities, finfish and shellfish processing, fish-related storage and
retail and wholesale fish marketing facilities, waterfront dock and port facilities, shipyards and boat
building facilities, marinas, navigation aids, basins and channels, shoreline structures necessary for
erosion control purposes, industrial uses dependent upon water-borne transportation or requiring large
volumes of cooling or processing water that cannot reasonably be located or operated at an inland
site, and uses that primarily provide general public access to coastal or inland waters. Recreational
boat storage buildings are not considered to be a functionally water-dependent use.
Great pond - any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess of 10
acres, and any inland body of water artificially formed or increased which has a surface area in excess
of 30 acres except for the purposes of this Ordinance, where the artificially formed or increased
inland body of water is completely surrounded by land held by a single owner. In Hampden, these are
Ben Annis Pond, Hammond Pond, Hermon Pond, and Patten Pond.
Great pond classified GPA - any great pond classified GPA, pursuant to 38 M.R.S. Section 465-A.
This classification includes some, but not all impoundments of rivers that are defined as great ponds.
In Hampden, these are Ben Annis Pond, Hammond Pond, Hermon Pond, and Patten Pond.
Ground cover – small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the partially decayed organic
matter of the forest floor.
Hazard tree - a tree with a structural defect, combination of defects, or disease resulting in a
structural defect that under the normal range of environmental conditions at the site exhibits a high
probability of failure and loss of a major structural component of the tree in a manner that will strike a
target. A normal range of environmental conditions does not include meteorological anomalies, such
as, but not limited to: hurricanes; hurricane-force winds; tornados; microbursts; or significant ice
storm events. Hazard trees also include those trees that pose a serious and imminent risk to bank
stability. A target is the area where personal injury or property damage could occur if the tree or a
portion of the tree fails. Targets include roads, driveways, parking areas, structures, campsites, and
any other developed area where people frequently gather and linger.
Height of a structure – the vertical distance between the mean original (prior to construction) grade
at the downhill side of the structure and the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys,
steeples, antennas, and similar appurtenances that have no floor area.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 37 -
Home occupation - The subordinate use of a dwelling unit or structure accessory to a dwelling unit
for gainful employment involving the manufacture, provision or sale of goods and/or services. See the
Town of Hampden Zoning Ordinance definition of “Use of Residence for Business Purposes” and
§4.10.
Increase in nonconformity of a structure - any change in a structure or property which causes
further deviation from the dimensional standard(s) creating the nonconformity such as, but not limited
to, reduction in water body, tributary stream or wetland setback distance, increase in lot coverage, or
increase in height of a structure. Property changes or structure expansions which either meet the
dimensional standard or which cause no further increase in the linear extent of nonconformance of the
existing structure are not be considered to increase nonconformity. For example, there is no increase
in nonconformity with the setback requirement for water bodies, wetlands, or tributary streams if the
expansion extends no further into the required setback area than does any portion of the existing
nonconforming structure. Hence, a structure may be expanded laterally provided that the expansion
extends no closer to the water body, tributary stream, or wetland than the closest portion of the
existing structure from that water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Included in this allowance are
expansions which in-fill irregularly shaped structures.
Individual private campsite - an area of land which is not associated with a campground, but which
is developed for repeated camping by only one group not to exceed 10 individuals and which involves
site improvements which may include but not be limited to a gravel pad, parking area, fire place, or
tent platform.
Industrial - The assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packaging or processing of goods,
or the extraction of minerals, excluding any business related to marijuana or medical marijuana.
Institutional - a non-profit or quasi-public use, or institution such as a church, library, public or
private school, hospital, or municipally owned or operated building, structure or land used for public
purposes.
Licensed Forester - a forester licensed under 32 M.R.S. Section 5515.
Local stream - “Local stream” means a channel between defined banks created by the action of
surface water, which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial vegetation or by the presence of a bed,
devoid of topsoil, containing waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material or bedrock. This
definition does not include the term "stream" or tributary stream as defined elsewhere in this
Ordinance, and in Hampden, Maine only applies to Baker Brook, Baker Brook Tributary 1, Baker
Brook Tributary 2, Cold Brook, Reeds Brook, Sucker Brook and Weber Brook. The only portion of
these Local streams that are regulated by this Ordinance are those portions within the shoreland zone
of a regulated waterbody or stream.
Lot area - The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, minus land below the normal
high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and areas beneath roads serving more
than two lots.
Marina - a business establishment having frontage on navigable water and, as its principal use,
providing for hire offshore moorings or docking facilities for boats, and which may also provide
accessory services such as boat and related sales, boat repair and construction, indoor and outdoor
storage of boats and marine equipment, bait and tackle shops and marine fuel service facilities.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 38 -
Market value - the estimated price a property will bring in the open market and under prevailing
market conditions in a sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer, both conversant with the
property and with prevailing general price levels.
Mineral exploration - hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of determining the nature or
extent of mineral resources which create minimal disturbance to the land and which include
reasonable measures to restore the land to its original condition.
Mineral extraction - any operation within any 12 month period which removes more than 100 cubic
yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, rock, peat, or other like material from its natural
location and to transport the product removed, away from the extraction site.
Minimum lot width - the closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot. When only two lot lines
extend into the shoreland zone, both lot lines are considered to be side lot lines.
Multi-unit residential - a residential structure containing three or more residential dwelling units.
Native – indigenous to the local forests.
Nonconforming condition – nonconforming lot, structure or use which is allowed solely because it
was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendment took effect.
Nonconforming lot - a single lot of record which, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this Ordinance, does not meet the area, frontage, or width requirements of the district in which it is
located.
Nonconforming structure - a structure which does not meet any one or more of the following
dimensional requirements; setback, height, lot coverage or footprint, but which is allowed solely
because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Nonconforming use - use of buildings, structures, premises, land or parts thereof which is not
allowed in the district in which it is situated, but which is allowed to remain solely because it was in
lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Non-native invasive species of vegetation - species of vegetation listed by the Maine Department of
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry as being invasive in Maine ecosystems and not native to
Maine ecosystems.
Normal high-water line (non-tidal waters) - that line which is apparent from visible markings,
changes in the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation, and
which distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial land. Areas
contiguous with rivers and great ponds that support non-forested wetland vegetation and hydric soils
and that are at the same or lower elevation as the water level of the river or great pond during the
period of normal high-water are considered part of the river or great pond.
Outlet stream - any perennial or intermittent stream, as shown on the most recent highest resolution
version of the national hydrography dataset available from the United States Geological Survey on
the website of the United States Geological Survey or the national map, that flows from a freshwater
wetland.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 39 -
Person - an individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality, trust, estate, partnership,
association, two or more individuals having a joint or common interest, or other legal entity.
Principal structure - a structure other than one which is used for purposes wholly incidental or
accessory to the use of another structure or use on the same lot.
Principal use - a use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory to another use on the
same lot.
Public facility - any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings, property, recreation areas, and
roads, which are owned, leased, or otherwise operated, or funded by a governmental body or public
entity.
Recent floodplain soils - the following soil series as described and identified by the National
Cooperative Soil Survey:
Alluvial Charles Cornish Fryeburg Hadley
Limerick Lovewell Medomak Ondawa Podunk
Rumney Saco Suncook Sunday Winooski
Recreational facility - a place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time
activities, and other customary and usual recreational activities, excluding boat launching facilities.
Recreational vehicle - a vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle designed to be towed, and designed for
temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons, and which may include a pick-up
camper, travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and motor home. In order to be considered as a vehicle
and not as a structure, the unit must remain with its tires on the ground, and must be registered with
the State Division of Motor Vehicles.
Replacement system - a system intended to replace: 1.) an existing system which is either
malfunctioning or being upgraded with no significant change of design flow or use of the structure, or
2.) any existing overboard wastewater discharge.
Residential dwelling unit - a room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use as
permanent, seasonal, or temporary living quarters for only one family at a time, and containing
cooking, sleeping and toilet facilities. The term includes mobile homes and rental units that contain
cooking, sleeping, and toilet facilities regardless of the time-period rented. Recreational vehicles are
not residential dwelling units.
Riprap - rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least six inches in diameter, used for erosion control and
soil stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two units horizontal to one unit vertical or less.
River - a free-flowing body of water including its associated floodplain wetlands from that point at
which it provides drainage for a watershed of 25 square miles to its mouth. In Hampden this includes
the Souadabscook Stream and the West Branch Souadabscook Stream downstream of its confluence
with Brown Brook. Note, the Penobscot River is classified as a coastal wetland under Shoreland
Zoning.
Road - a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel, asphalt, or other surfacing
material constructed for or created by the repeated passage of motorized vehicles, excluding a
driveway as defined.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 40 -
Salt marsh - Areas of coastal wetland (most often along coastal bays) that support salt tolerant
species, and where at average high tide during the growing season, the soil is irregularly inundated by
tidal waters. The predominant species is saltmarsh cordgrass (Spartina alterniflora). More open areas
often support widgeon grass, eelgrass, and Sago pondweed.
Salt meadow - Areas of a coastal wetland that support salt tolerant plant species bordering the
landward side of salt marshes or open coastal water, where the soil is saturated during the growing
season but which is rarely inundated by tidal water. Indigenous plant species include salt meadow
cordgrass (Spartina patens) and black rush; common threesquare occurs in fresher areas.
Sapling - a tree species that is less than two inches DBH.
Seedling - a young tree species that is less than 4.5 feet in height.
Service corridor - the strip of land in which a linear utility or essential service is located.
Service drop - any utility line extension which does not cross or run beneath any portion of a water
body provided that in the case of electric service, the placement of wires and/or the installation of
utility poles is located entirely upon the premises of the customer requesting service or upon a
roadway right-of-way and the total length of the extension is less than 1,000 feet; and in the case of
telephone service, the extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation of telephone
wires to existing utility poles, or the extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or
placement underground is less than 1,000 feet in length. Utility extensions that don’t meet this
definition are considered to be “Essential Services” in Sections 14 and 15K.
Setback - the nearest horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of a water body or tributary
stream, or upland edge of a wetland, to the nearest part of a structure, road, parking space or other
regulated object or area.
Shore frontage - the length of a lot bordering on a water body or wetland measured in a straight line
between the intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline.
Shoreland zone - the land area located within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water
line of any great pond or river; within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a coastal
wetland, including all areas affected by tidal action; within 250 feet of the upland edge of a
freshwater wetland; or within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream.
Shoreline – the normal high-water line or upland edge of a freshwater or coastal wetland.
Shoreline Buffer – the strip of land extending 100 feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal
high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, or
within a strip extending 75 feet, horizontal distance, from any other water body, tributary stream, or
the upland edge of a wetland.
Significant River Segments - See 38 M.R.S. section 437. (Note, there are none in Hampden.)
Storm-damaged tree - a tree that has been uprooted, blown down, is lying on the ground, or that
remains standing and is damaged beyond the point of recovery as the result of a storm event.
Stream - a free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond or the confluence of two
perennial streams as depicted on the most recent , highest resolution version of the national
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 41 -
hydrography dataset available from the United States Geological Survey on the website of the United
States Geological Survey or the national map to the point where the stream becomes a river or where
the stream meets the shoreland zone of another water body or wetland. When a stream meets the
shoreland zone of a water body or wetland and a channel forms downstream of the water body or
wetland as an outlet, that channel is also a stream. In Hampden, this includes the West Branch of the
Souadabscook upstream of the confluence with Brown Brook, Brown Brook downstream of the
confluence with the unnamed brook located in the eastern portion of parcel 01-0-043, Patten Stream,
Shaw Brook downstream of the confluence with the unnamed brook located behind Dysarts gas
station on Coldbrook Road (parcel 09-0-041), and the unnamed stream in the southwestern corner of
Hampden from the Winterport boundary downstream to the Newburgh boundary.
Structure – anything temporarily or permanently located, built, constructed or erected for the
support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods or property of any kind or anything
constructed or erected on or in the ground. The term includes structures temporarily or permanently
located, such as decks, patios, and satellite dishes. Structure does not include fences; poles and wiring
and other aerial equipment normally associated with service drops, including guy wires and guy
anchors; subsurface wastewater (sewage) disposal systems as defined in Title 30-A, section 4201,
subsection 5; geothermal heat exchange wells as defined in Title 32, section 4700-E, subsection 3-C;
or wells or water wells as defined in Title 32, section 4700-E, subsection 8.
Substantial start - completion of 30% of a permitted structure or use measured as a percentage of
estimated total cost.
Subsurface sewage disposal system – any system designed to dispose of waste or wastewater on or
beneath the surface of the earth; includes, but is not limited to: septic tanks; disposal fields;
grandfathered cesspools; holding tanks; pretreatment filter, piping, or any other fixture, mechanism,
or apparatus used for those purposes; does not include any discharge system licensed under 38 M.R.S.
section 414, any surface wastewater disposal system, or any municipal or quasi-municipal sewer or
wastewater treatment system.
Sustained slope - a change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is substantially
maintained or exceeded throughout the measured area.
Tidal waters – all waters affected by tidal action during the highest annual tide.
Timber harvesting - the cutting and removal of timber for the primary purpose of selling or
processing forest products. “Timber harvesting” does not include the cutting or removal of vegetation
within the shoreland zone when associated with any other land use activities. The cutting or removal
of trees in the shoreland zone on a lot that has less than two acres within the shoreland zone is not be
considered timber harvesting. Such cutting or removal of trees is to be regulated pursuant to Section
15 (N), Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting.
Tree - a woody perennial plant with a well-defined trunk(s) at least two inches DBH, with a more or
less definite crown, and reaching a height of at least 10 feet at maturity.
Tributary stream – means a channel between defined banks created by the action of surface water,
which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial vegetation or by the presence of a bed, devoid of
topsoil, containing waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material or bedrock; and which is
connected hydrologically with other water bodies. “Tributary stream” does not include rills or gullies
forming because of accelerated erosion in disturbed soils where the natural vegetation cover has been
removed by human activity. This definition does not include the term "stream" as defined elsewhere
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 42 -
in this Ordinance, and only applies to that portion of the tributary stream located within the shoreland
zone of the receiving water body or wetland.
Upland edge of a wetland - the boundary between upland and wetland. For purposes of a coastal
wetland, this boundary is the line formed by the landward limits of the salt tolerant vegetation and/or
the highest annual tide level, including all areas affected by tidal action. For purposes of a freshwater
wetland, the upland edge is formed where the soils are not saturated for a duration sufficient to
support wetland vegetation; or where the soils support the growth of wetland vegetation, but such
vegetation is dominated by woody stems that are six meters (approximately 20 feet) tall or taller.
Vegetation - all live trees, shrubs, and other plants including without limitation, trees both over and
under four inches DBH.
Velocity zone - an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of the
primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from
storms or seismic sources. There are no velocity zones in Hampden.
Volume of a structure - the volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by roof and fixed exterior
walls as measured from the exterior faces of these walls and roof.
Water body - any great pond, river or stream.
Water crossing - any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a river, stream,
tributary stream, or wetland whether under, through, or over the water or wetland. Such projects
include but may not be limited to roads, fords, bridges, culverts, water lines, sewer lines, and cables
as well as maintenance work on these crossings. This definition includes crossings for timber
harvesting equipment and related activities.
Wetland - a freshwater or coastal wetland.
Woody Vegetation - live trees or woody, non-herbaceous shrubs, including saplings and seedlings as
defined in this ordinance.
Orrington
Hermon
Winterport
Newburgh
Carmel
Bangor
Bucksport
Brewer
Main
Western
Kennebec
Carmel
Interstate 95
Coldbrook
US Highway 202
Old County
Mayo
Interstate 95
Penobscot River
Souadabscook
Stream
Brown Brook
Reeds
Brook
Sucker Brook
WestB ranch Souadabscook Stream
ShawBrook
Ward Stream
Hermon Pond
Hammond Pond
Patten Pond
Ben Annis Pond
Exhibit 1: Waterbodies and Streams Regulated by the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance - Hampden ME
Key
Rivers & Streams
River
Stream
Not Regulated - Perennial
Not Regulated - Intermittent
The segment Stream betw eoef nS Houearmdaonb sacnodok FHlaowmimngo ntdo Pao Gndrse aist aP o"Rndiv eGr PA"
TShtree aremm ias inad "eRri voefr "Souadabscook
TWhee sste Bgrmanecnht ooff the Sboeutwaedeanb sthcoeo cko nSftlrueeanmce Hwaithm mBroonwdn P Bornodo kis aan d "GRriveeart FPloonwdin Gg PtoA "a
Tah "eC Poeansotabls cWote Rtliavnedr "is
AHlal mfomuor npdo, nHdes r(mBoenn, Aannndis , PPoanttde nG) PaAre" "Great
Land &1 0B6ui lWdinegst eSrenr vAicvees. Hahmampdpedne,n MmEa i0ne4.4g4o4v
January 28, 2019
µ
SoRuirvceerss:, Streams, and Ponds - USGS, National Hydrography Dataset
Orrington
Orrington
Hermon
Winterport
Newburgh
Carmel
Bangor
Bucksport
Brewer
Main
Western
Kennebec
Carmel
Interstate 95
Coldbrook
US Highway 202
Old County
Mayo
Interstate 95
Penobscot River
Souadabscook
Stream
Brown Brook
Reeds
Brook
Sucker Brook
WestB ranch Souadabscook Stream
ShawBrook
Ward Stream
Hermon Pond
Hammond Pond
Patten Pond
Ben Annis Pond
Exhibit 2: Shoreland Zones - Hampden ME
Key
Shoreland Zone - Penobscot River; 250'
Shoreland Zone - Rivers; 250'
Shoreland Zone - Ponds; 250'
Shoreland Zone - Streams; 75'
µ
The segment Stream betw eoef nS Houearmdaonb sacnodok FHlaowmimngo ntdo Pao Gndrse aist aP o"Rndiv eGr PA"
TShtree aremm ias inad "eRri voefr "Souadabscook
TWhee sste Bgrmanecnht ooff the Sboeutwaedeanb sthcoeo cko nSftlrueeanmce Hwaithm mBroonwdn P Bornodo kis aan d "GRriveeart FPloonwdin Gg PtoA "a
Tah "eC Poeansotabls cWote Rtliavnedr "is
AHlal mfomuor npdo, nHdes r(mBoenn, Aannndis , PPoanttdesn )G aPrAe" "Great
Land &1 0B6ui lWdinegst eSrenr vAicvees. Hahmampdpedne,n MmEa i0ne4.4g4o4v
January 28, 2019
SoRuirvceerss:, Streams, and Ponds - USGS, National Hydrography Dataset
TMhaisp m" afopr sah odwesp itchteio snh oorfe ltahen dS zhoonreelsa. nRde fZeor ntion gth De i"sStrhicotrse. land Zoning
Main Rd South
Patterson Rd
Canaan Rd
Meadow Rd
Meadow Rd
Sawyer Rd
Pond Rd
Monroe Rd
Back Winterport Rd
Carmel Rd South
Emerson Mill Rd
Bog Rd
Papermill Rd
Western Ave
Shaw Hill Rd
Sucker Brook
Reeds Brook
Brown Brook
Brown Brook
West Branch Souadabscook Stream
West Branch Souadabscook Stream
Souadabscook
Souadabscook Stream
Stream
Souadabscook Stream
Shaw Brook
Shaw Brook
Patten Stream
Orrington
Hermon
Brewer
Winterport
Newburgh
Carmel
Bangor
Bucksport
Main Rd North
Western Ave
Kennebec Rd
Carmel Rd North
Coldbrook Rd
US Highway 202
Mayo Rd
Old County Rd
Interstate 95
Hermon Pond
Hammond Pond
Patten Pond
Ben Annis Pond
®0 0.75 1.5 3 Miles
Legend Resource Protection
Resource and Stream Protection
Limited Residential
Limited Resid and Stream Protection
Stream Protection
General Development
Rivers & Streams
River
Stream
Not Regulated - Perennial
Not Regulated - Intermittent
Nonforested Wetlands
rNeogtuel:a Ttehde aPes nao bCsocaostt aRli vWer eitsl and.
SouSrcheosr:eland Zoning Districts - Town of Hampden RNiovenfros r&e sStetrde aWmest l-a Nndast i-o nNaal tHioyndarlo Wgreatplahnyd Ds aIntvaesenttory, sCuaprplilselem eCnot.e uds iwngit h2 0d0a6ta oprrthoodpuhceodto gbyra Pprheyn.tiss &
Created - July 22, 2019
Adopted by Town Council Nov.4, 2019
Effective Dec. 4, 2019
Shoreland Zoning Map
Hampden Maine
T1o0w6n Wofe Hstaermnp Adveen Hampden Maine, 04444
www.hampdenmaine.gov








MFS Rule - Chapter 21
Statewide Standards for Timber
Harvesting and Related Activities in
Shoreland Areas
(Effective Date Contingent on 38 MRSA §438-B, sub-§5)
MAINE DEPARTMENT OF CONSERVATION
MAINE FOREST SERVICE
ADOPTED RULE: 15 JUNE 2005
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rule – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting Activities in Shoreland Areas
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1. PURPOSES .........................................................................................pg. 1
SECTION 2. AMENDMENTS TO MAINE FOREST SERVICE CHAPTER 20 RULE
(FOREST REGENERATION AND CLEARCUTTING STANDARDS) …....………….pg. 1
SECTION 3. SCOPE & APPLICABILITY ..................................................................pg. 1
SECTION 4. DEFINITIONS ......................................................................................pg. 2
SECTION 5. SHORELAND AREA INTEGRITY AND SEDIMENTATION…………………..pg. 5
SECTION 6. SLASH TREATMENT …………………………………………….…............pg. 6
SECTION 7. STANDARDS FOR TIMBER HARVESTING AND RELATED ACTIVITIES
IN SHORELAND AREAS REQUIRING A 250-FOOT ZONE .………………..............pg. 6
SECTION 8. STANDARDS FOR TIMBER HARVESTING AND RELATED ACTIVITIES
IN SHORELAND AREAS REQUIRING A 75-FOOT ZONE ..……………………….…pg. 8
SECTION 9. SKID TRAILS, YARDS, AND EQUIPMENT OPERATION ......….........pg. 9
SECTION 10. LAND MANAGEMENT ROAD CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
STANDARDS ...........................................................................................................pg. 10
SECTION 11. CROSSINGS OF WATER BODIES………………………......……....pg. 13
SECTION 12. SLOPE TABLE ...……..................................................................….pg. 19
SECTION 13. VARIANCE .................................................................................…..pg. 19
SECTION 14. VIOLATIONS ………………………………………………………...….pg. 19
SECTION 15. EFFECTIVE DATE ......................................................................... pg. 19
APPENDIX 1. DIAGRAMS OF APPLICATION OF THIS RULE …..…..….….…..…pg. 20
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
04 DEPARTMENT OF CONSERVATION
058 BUREAU OF FORESTRY
Chapter 21: STATEWIDE STANDARDS FOR TIMBER HARVESTING AND
RELATED ACTIVITIES IN SHORELAND AREAS
AUTHORITY: 12 MRSA, chapter 805, subchapter 3-A; Public Laws 2003,
chapter 335
Summary: This rule establishes statewide standards for timber harvesting and
related activities in shoreland areas. In general, timber harvesting activities in
shoreland areas must protect shoreline integrity and not expose mineral soil that can be
washed into water bodies, including nonforested freshwater and coastal wetlands and
tidal waters. Timber harvesting and related activities in shoreland areas below the 300
acre drainage point must leave windfirm stands of trees that provide adequate shade. If
located in shoreland areas, roads used primarily for timber harvesting and related
activities must be constructed and maintained to standards designed to minimize the
chance of exposed soil washing into water bodies, including wetlands. Stream
crossings must not disrupt the natural flow of water and must not allow sediment into
water bodies.
SECTION 1. PURPOSES
The purposes of this rule include the following: to establish statewide standards for
timber harvesting and related activities in shoreland areas; to resolve inconsistencies
among existing standards; to provide maximum opportunity for flexibility; to protect
public resources while minimizing impacts on private resources; to further the
maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution from
various agents, including sediment, temperature, toxic materials, and excessive nutrient
inputs; to maintain shoreline stability; to protect fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird
and other wildlife habitat; to protect freshwater and coastal wetlands; and to conserve
natural beauty, open space, and public recreational values.
SECTION 2. AMENDMENTS TO MAINE FOREST SERVICE CHAPTER
20 RULE (FOREST REGENERATION AND CLEARCUTTING
STANDARDS)
Sections 4.E, 4.G, 4.J, 4.K., 4.M., 4.N, 4.O, 4.S, 4.X, and 4.DD of this rule constitute
amendments to Sections 2.A.11, 2.A.13, 2.A.22, 2.A.23, 2.A.29, 2.A.30, 2.A.31, 2.A.44,
2.A.50, and 2.A.53, respectively, of MFS Chapter 20 Rule (Forest Regeneration and
Clearcutting Standards) as adopted on April 28, 1999.
SECTION 3. SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY
A. SCOPE. This rule governs all timber harvesting and related activities conducted in,
over, or near water bodies, including rivers, streams, brooks, ponds, lakes, Great
Ponds, freshwater and coastal wetlands, and tidal waters throughout the state,
unless exempted in Section 3.B. of this rule.
B. EXEMPTION. This rule does not govern timber harvesting and related activities in
forested wetlands, unless the forested wetlands lie within a shoreland area.
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 1 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
C. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LEGAL REQUIREMENTS. Whenever provisions of
this rule are less stringent than corresponding provisions of applicable federal, state,
or municipal legal requirements, the more stringent provisions shall apply.
SECTION 4. DEFINITIONS
Unless otherwise provided herein, this rule incorporates by reference the definitions
contained in MFS Rule Chapter 20 (Forest Regeneration and Clearcutting Standards).
For the purpose of 12 MRSA, chapter 805, subchapter 3-A and this rule, the following
terms are defined as follows.
A. Brook: See “Stream Channel.”
B. Coastal Wetland is defined by 38 MRSA, chapter 3, article 5-A.
C. Cross-sectional area of a stream channel is determined by multiplying the stream
channel width by the average stream channel depth. The stream channel width is
the straight line distance from the normal high water line on one side of the channel
to the normal high water line on the opposite side of the channel. The average
stream channel depth is the average of the vertical distances from a straight line
between the normal high water lines of the stream channel to the bottom of the
channel.
D. Crossing means any timber harvesting and related activity involving the passage of
ground-based equipment from one side to the opposite side of a water body, or to an
island or upland within a water body. Such activities include, but are not limited to
construction of roads, fords, bridges, and culverts, as well as maintenance work on
these crossings.
E. Designated Agent means a person, company or other entity that is authorized by
the landowner to act on the landowner's behalf for timber harvesting and related
activities on the landowner's property.
F. Disruption of shoreline integrity means the alteration of the physical shape,
properties, or condition of a shoreline at any location by timber harvesting and
related activities. A shoreline where shoreline integrity has been disrupted is
recognized by compacted, scarified and/or rutted soil, an abnormal channel or
shoreline cross-section, and in the case of flowing waters, a profile and character
altered from natural conditions.
G. Essential Wildlife Habitat means areas identified by the Commissioner, Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife in accordance with the provisions of 12
MRSA, chapter 925, subchapter 3, and any Department of Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife rules implementing that subchapter.
H. Forested Wetland means a freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that
is at least 20 feet tall.
I. Forest Stand means a contiguous group of trees sufficiently uniform in age class
distribution, composition, and structure, and growing on a site of sufficiently uniform
quality, to be a distinguishable unit.
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 2 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
J. Freshwater Wetland means ponds, freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar
areas that are:
1. Inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and for a
duration sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances do support,
a prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils;
and,
2. Not part of a Great Pond, coastal wetland, stream, or river.
K. Great Pond means any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface
area in excess of 10 acres, and any inland body of water artificially formed or
increased which has a surface area in excess of 30 acres.
L. Harvest Area means the area where timber harvesting and related activities,
including the cutting of trees, skidding, yarding, and associated road construction
take place. The area affected by a harvest encompasses the area within the outer
boundaries of these activities, excepting unharvested areas greater than 10 acres
within the area affected by a harvest.
M. Landowner means a person, company, or other legal entity which holds title to land,
including as a joint ownership or as tenants in common. Where the ownership of the
timber located on the land is different than the fee ownership of the land itself, the
owners of the timber are deemed a landowner and are jointly and severally
responsible with the fee landowner to comply with this rule. Where a corporate
landowner is a wholly owned subsidiary of another corporation, both parent and
subsidiary are deemed the same landowner.
N. Land Management Road means a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed
mineral soil, gravel, or other surfacing materials constructed for, or created by, the
passage of motorized vehicles and used primarily for timber harvesting and related
activities, including associated log yards, but not including skid trails or skid roads.
O. Licensed Forester means a forester licensed under 32 MRSA, chapter 76.
P. Normal High Water Line means that line which is apparent from visible markings,
changes in the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in
vegetation, and which distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and
predominantly terrestrial land. In the case of nonforested freshwater wetlands
adjacent to streams and other water bodies, the normal high water line is the upland
edge of the freshwater wetland, not the edge of the open water.
Q. Permanent crossing means any structure constructed or erected with a fixed
location, in, on, or over a water body for a period exceeding 7 months each year,
including, but not limited to, culverts and bridges.
R. Pond means any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area
between 4,300 square feet and 10 acres.
S. Residual Stand means a stand of trees remaining in the forest following timber
harvesting and related activities.
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 3 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
T. River means a free-flowing body of water, including its associated flood plain
wetlands, from that point at which it provides drainage for a watershed of:
1. fifty square miles to its mouth in the jurisdiction of the Land Use Regulation
Commission; and,
2. twenty-five square miles to its mouth in municipalities not subject to the
jurisdiction of the Land Use Regulation Commission.
U. Shoreland area means all land areas within:
1. 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water line of:
a. Rivers below the 50 square mile drainage point in the jurisdiction of the Land
Use Regulation Commission;
b. Rivers below the 25 square mile drainage point in municipalities not subject to
the jurisdiction of the Land Use Regulation Commission;
c. Great Ponds and nonforested freshwater wetlands 10 acres or larger;
d. Any coastal wetland or tidal water;
e. Any size pond or freshwater wetland identified by the Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife as significant wildlife habitat or essential wildlife habitat;
2. 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water line of:
a. Streams between the 300 acre drainage point and the 50 square mile
drainage point in the jurisdiction of the Land Use Regulation Commission;
b. Streams between the 300 acre drainage point and the 25 square mile
drainage point in municipalities not subject to the jurisdiction of the Land Use
Regulation Commission;
3. Adjacent to:
a. The normal high water line of streams above the 300 acre drainage point;
and,
b. Ponds or freshwater wetlands larger than 4,300 square feet but less than 10
acres that are not identified by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife
as significant wildlife habitat or essential wildlife habitat.
V. Shoreline: See “Normal High Water Line” and “Coastal Wetland.”
W. Significant wildlife habitat is defined by 38 MRSA, chapter 3, article 5-A.
X. Skid Road or Skid Trail means a route repeatedly used by forwarding machinery or
animal to haul or drag forest products from the stump to the yard or landing, the
construction of which requires minimal excavation.
Y. Slash means the residue, e.g., treetops and branches, left on the ground after a
timber harvest.
Z. Stand: see "Forest Stand."
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 4 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
AA. Stream: means a stream channel upstream from the point at which it becomes
a river.
BB. Stream channel means a channel between defined banks created by the action
of surface water, which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial vegetation or by the
presence of a bed, devoid of topsoil, containing waterborne deposits or exposed soil
parent material or bedrock; and which is connected hydrologically with other water
bodies. “Stream channel” does not include rills or gullies forming because of
accelerated erosion in disturbed soils where the natural vegetative cover has been
removed by human activity.
CC. Tidal waters means all waters or portions thereof which customarily ebb and
flow as the result of tidal action.
DD. Timber harvesting means the cutting or removing of timber for the primary
purpose of selling or processing forest products.
EE. Timber harvesting and related activities means timber harvesting, the
construction and maintenance of roads used primarily for timber harvesting, and
other activities conducted to facilitate timber harvesting.
FF. Water body means any river, stream, stream channel, brook, freshwater
wetland, coastal wetland, tidal waters, pond, lake, Great Pond, or any other
hydrological feature regulated by this rule.
GG. Woody Vegetation means live trees or woody, non-herbaceous shrubs.
HH. Windfirm means the ability of a forest stand to withstand strong winds and resist
windthrow, wind rocking, and major breakage.
NOTE: In the context of this definition, an assessment of windfirmness will include assessment of
soil conditions, depth to bedrock, and live crown ratios and height/diameter ratios on residual
trees. Trees with live crown ratios of 30 percent or greater and/or trees with height/diameter ratios
of 90 or less could be considered indicators of windfirmness.
SECTION 5. SHORELINE INTEGRITY AND SEDIMENTATION
A. APPLICABILITY. The requirements of Section 5 apply to all timber harvesting and
related activities conducted in all shoreland areas as defined in this rule.
B. STANDARDS. Persons conducting timber harvesting and related activities in
shoreland areas must take reasonable measures to avoid the disruption of shoreline
integrity, the occurrence of sedimentation of water, and the disturbance of stream
banks, stream channels, shorelines, and soil lying within ponds and wetlands. If,
despite such precautions, the disruption of shoreline integrity, sedimentation of
water, or the disturbance of stream banks, stream channels, shorelines, and soil
lying within ponds and wetlands occurs, such conditions must be corrected. This
section does not apply to crossings of water bodies conducted in compliance with
Section 11 of this rule.
NOTE: For guidance on reasonable measures, consult the Bureau publication, “Best Management
Practices for Forestry: Protecting Maine’s Water Quality” (2004). This publication is available
from the Bureau and on the Bureau’s website, www.maineforestservice.org.
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 5 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
SECTION 6. SLASH TREATMENT
A. Timber harvesting and related activities shall be conducted such that slash or debris
is not left below the normal high water line of any water body. This section does not
apply to minor, incidental amounts of slash that result from timber harvesting and
related activities otherwise conducted in compliance with this section.
B. No accumulation of slash shall be left within 50 feet of:
1. the normal high water line of Great Ponds, rivers, non-forested wetlands larger
than 10 acres, and tidal waters in the jurisdiction of the Land Use Regulation
Commission; and,
2. the normal high water line of Great Ponds, rivers, non-forested wetlands larger
than 10 acres, and tidal waters in municipalities not subject to the jurisdiction of
the Land Use Regulation Commission.
Slash actively used to protect soil from disturbance by equipment or to stabilize
exposed soil may be left in place, provided no part thereof extends more than 4 feet
above the ground.
C. Between 50 feet and 250 feet of the normal high water line of a water body identified
in subsection 6.B. above, all slash larger than 3 inches in diameter must be disposed
of in such a manner that no part thereof extends more than 4 feet above the ground.
SECTION 7. STANDARDS FOR TIMBER HARVESTING AND RELATED
ACTIVITIES IN SHORELAND AREAS REQUIRING A 250-FOOT ZONE
A. APPLICABILITY. The requirements of Section 7 apply to all timber harvesting and
related activities in shoreland areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high water line of:
1. Rivers below the 50 square mile drainage point in the jurisdiction of the Land Use
Regulation Commission
2. Rivers below the 25 square mile drainage point in municipalities not subject to
the jurisdiction of the Land Use Regulation Commission;
3. Great Ponds and nonforested freshwater wetlands 10 acres or larger;
4. Any coastal wetland or tidal water; and,
5. Any size pond or freshwater wetland identified by the Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife as significant wildlife habitat or essential wildlife habitat.
B. SHADE AND TREE RETENTION STANDARDS.
Timber harvesting and related activities in shoreland areas subject to the
requirements of Section 7 must leave adequate tree cover and shall be conducted
so that a well-distributed stand of trees is retained. The requirements of this section
may be satisfied by following one of the following three options:
1. Option 1 (40% volume removal), which requires:
a. Harvesting of no more than 40 percent of the total volume on each acre
involved of trees 4.5 inches DBH or greater in any 10 year period is permitted.
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 6 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
For the purposes of these standards volume may be considered to be
equivalent to basal area;
b. A well-distributed stand of trees which is windfirm, and other vegetation
including existing ground cover, must be maintained; and,
c. Within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water line of shoreland
areas regulated under this section, there must be no cleared openings. At
distances greater than 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water
line, timber harvesting and related activities must not create single cleared
openings greater than 14,000 square feet in the forest canopy. Where such
openings exceed 10,000 square feet, they must be at least 100 feet apart.
Such cleared openings will be included in the calculation of total volume
removal. For the purposes of these standards, volume may be considered
equivalent to basal area.
2. Option 2 (60 square foot basal area retention), which requires:
a. The residual stand must contain an average basal area of at least 60 square
feet per acre of woody vegetation greater than or equal to 1.0 inch DBH, of
which 40 square feet per acre must be greater than or equal to 4.5 inches
DBH;
b. A well-distributed stand of trees which is windfirm, and other vegetation
including existing ground cover, must be maintained; and,
c. Within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water line of shoreland
areas regulated under this section, there must be no cleared openings. At
distances greater than 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water
line, timber harvesting and related activities must not create single cleared
openings greater than 14,000 square feet in the forest canopy. Where such
openings exceed 10,000 square feet, they must be at least 100 feet apart.
Such cleared openings will be included in the calculation of total volume
removal. For the purposes of these standards, volume may be considered
equivalent to basal area.
3. Option 3 (outcome based), which requires: An alternative method proposed
in an application, signed by a Licensed Forester or certified wildlife professional,
submitted by the landowner or designated agent to the Bureau and approved by
the Bureau, which provides equal or better protection of the shoreland area than
this rule.
Landowners must designate on the Forest Operations Notification form required by
12 MRSA, chapter 805, subchapter 5 which option they choose to use. If
landowners choose Option 1 or Option 2, compliance with this section will be
determined solely on the criteria for the option chosen. If landowners choose Option
3, timber harvesting and related activities may not begin until the Bureau has
approved the required application.
The Bureau may verify that adequate tree cover and a well-distributed stand of trees
is retained through a field procedure that uses sample plots that are located
randomly or systematically to provide a fair representation of the harvest area.
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 7 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
SECTION 8. STANDARDS FOR TIMBER HARVESTING AND RELATED
ACTIVITIES IN SHORELAND AREAS REQUIRING A 75-FOOT ZONE
A. APPLICABILITY. The requirements of Section 8 apply to all timber harvesting and
related activities in shoreland areas within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high water line of:
1. Streams between the 300 acre drainage point and the 50 square mile drainage
point in the jurisdiction of the Land Use Regulation Commission; and,
2. Between the 300 acre drainage point and the 25 square mile drainage point in
municipalities not subject to the jurisdiction of the Land Use Regulation
Commission.
B. SHADE AND TREE RETENTION STANDARDS.
Timber harvesting and related activities in shoreland areas subject to the
requirements of Section 8 must leave adequate tree cover and shall be conducted
so that a well-distributed stand of trees is retained. The requirements of this section
may be satisfied by following one of the following three options:
1. Option 1 (40% volume removal), which requires:
a. Harvesting of no more than 40 percent of the total volume on each acre
involved of trees 4.5 inches DBH or greater in any 10 year period is permitted.
For the purposes of these standards volume may be considered to be
equivalent to basal area;
b. A well-distributed stand of trees which is windfirm, and other vegetation
including existing ground cover, must be maintained; and,
c. There must be no cleared openings.
2. Option 2 (60 square foot basal area retention), which requires:
a. The residual stand must contain an average basal area of at least 60 square
feet per acre of woody vegetation greater than or equal to 1.0 inch DBH, of
which 40 square feet per acre must be greater than or equal to 4.5 inches
DBH;
b. A well-distributed stand of trees which is windfirm, and other vegetation
including existing ground cover, must be maintained; and,
c. There must be no cleared openings.
3. Option 3 (outcome based), which requires: An alternative method proposed
in an application, signed by a Licensed Forester or certified wildlife professional,
submitted by the landowner or designated agent to the Bureau and approved by
the Bureau, which provides equal or better protection of the shoreland area than
this rule.
Landowners must designate on the Forest Operations Notification form required by
12 MRSA, chapter 805, subchapter 5 which option they choose to use. If
landowners choose Option 1 or Option 2, compliance with this section will be
determined solely on the criteria for the option chosen. If landowners choose Option
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 8 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
3, timber harvesting and related activities may not begin until the Bureau has
approved the required application.
The Bureau may verify that adequate tree cover and a well-distributed stand of trees
is retained through a field procedure that uses sample plots that are located
randomly or systematically to provide a fair representation of the harvest area.
Exception. Timber harvesting and related activities conducted in the jurisdiction of
the Land Use Regulation Commission between the 300 acre drainage point and the
25 square mile drainage point are not subject to the requirements of Section 8.B. of
this rule, but must be conducted to retain sufficient vegetation to maintain shading of
surface waters.
SECTION 9. SKID TRAILS, YARDS, AND EQUIPMENT OPERATION
A. APPLICABILITY. The requirements of Section 9 apply to the construction,
maintenance, and use of skid trails and yards in shoreland areas. This section
does not apply to crossings of water bodies conducted in compliance with
Section 11 of this rule.
B. STREAM CHANNELS. Equipment used in timber harvesting and related
activities shall not use stream channels as travel routes except when:
1. surface waters are frozen and snow covered; and,
2. the activity will not result in any ground disturbance.
C. DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, AND CLOSEOUT. Skid trails and yards must be
designed and constructed to prevent sediment and concentrated water runoff
from entering a water body. Upon termination of their use, skid trails and yards
must be stabilized.
D. SETBACKS.
1. Except for crossings of stream channels or freshwater wetlands, equipment
used in timber harvesting and related activities, including but not limited to the
use of skid trails and yards, must be operated to avoid the exposure of
mineral soil within 25 feet of any water body or wetland regulated by this rule.
On slopes of 10 percent or greater, the setback for equipment operation must
be increased by 20 feet, plus an additional 10 feet for each 5 percent increase
in slope above 10 percent. These requirements are presented in an
alternative format in the slope table in Section 12 of this rule.
2. The provisions of this subsection apply only to a face sloping toward the
water body or freshwater or coastal wetland, provided, however, that no
portion of such exposed mineral soil on a back face is closer than 25 feet
from the normal high water line of a water body or upland edge of a
freshwater or coastal wetland. The setback requirements of this subsection
shall not apply to skid trail approaches to crossings of stream channels or
freshwater wetlands.
3. Where such setbacks are impracticable, appropriate techniques shall be used
to avoid sedimentation of the water body or wetland. Such techniques may
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 9 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
include the installation of sump holes or settling basins, and/or the effective
use of additional ditch relief culverts and ditch water turnouts placed to avoid
sedimentation of the water body or wetland. If, despite such precautions,
sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such conditions
must be corrected.
Exception. Timber harvesting and related activities in shoreland areas of
streams draining less than 300 acres and wetlands adjacent to such streams
may be conducted in a manner not in conformity with the setback requirements
of the foregoing subsections provided persons conducting such activities take
reasonable measures to avoid the disruption of shoreline integrity, the
occurrence of sedimentation of water, and the disturbance of stream banks,
stream channels, shorelines, and soil lying within ponds and wetlands. If, despite
such precautions, the disruption of shoreline integrity, sedimentation of water, or
the disturbance of stream banks, stream channels, shorelines, and soil lying
within ponds and wetlands occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
NOTE: For guidance on reasonable measures, consult the Bureau publication, “Best Management
Practices for Forestry: Protecting Maine’s Water Quality” (2004). This publication is available
from the Bureau and on the Bureau’s website, www.maineforestservice.org.
SECTION 10. LAND MANAGEMENT ROAD CONSTRUCTION AND
MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
A. APPLICABILITY. The requirements of Section 10 apply to the construction,
maintenance, and use of land management roads in shoreland areas. This section
does not apply to crossings of water bodies conducted in compliance with Section
11 of this rule.
B. ROAD DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, AND MAINTENANCE. Land management
roads, including approaches to crossings of stream channels and freshwater
wetlands, ditches and other related structures, must be designed, constructed, and
maintained to prevent sediment and concentrated water runoff from directly entering
the water body. Surface water on or adjacent to crossing approaches must be
diverted through vegetative filter strips to avoid sedimentation of the watercourse.
Because roadside ditches may not extend to the resource being crossed, filter strips
must be established in accordance with the slope table in Section 12 of this rule.
C. SETBACKS. Land management roads and associated ditches, excavation, and fill
must be set back at least:
1. 100 feet from the normal high-water line of a Great Pond or a river that flows to a
Great Pond, rivers draining more than 50 square miles in the jurisdiction of the
Land Use Regulation Commission, rivers draining more than 25 square miles in
municipalities not subject to the jurisdiction of the Land Use Regulation
Commission, nonforested freshwater wetlands 10 acres or larger, any coastal
wetland or tidal water, and any pond or freshwater wetland identified by the
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as significant wildlife habitat or
essential wildlife habitat;
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 10 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
2. 50 feet from the normal high water line of streams draining more than 300 acres
but less than 50 square miles in the jurisdiction of the Land Use Regulation
Commission and streams below the 300 acre drainage but above the 25 square
mile drainage point in municipalities not subject to the jurisdiction of the Land
Use Regulation Commission; and,
3. 25 feet from the normal high water line of streams draining less than 300 acres
and ponds or freshwater wetlands larger than 4,300 square feet but less than 10
acres that are not identified by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as
significant wildlife habitat or essential wildlife habitat.
4. Exceptions:
a. The minimum 100 foot setback specified in subsection 1 above may be
reduced to no less than 50 feet, if, prior to construction, the landowner or the
landowner’s designated agent demonstrates to the Bureau’s satisfaction that
no reasonable alternative exists and that appropriate techniques will be used
to prevent sedimentation of the water body. Such techniques may include,
but are not limited to, the installation of settling basins, and/or the effective
use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed to avoid
sedimentation of the water body. If, despite such precautions, sedimentation
or the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such conditions must be
corrected.
b. The minimum 50 foot setback specified in subsection 2 above may be
reduced to no less than 25 feet, if, prior to construction, the landowner or the
landowner’s designated agent demonstrates to the Bureau’s satisfaction that
no reasonable alternative exists and that appropriate techniques will be used
to prevent sedimentation of the water body. Such techniques may include,
but are not limited to, the installation of settling basins, and/or the effective
use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed to avoid
sedimentation of the water body or the disruption of shoreline integrity. If,
despite such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline
integrity occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
5. On slopes of 10 percent or greater, the land management road setback must be
increased by at least 20 feet, plus an additional 10 feet for each 5 percent
increase in slope above 10 percent, but in no case may the land management
road setback be less than that indicated in the slope table presented in Section
12 of this rule.
6. New land management roads are not permitted within the shoreland area along
Significant River Segments as identified in 38 MRSA, chapter 3, subchapter 1,
article 2-B, nor in Resource Protection Districts as identified in municipal
shoreland zoning ordinances nor in Recreation Protection Subdistricts (P-RR) as
identified by the Land Use Regulation Commission, unless, prior to construction,
the landowner or the landowner’s designated agent makes a clear demonstration
to the Bureau’s satisfaction that no reasonable alternative route exists outside
the shoreland zone, and that the new road must be set back as far as practicable
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 11 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
from the normal high water line and screened from the river by existing
vegetation.
D. MAINTENANCE. Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other water
control installations associated with roads must be maintained on a regular basis to
assure effective functioning. Drainage structures shall deliver a dispersed flow of
water into an unscarified filter strip no less than the width indicated in the slope table
set forth in Section 12 of this rule. Where such filter strip is impracticable,
appropriate techniques shall be used to avoid sedimentation of the water body or
wetland. Such techniques may include the installation of sump holes or settling
basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and ditch water
turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation of the water body or wetland. If, despite
such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such
conditions must be corrected.
E. ROAD CLOSEOUT AND DISCONTINUANCE. Maintenance of the water control
installations required above must continue until use of the road is discontinued and
the road is put to bed by effective installation of water bars or other adequate road
drainage structures at appropriate intervals, constructed to avoid surface water
flowing over or under the water bar, and extending sufficient distance beyond the
traveled way so that water does not reenter the road surface.
F. UPGRADING EXISTING ROADS. Extension or enlargement of presently existing
roads must conform to the provisions of this section. Any nonconforming existing
road may continue to exist and to be maintained, as long as the nonconforming
conditions are not made more nonconforming.
Exception. Extension or enlargement of presently existing roads need not conform
to the setback requirements of Section 10.C if, prior to extension or enlargement, the
landowner or the landowner’s designated agent demonstrates to the Bureau’s
satisfaction that no reasonable alternative exists and that appropriate techniques will
be used to prevent sedimentation of the water body. Such techniques may include,
but are not limited to, the installation of settling basins, and/or the effective use of
additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation of the
water body. If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of
shoreline integrity occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
G. ADDITIONAL MEASURES. In addition to the foregoing minimum requirements,
persons undertaking construction and maintenance of roads and stream crossings
must take reasonable measures to avoid sedimentation of surface waters.
NOTE: For guidance on reasonable measures, consult the Bureau publication, “Best Management
Practices for Forestry: Protecting Maine’s Water Quality” (2004). This publication is available
from the Bureau and on the Bureau’s website, www.maineforestservice.org.
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 12 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
SECTION 11. CROSSINGS OF WATER BODIES
A. APPLICABILITY. The requirements of Section 11 apply to all crossings of
stream channels, rivers, ponds, lakes, Great Ponds, nonforested freshwater
wetlands, coastal wetlands, tidal waters, and freshwater wetlands identified by
the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as significant wildlife habitat or
essential wildlife habitat.
B. ALL CROSSINGS.
1. Crossings must allow for fish passage at all times of the year, must not
impound water, and must allow for the maintenance of normal stream flows.
2. Determination of flow. Provided they are properly applied and used for the
circumstances for which they are designed, methods including but not limited
to the following are acceptable to the Bureau as means of calculating the 10
year and 25 year frequency water flows and thereby determining crossing
sizes as required in this section: The United States Geological Survey
(USGS) Methods; specifically: Hodgkins, G. 1999. Estimating the
Magnitude of Peak Flows for Streams in Maine for Selected Recurrence
Intervals. U.S. Geological Survey. Water Resources Investigations Report
99-4008. 45 pp.
3. Upgrading existing crossings. Extension or enlargement of presently existing
crossings must conform to the provisions of this section. Any nonconforming
existing crossing may continue to exist and be maintained, as long as the
nonconforming conditions are not made more nonconforming; however, any
maintenance or repair work done below the normal high water line must
conform to the provisions of this section.
4. Other Agency Permits.
a. Any timber harvesting and related activities involving the design,
construction, and maintenance of crossings on water bodies other than a
stream channel or river, including crossings of Significant River Segments
and freshwater wetlands identified by the Department of Inland Fisheries
and Wildlife as significant wildlife habitat or essential wildlife habitat, may
require a permit from one or more of the following: the Land Use
Regulation Commission, the Department of Environmental Protection, and
the US Army Corps of Engineers. When a permit is required, the crossing
is not required to meet the standards of this section provided it conforms
with all applicable state and federal requirements and any permit
conditions.
b. Any timber harvesting and related activities involving the design,
construction, and maintenance of crossings of freshwater wetlands
identified by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as essential
wildlife habitat require prior consultation with the Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife.
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 13 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
5. Notice to Bureau. Notification to the Bureau is required prior to construction,
maintenance, alteration, and replacement of crossings. Written notice of all
temporary and permanent water body crossing construction, maintenance,
alteration, and replacement activities in shoreland areas regulated by this rule
must be given to the Bureau prior to the commencement of such activities.
Multiple crossings within one township or municipality may be submitted on
one notification form. Such notice must contain all information required by the
Bureau, including:
a. a map showing the location of all proposed permanent crossings;
b. the GPS location of all proposed permanent crossings;
c. for any temporary or permanent crossing that requires a permit from state
or federal agencies, a copy of the approved permit or permits; and,
d. a statement signed by the responsible party that all temporary and
permanent crossings will be constructed, maintained, and closed out in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
C. SKID TRAIL CROSSINGS.
1. Design and Construction.
a. All skid trail crossings of streams and rivers below the 25 square mile
drainage point require a bridge or culvert sized according to the
requirements of subsection 2 below.
b. Streams above the 25 square mile drainage point may be crossed using
temporary structures that are not bridges or culverts but which meet the
requirements of the following subsection c; or
i. when stream channels are frozen and snow-covered; or
ii. when stream channels are composed of a hard surface which will not
be eroded or otherwise damaged.
c. All skid trail crossings of streams must be designed, constructed, and
maintained, such that:
i. sedimentation of surface waters is reasonably avoided;
ii. there is no substantial disturbance of the bank or stream channel;
iii. fish passage is not impeded; and,
iv. water flow is not unreasonably impeded.
NOTE: For guidance on reasonable measures, consult the Bureau publication, “Best Management
Practices for Forestry: Protecting Maine’s Water Quality” (2004). This publication is available
from the Bureau and on the Bureau’s website, www.maineforestservice.org.
2. Bridge and Culvert Sizing. The following requirements apply to skid trail
crossings of stream channels when surface waters are unfrozen:
a. Bridges and culverts must be installed and maintained to provide an
opening sufficient in size and structure to accommodate 10 year frequency
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 14 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
water flows or with a cross-sectional area at least equal to 2 1/2 times the
cross-sectional area of the stream channel.
b. Temporary bridge and culvert sizes may be smaller than provided in
subsection a above if techniques are effectively employed such that in the
event of culvert or bridge failure, the natural course of water flow is
maintained and sedimentation of the water body is avoided. Such
crossing structures must be at least as wide as the channel and, if not
culverts, placed above the normal high water line. Techniques may
include, but are not limited to, the effective use of any, a combination of, or
all of the following:
i. use of temporary skidder bridges;
ii. removing culverts prior to the onset of frozen ground conditions;
iii. using water bars in conjunction with culverts;
iv. using road dips in conjunction with culverts.
c. Culverts utilized in stream crossings must:
i. be installed at or below stream bed elevation;
ii. be seated on firm ground;
iii. have soil compacted at least halfway up the side of the culvert;
iv. be covered by soil to a minimum depth of 1 foot or according to the
culvert manufacturer's specifications, whichever is greater; and
v. have a headwall at the inlet end which is adequately stabilized by riprap
or other suitable means to reasonably avoid erosion of material
around the culvert.
NOTE: For guidance on reasonable measures, consult the Bureau publication, “Best Management
Practices for Forestry: Protecting Maine’s Water Quality” (2004). This publication is available
from the Bureau and on the Bureau’s website, www.maineforestservice.org.
d. Stream crossings allowed under this section, but located in flood hazard
areas (i.e. A zones) as identified on a community's Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRM) or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps (FHBM), must be designed
and constructed under the stricter standards contained in that community's
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). For example, a crossing may
be required to pass a 100-year flood event.
3. Closeout. Upon completion of timber harvesting and related activities, or
upon the expiration of a Forest Operations Notification, whichever is earlier,
the following requirements apply:
a. Bridges and culverts installed for stream crossings by skid trails must
either:
i. comply with the standards for stream channel crossings by land
management roads as set forth in this rule, or
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 15 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
ii. be removed and areas of exposed soil stabilized.
b. Crossing structures that are not bridges or culverts must either:
i. be removed immediately following timber harvesting and related
activities, or,
ii. if frozen into the stream bed or bank, as soon as practical after
snowmelt.
c. Stream channels, banks and approaches to crossings of water bodies
must be immediately stabilized on completion of harvest, or if the ground
is frozen and/or snow-covered, as soon as practical after snowmelt. If,
despite such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline
integrity occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
4. Freshwater wetlands. Skid trail crossings, other than those areas below the
normal high water line of water bodies, must avoid freshwater wetlands and
must maintain the existing hydrology of such wetlands, unless there are no
reasonable alternatives, as determined by the Bureau in a written decision
prior to construction.
5. Exception. Timber harvesting and related activities in shoreland areas of
streams draining less than 300 acres and wetlands adjacent to such streams
may be conducted in a manner not in conformity with the requirements of the
foregoing subsections provided persons conducting such activities take
reasonable measures to avoid the disruption of shoreline integrity, the
occurrence of sedimentation of water, and the disturbance of stream banks,
stream channels, shorelines, and soil lying within ponds and wetlands. If,
despite such precautions, the disruption of shoreline integrity, sedimentation
of water, or the disturbance of stream banks, stream channels, shorelines,
and soil lying within ponds and wetlands occurs, such conditions must be
corrected
NOTE: For guidance on reasonable measures, consult the Bureau publication, “Best Management
Practices for Forestry: Protecting Maine’s Water Quality” (2004). This publication is available
from the Bureau and on the Bureau’s website, www.maineforestservice.org.
D. LAND MANAGEMENT ROAD STREAM CROSSINGS.
1. Design, construction, and maintenance. Land management road stream
channel crossings, including approaches to stream channel crossings, ditches
and other related structures, must be designed, constructed, and maintained
such that:
a. concentrated water runoff does not enter the water body or tributary
stream;
b. sedimentation of surface waters is reasonably avoided;
c. there is no substantial disturbance of the stream bank or stream channel
not directly associated with culvert or bridge installation;
d. fish passage is not impeded; and,
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 16 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
e. water flow is not unreasonably impeded.
NOTE: For guidance on reasonable measures, consult the Bureau publication, “Best Management
Practices for Forestry: Protecting Maine’s Water Quality” (2004). This publication is available
from the Bureau and on the Bureau’s website, www.maineforestservice.org.
2. Bridge and culvert sizing. The following requirements apply to land
management road crossings of stream channels when surface waters are
unfrozen:
a. Bridges and culverts must be installed and maintained to provide an
opening sufficient in size and structure to accommodate 10 year frequency
water flows or with a cross-sectional area at least equal to 2 1/2 times the
cross-sectional area of the stream channel.
b. Culverts utilized in stream crossings must:
i. be installed at or below stream bed elevation;
ii. be seated on firm ground;
iii. have soil compacted at least halfway up the side of the culvert;
iv. be covered by soil to a minimum depth of 1 foot or according to the
culvert manufacturer's specifications, whichever is greater; and
v. have a headwall at the inlet end which is adequately stabilized by riprap
or other suitable means to reasonably avoid erosion of material
around the culvert.
NOTE: For guidance on reasonable measures, consult the Bureau publication, “Best Management
Practices for Forestry: Protecting Maine’s Water Quality” (2004). This publication is available
from the Bureau and on the Bureau’s website, www.maineforestservice.org.
c. Temporary bridge and culvert sizes may be smaller than provided in
subsection a above if techniques are effectively employed such that in the
event of culvert or bridge failure, the natural course of water flow is
maintained and sedimentation of the water body is avoided. Such
crossing structures must be at least as wide as the channel and, if not
culverts, placed above the normal high water line. Techniques may
include, but are not limited to, the effective use of any, a combination of, or
all of the following:
i. use of temporary skidder bridges;
ii. removing culverts prior to the onset of frozen ground conditions;
iii. using water bars in conjunction with culverts; and/or,
iv. using road dips in conjunction with culverts.
3. Stream crossings allowed under this section, but located in flood hazard
areas (i.e. A zones) as identified on a community's Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRM) or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps (FHBM), must be designed
and constructed under the stricter standards contained in that community's
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 17 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). For example, a crossing may be
required to pass a 100-year flood event.
4. Road closeout and discontinuance. Maintenance of the water control
installations required above must continue until use of the road is
discontinued and the road is put to bed by taking the following actions:
a. Effective installation of water bars or other adequate road drainage
structures at appropriate intervals, constructed to reasonably avoid
surface water flowing over or under the water bar, and extending sufficient
distance beyond the traveled way so that water does not reenter the road
surface.
b. Crossing structures must be appropriately sized or dismantled and
removed in a manner that reasonably avoids sedimentation of the water
body.
c. Any bridge or water crossing culvert in roads to be discontinued shall
satisfy one of the following requirements:
i. it shall be designed to provide an opening sufficient in size and
structure to accommodate 25 year frequency water flows;
ii. it shall be designed to provide an opening with a cross-sectional area
at least 3 1/2 times the cross-sectional area of the stream channel;
or
iii. it shall be dismantled and removed in a fashion to reasonably avoid
sedimentation of the water body.
If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline
integrity occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
NOTE: For guidance on reasonable measures, consult the Bureau publication, “Best Management
Practices for Forestry: Protecting Maine’s Water Quality” (2004). This publication is available
from the Bureau and on the Bureau’s website, www.maineforestservice.org.
5. Freshwater wetlands. Land management road crossings, other than those
areas below the normal high water line of water bodies, must avoid
freshwater wetlands and must maintain the existing hydrology of such
wetlands, unless there are no reasonable alternatives, as determined by the
Bureau in a written decision.
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 18 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
SECTION 12. SLOPE TABLE
Filter strips, skid trail setbacks, and land management road setbacks must be
maintained as specified in the rule, but in no case shall be less than shown in the
following table.
Average slope of land between Width of strip between exposed mineral soil
exposed mineral soil and and normal high water line
normal high water line (percent) (feet along surface of the ground)_________
0 25
10 45
20 65
30 85
40 105
50 125
60 145
70 165
SECTION 13. VARIANCE
A variance to the strict application of this rule may be granted as specified in MFS Rule
Chapter 20 (Forest Regeneration and Clearcutting Standards, Section 6).
SECTION 14. VIOLATIONS
Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner's agent or a
contractor, who orders, contracts for, or conducts any activity in violation of this rule
commits a civil violation, and shall be penalized in accordance with 12 MRSA, chapter
809.
SECTION 15. EFFECTIVE DATE
The effective date of this rule is the first day of January of the second year following the
year in which the Commissioner of Conservation determines that at least 252 of the 336
municipalities identified by the Commissioner of Conservation as the municipalities with
the highest acreage of timber harvesting activity on an annual basis for the period 1999-
2003 have either accepted the statewide standards in accordance with 38 MRSA §438-
B, sub-§2 or have adopted an ordinance identical to the statewide standards in
accordance with 38 MRSA §438-B, sub-§3. Within 30 days of making the determination
that the 252-municipality threshold has been met, the Commissioner of Conservation
shall notify the Secretary of State in writing and advise the secretary of the effective
date for the statewide standards.
Timber harvesting and related activities are not subject to this rule if, prior to the
effective date of the rule, (1) notification has been filed with and accepted by the
Bureau, and (2) timber harvesting has begun. Timber harvesting and related activities
not subject to this rule are subject to the rules of the proper authority that were in effect
at the time notification was filed and accepted by the Bureau and timber harvesting
began.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY: 12 MRSA, chapter 805, subchapter 3-A; Public Laws
2003, chapter 335.
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 19 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
APPENDIX 1. DIAGRAMS OF APPLICATION OF THIS RULE
Figure 1. Application of this rule in the jurisdiction of the Land Use Regulation
Commission
Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
50 sq. mi.
25 sq. mi.
Streams above 300
acres
•Shoreline integrity
Rivers
•Shoreline integrity
•250 ft. buffer
•3 options for shade
•Bridges/culverts required
Streams between 300 acres and
50 sq. mi.
•Shoreline integrity
•75 ft. buffer
•Shade above 25 sq. mi.
•3 options for shade below 25
sq. mi.
•Temporary crossing structures
allowed above 25 sq. mi.
300 acres
DEPARTMENT OF CONSERVATION – Maine Forest Service
Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
50 sq. mi.
25 sq. mi.
Streams above 300
acres
•Shoreline integrity
Rivers
•Shoreline integrity
•250 ft. buffer
•3 options for shade
•Bridges/culverts required
Streams between 300 acres and
50 sq. mi.
•Shoreline integrity
•75 ft. buffer
•Shade above 25 sq. mi.
•3 options for shade below 25
sq. mi.
•Temporary crossing structures
allowed above 25 sq. mi.
LURC jurisdiction
300 acres
DEPARTMENT OF CONSERVATION – Maine Forest Service
NOTE: This diagram is for informational purposes only. In the case of
discrepancies, the written rule shall govern.
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 20 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
Figure 2. Application of this rule in municipalities not subject to the jurisdiction
of the Land Use Regulation Commission
Ti Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
25 sq. mi.
Streams above 300 acres
•Shoreline integrity
Rivers below 25 sq. mi. drainage
•Shoreline integrity
•250 ft. buffer
•3 options for shade
•Bridges/culverts required
Streams above 25 sq. mi. drainage
•Shoreline integrity
•75 ft. buffer
•3 options for shade
•Temporary crossing structures allowed above 25 sq. mi.
300 acres
DEPARTMENT OF CONSERVATION – Maine Forest Service
Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
25 sq. mi.
Streams above 300 acres
•Shoreline integrity
Rivers below 25 sq. mi. drainage
•Shoreline integrity
•250 ft. buffer
•3 options for shade
•Bridges/culverts required
Streams above 25 sq. mi. drainage
•Shoreline integrity
•75 ft. buffer
•3 options for shade
•Temporary crossing structures allowed above 25 sq. mi.
Outside LURC jurisdiction
300 acres
DEPARTMENT OF CONSERVATION – Maine Forest Service
Note: This diagram is for informational purposes only. In the case of
discrepancies, the written rule shall govern.
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 21 of 22
Maine Department of Conservation – Maine Forest Service
Chapter 21 Rules – Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
Figure 3. Application of this rule to wetlands statewide
Great Pond/
Lake >10 ac
Pond > 4,300 sq ft,
<10 ac
Coastal wetlands
Wetland >4,300 sq ft,
<10 ac
Wetland >10 ac
T Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
•Shoreline integrity
•Permit may be required to cross or alter
•Shoreline integrity
•250 ft buffer
•3 options for shade
•Permit may be required to cross or alter
DEPARTMENT OF CONSERVATION – Maine Forest Service
Great Pond/
Lake >10 ac
Pond > 4,300 sq ft,
<10 ac
Coastal wetlands
Wetland >4,300 sq ft,
<10 ac
Wetland >10 ac
Wetlands – Statewide
Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting in Shoreland Areas
•Shoreline integrity
•Permit may be required to cross or alter
•Shoreline integrity
•250 ft buffer
•3 options for shade
•Permit may be required to cross or alter
DEPARTMENT OF CONSERVATION – Maine Forest Service
Note: This diagram is for informational purposes only. In the case of
discrepancies, the written rule shall govern.
ADOPTED RULE - 15 JUNE 2005
Page 22 of 22











Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
1 07-06-2016
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
Prepared for the
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
By
PENOBSCOT VALLEY REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION
FEBRUARY 1982
Financial assistance in the preparation of this document was provided by Maine's Coastal Program
through funding provided by the U. S. Department of Commerce, Office of Coastal Zone Management,
under the Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972 as amended.
ADOPTED BY HAMPDEN TOWN COUNCIL: May 17, 1982
EFFECTIVE DATE: June 17, 1982
TEXT AMENDED
AMENDED: April 4, 1983 deletion
EFFECTIVE: May 6, 1983
AMENDED: May 7, 1984 331.2.5
EFFECTIVE: June 6, 1984
AMENDED: November 18, 1985 532.6 1030
EFFECTIVE: December 18, 1985
AMENDED: December 1, 1986 620
EFFECTIVE: January 1, 1987
AMENDED: September 21, 1987 545.3D 554.4
EFFECTIVE: October 20, 1987
AMENDED: October 5, 1987 331.2.4 332.1.1 332.1.4 342.5
EFFECTIVE: November 3, 1987
AMENDED: March 7, 1988 565
EFFECTIVE: April 6, 1988
AMENDED: June 6, 1988 331.2.2 332.1.2
EFFECTIVE: July 5, 1988
AMENDED: September 19, 1988 1030
EFFECTIVE: October 18, 1988
AMENDED: March 13, 1989 deletion
EFFECTIVE: April 11, 1989
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
2 07-06-2016
AMENDED: June 19, 1989 332.2.3 332.2.4 332.2.12 443 460.26 554.4
EFFECTIVE: July 19, 1989
AMENDED: June 3, 1991 544.3 545.3D
EFFECTIVE: July 3, 1991
AMENDED: April 6, 1992 deletion
EFFECTIVE: May 6, 1992
AMENDED: October 4, 1993 513 531.8
EFFECTIVE: November 3, 1993
AMENDED: December 20, 1993 1031
EFFECTIVE: January 19, 1994
AMENDED: February 7, 1994 1021 1032 1033
EFFECTIVE: March 9, 1994
AMENDED: December 4, 1995 552.15.C 552.25 552.26
EFFECTIVE: January 3, 1996
AMENDED: May 20, 1996 541 543
EFFECTIVE: June 19, 1996
AMENDED: February 12, 2002 410 420 431 432 450 460.3 470
EFFECTIVE: March 14, 2002 475 481 483.3 521 531.3A 532.3 532.5
AMENDED: February 12, 2002 520 530
EFFECTIVE: March 14, 2002
AMENDED: November 17, 2003 320 330
EFFECTIVE: December 17, 2003
AMENDED: October 3, 2005 521 522 524 552.15.B 552.16
EFFECTIVE: November 2, 2005
AMENDED: August 6, 2007 565
EFFECTIVE: September 5, 2007
AMENDED: July 14, 2014 542
EFFECTIVE: August 13, 2014
AMENDED: April 4, 2016 540-545 (repealed)
EFFECTIVE: May 4, 2016
AMENDED: July 6, 2016 100 310 345-347 431 441 442 444-446
EFFECTIVE: August 5, 2016 460 513 524 531 532 546 551-555
570 710-740 1022 1025 1026 1031 1032
CERTIFIED BY: ___________________________
Paula Scott, Town Clerk
Affix Seal
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
3 07-06-2016
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 100 - DECLARATION OF PURPOSE 5
ARTICLE 200 - AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION 5
210. Authority 5
220. Administration and Enforcement 5
ARTICLE 300 - PROCEDURES FOR SUBDIVISION REVIEW 6
310. Introduction 6
320. Preapplication Meeting and Submission of a Sketch Plan 6
330. Review of Major Subdivision 7
331. Preliminary Plan 7
332. Final Plan 11
340. Review of Minor Subdivision 14
345. Review of Private Street Subdivision…………………………………………18
ARTICLE 400 - IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES 20
410. Improvement Guarantees Required 20
420. Procedure 20
430. Time Limit 20
440. Inspection and Certification 21
450. Release of Guarantee 21
460. Reduction of Guarantee 22
470. Incomplete or Unsatisfactory Work 22
480. Improvement Guarantee Option 23
ARTICLE 500 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN 24
STANDARDS
510. General Requirements 24
520. Lots 24
530. Drainage Requirements 25
540. Open Space and Recreation Land (Repealed) 27
546. Ownership & Maintenance of Private Streets..................................................... 27
550. Street Standards 28
551. Public Street Standards ............................................................................. 28
552. Private Street Standards…………………………………………………. 29
560. Utilities 32
570. Buffer Strip 33
ARTICLE 600 - WAIVER AND MODIFICATIONS OF THESE 33
REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 700 - VALIDITY, EFFECTIVE DATE, 33
CONFLICT OF ORDINANCES, AND FILING
ARTICLE 800 - AMENDMENTS 34
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
4 07-06-2016
ARTICLE 900 - APPEALS 34
ARTICLE 1000 - DEFINITIONS 34
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
5 07-06-2016
ARTICLE 100
DECLARATION OF PURPOSE
The purpose of these standards shall be to assure the comfort, convenience, safety, health, and welfare of
the people, to protect the environment, to promote the development of an economically sound and stable
community, and to uphold the state Subdivision Law (MRSA) Title 30, Section 4956). This ordinance
establishes separate and distinct construction standards and maintenance practices for Public Streets and
Private Streets. (Amended 07-06-16)
ARTICLE 200
AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION
210. Authority - This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to and consistent with Title 30 MRSA Section 4956;
the Subdivision Law.
220. Administration and Enforcement
221. This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Subdivision Ordinance of the Town
of Hampden, Maine.”
222. The Planning Board of the Town of Hampden, with the assistance of the code enforcement
officer and the Town Manager (as specified in the ordinance) shall administer this Ordinance.
223. The provisions of this Ordinance shall pertain to all land proposed for subdivision as herein
defined within the boundaries of the Town of Hampden.
224. No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity may sell, lease, develop, build upon or
convey for consideration, offer or agree to sell, lease, develop, build upon or convey for
consideration any land in a subdivision which has not been approved by the Hampden Planning
Board and recorded in the Penobscot County registry of deeds, nor shall such person, firm,
corporation or other legal entity sell or convey any land in such approved subdivision unless at least
one permanent marker is set at one lot corner of the lot sold or conveyed. The term “permanent
marker” includes but is not limited to the following: a granite monument, a concrete monument, an
iron pin or a drill hole in ledge. No subdivision plat or plan shall be recorded by the register of
deeds which has not been approved as required. Approval for the purpose of recording shall appear
in writing on the plat or plan. No public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility
company of any kind shall install services to any lot in a subdivision for which a plan has not been
approved.
225. The Hampden Planning Board, the Town Council of the Town of Hampden, the code
enforcement officer, or the Town of Hampden may institute proceedings to enjoin any violations of
this Ordinance, and if a violation is found in court, the Town of Hampden may be allowed attorney
fees.
226. Any person, firm, or corporation or other legal entity found guilty of a violation of this
Ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) for each such
occurrence.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
6 07-06-2016
ARTICLE 300
PROCEDURES FOR SUBDIVISION REVIEW
310. Introduction – At the subdivider’s option, an application for subdivision approval may propose one
or more Public Streets, one or more Private Streets, or a combination thereof. Proposed subdivisions that
include one or more Public Streets shall be reviewed under the procedures set forth in section 320 and
section 330, inclusive. Proposed Private Street Subdivisions shall be exempt from section 320 and 330,
inclusive, and shall be reviewed under the procedures set forth in section 345. (Amended 07-06-16)
The subdivider’s application for subdivision approval will not be considered complete until a Final Plan,
including all required information, has been submitted to the Planning Board. While the subdivider may
submit the Final Plan and all related materials to the Planning Board without any prior contact with the
board, the subdivider is encouraged to follow the procedures outlined in this Ordinance. The procedures
herein outlined are designed to prevent problems related to the statutory time limits for reviewing
complete applications and to provide opportunity for a dialogue between the Planning Board and the
subdivider so that the approved subdivision will be designed and built in a manner that fulfills the purpose
of this ordinance.
320. Preapplication Meeting and Submission of a Sketch Plan
321. The subdivider shall submit at least twelve (12) copies of a sketch plan and application to the
code enforcement officer at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the regularly scheduled meeting at
which she/he wishes it to be considered. The subdivider or his/her authorized agent shall be present
at the meeting to discuss the proposal with the Planning Board.
322. The purposes of this preapplication conference between the subdivider and the Planning
Board are:
1. To classify the subdivision as a major or a minor subdivision.
2. To provide an opportunity for the subdivider and the Planning Board to informally review the
subdivider’s ideas for use of the land;
3. To discuss procedures for subdivision review and approval;
4. If road construction is involved in the proposal, to classify the road as either minor or collector;
5. To discuss any apparent potential problems associated with the subdivision; and
6. To arrange for on-site inspection of the subdivision site.
323. The sketch plan shall consist of an outline of the proposed subdivision, drawn on a map drawn
to scale, showing the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features in relation to existing
conditions. The sketch plan may be a freehand pencil sketch. Accompanying the sketch plan shall
be a written application which includes a description of existing covenants and easements and
zoning; medium intensity soils survey information(obtainable from the Penobscot County Soil
Conservation Service); information about available community facilities and utilities on or near the
site; information describing the subdivision proposal including the number of residential lots,
typical lot width, and depth, plans regarding sewer and water service and road construction; and any
proposed nonresidential areas. An application form, available at the town office, shall be used to
submit the written information.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
7 07-06-2016
324. Other than the classification of the subdivision and the roads, if necessary, no binding
commitments shall be made between the subdivider and the board at this stage.
325. The Planning Board shall act on the sketch plan within forty-five (45) days of the time it is
submitted and shall notify the subdivider of its action in writing, within fifteen (15) days of its
action.
326. Inspection of the site. In order for the Planning Board to be more fully informed about the
site, the subdivider shall arrange an inspection of the site with the code enforcement officer and the
Planning Board or an individual appointed by the chairman to act as the board’s representative for
the inspection. The on-site inspection must be considered the next step in the subdivision review
process.
330. Review of Major Subdivision
331. Preliminary Plan
331.1. Purpose - The purpose of Preliminary Plan review is to give the Planning Board an
opportunity to review the subdivider’s proposal while it is in the planning stage and to make
recommendations to the subdivider as seem appropriate based on state and local laws and
regulations. The intent is that all major issues relative to the subdivision will be identified and
resolved prior to the submission of the Final Plan.
331.2. Procedure
1. Within six (6) months after classification of the sketch plan as a major subdivision by the
Planning Board, the subdivider shall submit an application for the consideration of a
Preliminary Plan for a major subdivision. The Preliminary Plan shall substantially conform
to the layout shown on the sketch plan plus any recommendations made by the Planning
Board.
2. The application for approval of the Preliminary Plan shall be accompanied by a fee paid in
accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance, payable by check to the Town of
Hampden, Maine. (Amended: 06-06-88, 11-17-03)
3. The subdivider, or his duly authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of the
Planning Board to discuss the Preliminary Plan.
4. The time of submission of the Preliminary Plan shall be considered to be the date of the
regular monthly meeting of the Planning Board at least forty-five (45) days prior to which
fifteen (15) copies of the application for Preliminary Plan approval, complete and
accompanied by the required fee and all data required by section 331.3 of this Ordinance
shall have been filed with the code enforcement officer. (Amended: 10-05-87)
5. A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Board at the time of submission of the
preliminary subdivision plan. Said hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. A notice of said hearing
shall be mailed to each land owner abutting the proposed development and to each
landowner within three hundred (300) feet of the property line of the proposed
development. Landowners shall be considered to be those against whom property taxes are
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
8 07-06-2016
assessed. Failure of any landowner to receive a notice of public hearing shall not
necessitate another hearing or invalidate any action of the Planning Board. Responsibility
for such notification shall be assumed by the code enforcement officer. The applicant shall
bear all associated costs of advertisements and notifications. If site plan review is required
it shall be combined with this hearing. (Amended: 05-07-84)
6. The purpose of the public hearing shall be for the Planning Board to receive testimony from
the public and the Town Council relative to any municipal ordinance, standard, or
regulation which is applicable to the proposed subdivision and relative to the relationship of
the subdivision to the ordinance, standard, or regulation.
7. Within thirty (30) days after the public hearing, the Planning Board shall take action to give
preliminary approval, with or without modifications, or to disapprove such Preliminary
Plan. The reasons for any modification required or the grounds for disapproval shall be
stated upon the records of the Planning Board. Failure of the Planning Board to act within
thirty (30) days of the public hearing shall constitute approval of the Preliminary Plan.
8. When granting approval to a Preliminary Plan, the Planning Board shall state the conditions
of such approval, if any, with respect to:
A. The specific changes which it will require in the Final Plan;
B. Specific information which is over and above that required in section 332.2 of this
Ordinance which will be required in the Final Plan review (such additional information
must be reasonably related to the review of the subdivision);
C. The character and extent of the required improvements for which waivers have been
requested and which in its opinion may be waived without jeopardy to the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
9. Approval of a Preliminary Plan shall not constitute approval of the Final Plan but rather it
shall be deemed an expression of approval of the design submitted on the Preliminary Plan
as a guide to the preparation of the Final Plan. The Final Plan shall be submitted for
approval of the Planning Board and for recording upon fulfillment of the requirements of
these standards and the conditions of the preliminary approval, if any.
331.3. Submissions - The preliminary subdivision plan shall be submitted, in the appropriate
number of copies, which may be either printed or reproduced on paper. The Preliminary Plan shall
be not less than eight and one-half (8-1/2) inches by eleven (11) inches and not more than fortyeight
(48) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. The plan shall be drawn to a scale in which one inch
equals no more than one hundred (100) feet and shall be oriented so the north direction is the same
on all sheets. The Preliminary Plan and supporting data shall include the following information.
331.3.1. Information About the Applicant
map & text 1. Name of owner indicated on the map plan and in accompanying written
information.
map & text 2. Name of applicant (if other than owner) indicated on the map plan and in
accompanying written information.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
9 07-06-2016
text 3. If applicant is a corporation, state whether the corporation is licensed to do
business in Maine, and attach a copy of secretary of state’s registration in
accompanying written information.
text 4. Name of applicant’s authorized representative in accompanying written
information.
map & text 5. Name, address, and number of registered professional engineer or land surveyor
indicated on the map plan and in accompanying written information.
text 6. Address to which all correspondence from the Planning Board should be sent in
accompanying written information.
text 7. What interest does the applicant have in the parcel to be subdivided (option, land
purchase contract, record ownership, etc.) in accompanying written information?
text 8. What interest does applicant have in any property abutting parcel to be subdivided
in accompanying written information?
text 9. State whether preliminary plat plan covers entire, contiguous holdings of applicant
or not in accompanying written information.
331.3.2. Information About the Parcel to be Subdivided
text 1. Location of property: Book and page (from register of deeds) in accompanying
written information.
text 2. Location of property: Map and lot (from assessor’s office) in accompanying written
information.
map 3. Map survey of tract to be subdivided, certified by a registered land surveyor, tied to
established reference points (attach to application) indicated on the map plan.
map & text 4. Current zoning of property indicated on the map plan and in accompanying written
information.
text 5. Acreage of parcel to be subdivided in accompanying written information.
map & text 6. A soils report, identifying soil types and location of soil test areas indicated on the
map plan. Evidence of soil suitability according to the Maine State Plumbing Code
shall be presented if subsurface sewage disposal is proposed. There shall be at
least one (1) soil test per lot if subsurface sewage disposal is proposed.
map 7. Names of property owners abutting parcel to be subdivided, and on opposite side of
any road from parcel to be subdivided indicated on the map plan.
map & text 8. Indicate the nature of any restrictive covenants to be placed on the deeds indicated
on the map plan and in accompanying written information.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
10 07-06-2016
331.3.3. Information About the Subdivision
map & text 1. Proposed name of subdivision indicated on the map plan and in accompanying
written information.
map & text 2. Number of lots and lot sizes indicated on the map plan and in accompanying
written information.
map 3. Date, north point, graphic map scale indicated on the map plan.
map 4. Proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and suggested locations of
buildings, subsurface sewage disposal systems, and wells indicated on the map
plan.
map & text 5. Location of all parcels to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such
dedication indicated on the map plan and in accompanying written information.
map 6. A location map, drawn at a scale in which one (1) inch equals no more than five
hundred (500) feet, showing the relation of the proposed subdivision to adjacent
properties and to the general surrounding area indicated on the map plan. The
location map shall show all the area within two thousand (2,000) feet of any
property line of the proposed subdivision (attach to application).
map 7. Location and size of significant existing physical features including but not limited
to wetlands, floodplains, watercourse, rock outcrops and trees of twelve-inch
caliper diameter at chest height indicated on the map plan.
map 8. Location and size of any existing sewers, watermains, culverts and drains on the
property indicated on the map plan.
map 9. Location, names and widths of existing and proposed streets, highways, easements,
building setback lines, parks and other open spaces indicated on the map plan.
map 10. Contour lines at an interval of not more than two (2) feet in elevation, unless
otherwise specified by the Planning Board indicated on the map plan. All
elevations shall be referred to USGS datum.
map 11. Typical cross-sections of proposed grading for roadways and sidewalks, including
materials to be used on roadways and sidewalks indicated on the map plan.
map 12. Storm drainage plan indicating the approximate location and size of proposed lines,
catch basins and means of disposal indicated on the map plan.
map 13. The approximate location and size of all proposed water and sewer lines, valves,
pump stations and hydrants. Also connections to existing sewer and water systems
or alternative methods of water supply and sewage disposal shall be shown
indicated on the map plan.
map 14. Location of all other existing and proposed utilities such as electricity and
telephone indicated on the map plan.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
11 07-06-2016
map 15. Location and type of landscaping including natural growth to be left in place and
nursery stock to be planted indicated on the map plan. This information may be
indicated on a Preliminary Plan print.
map 16. If the application covers only a part of the subdivider’s entire holding, a map of the
entire tract, drawn at a scale in which one (1) inch equals not more than five
hundred (500) feet showing an outline of the subdivided area with its proposed
streets and an indication of the probable future street system in the remaining
portion of the tract indicated on the map plan. The part of the subdivider’s holding
submitted, shall be considered in light of the entire holding.
map 17. If the preliminary application covers more area than the Final Plan will cover, a
map showing the phasing of the entire project, drawn at a scale in which one inch
equals not more than five hundred (500) feet and indicating the proposed timing of
each phase indicated on the map plan.
332. Final Plan
332.1. Procedure
1. Within six (6) months of the date of Planning Board action on the Preliminary Plan, the
subdivider shall submit the Final Plan to the Planning Board. Failure to submit the Final
Plan within the designated time period shall require resubmission of the Preliminary Plan to
the Planning Board. However, the subdivider may submit a Final Plan for only part of the
subdivision approved in the Preliminary Plan. In that case, each successive phase shall be
submitted within three (3) years of the date of approval of the preceding phase. The Final
Plan shall consist of two (2) original transparencies of all maps or drawings and fifteen (15)
copies of all items necessary to complete the submission. (Amended: 10-05-87)
2. The application for approval of the Final Plan shall be accompanied by a fee paid in
accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance. The cost of the following
improvements shall be included in the calculation of cost: sewer, storm drainage, and/or
street work. The subdivider shall be responsible for providing the Town Manager with an
estimate of construction cost, prepared by an engineer acceptable to the Town Manager.
The Town Manager shall be responsible for certifying the acceptability of the estimate.
(Amended: 06-06-88, 11-17-03)
3. The subdivider, or his duly authorized representative shall attend the meeting of the
Planning Board to discuss the Final Plan.
4. The time of submission of the Final Plan shall be considered to be the date of the regular
monthly meeting of the Planning Board at least forty-five (45) days prior to which the
complete application, accompanied by the required fee, shall have been filed with the code
enforcement officer. The Planning Board shall issue the subdivider a dated receipt for the
Final Plan at the time of submission of the Final Plan. (Amended: 10-05-87)
5. Within thirty (30) days from receipt of a Final Plan, the Planning Board shall notify the
subdivider in writing either that the application is a complete application or, if the
application is incomplete, the specific additional material needed to make a complete
application. After the Planning Board has determined that a complete application has been
filed, it shall notify the subdivider and begin its full evaluation of the proposed subdivision.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
12 07-06-2016
6. Prior to submitting the Final Plan, the subdivider shall file an improvement guarantee with
the Town Manager. The purpose of the guarantee is to insure that all required subdivision
improvements shall be satisfactorily completed. The amount and form of the guarantee
shall be that defined under Article 400 of this Ordinance.
7. Public hearing - The board may vote to hold a public hearing on the proposed subdivision.
If so, such hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days of having received a complete Final
Plan (as determined under section 332.1 item 5.). The manner described in section 331.2
item 5 of this Ordinance. The purpose of the public hearing shall be for the Planning Board
to receive testimony from the public relative to any municipal or state ordinance, standard,
or regulation which is applicable to the proposed subdivision and the relationship of the
subdivision to the ordinance, standard, or regulation.
8. Review and Action on Final Plan - The board shall, within thirty (30) days of a public
hearing; or within sixty (60) days of having received a complete application, if no public
hearing is held; or within such other time limit as may be mutually agreed to by the board
and the subdivider, review the application and deny or grant approval of the proposed
subdivision, or grant approval on such terms and conditions as it may deem advisable to
satisfy the criteria contained in these regulations and state law and to preserve the public’s
health, safety, and general welfare. In all instances, the burden of proof shall be upon the
subdivider. In issuing its decision, the Planning Board shall make findings of fact
establishing that the proposed subdivision does or does not meet the provisions of these
regulations and the state subdivision law.
9. Upon approval of the plan, at least a majority of the board members present and eligible to
vote shall sign both transparencies. The date and any conditions of approval shall be
written on both transparencies. One signed transparency shall be returned to the subdivider
for filing with the registry of deeds and one signed transparency shall be retained by the
Planning Board. The Planning Board shall maintain a permanent record of their action with
respect to the Final Plan.
10. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any subdivision plan
after approval has been given by the Planning Board and endorsed, in writing on the plan
unless the plan is first resubmitted to the Planning Board and the board approves the
modifications. In the event that any such subdivision plan is recorded without complying
with this requirement, the same shall be considered null and void, and the board shall
institute proceedings to have the plan stricken from the records of the registry of deeds.
11. The subdivider shall file a signed subdivision plan at the Penobscot County registry of
deeds within ninety (90) days of the approval. Any plan not filed within ninety (90) days
will be considered null and void unless the particular circumstances of said subdivider or
subdivision warrant the Planning Board to grant an extension which shall not exceed two
(2) additional ninety-day periods.
332.2. Submissions - The Final Plan shall be submitted in the appropriate number of paper and
transparent copies. The Final Plan shall be not less than eight and one-half (8-1/2) inches by
eleven (11) inches and not more than forty-eight (48) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. The plan
shall be drawn at a scale in which one inch equals no more than one hundred (100) feet and
shall be oriented so the north direction is the same on all sheets. In addition to all items
required on the Preliminary Plan and information requested by the Planning Board during the
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
13 07-06-2016
Preliminary Plan review, the following items shall be required as part of the Final Plan
submission unless otherwise indicated by the Planning Board.
map 1. Registered Land Surveyor or Engineer The name, registration number, seal and signature
of the surveyor and/or engineer who prepared the plan. This information shall be on all
sheets including cross-section and profile sheets also indicated on the map plan.
map 2. Streets - The names and lines, lengths of all straight lines, the deflection of angles, radii,
length of curves, and central angles of all curves, and tangent distances and bearings
indicated on the map plan.
map 3. Street Profiles and Details - Profiles of centerlines of proposed new streets on sheets
separate from the plat, at a horizontal scale on one inch equals 40 feet and vertical scale
of one inch equals four (4) feet; profiles of all proposed sewers shall be shown on street
profiles, when applicable, at the same scale. All elevations shall refer to USGS datum
indicated on the map plan. Detail drawings of any construction methods required for the
accommodation of utilities and street appurtenances shall be included. (Amended: 06-19-89)
map 4. Street Cross Section - Cross section at fifty-foot horizontal intervals of proposed new
streets, on sheets separate from the plan at the scale of 1 inch equals 5 feet horizontal and
5 feet vertical indicated on the map plan. (Amended: 06-19-89)
map 5. Sewer profiles. Profile of sanitary sewer, if not shown on street profiles, on sheets
separate from the plan, at the same scale indicated for street profiles indicated on the map
plan.
map 6. Storm drainage plan. Indicating the location and size of the proposed lines, catchbasins,
underdrains, their profiles and means of disposal indicated on the map plan.
map & text 7. Open spaces. The designation of all easements, areas reserved for or dedicated to public
use, and areas reserved by the subdivider indicated on the map plan and in accompanying
written information. If open space or recreation land is to be dedicated to the town,
accompanying the plan must be a copy of the minutes of the Town Council, attested by
the town clerk, in which the Town Council agrees to accept such open space or recreation
land. Also accompanying the plan shall be written copies of any documents of land
dedication and a letter from the town attorney that he is satisfied with the legal
sufficiency of the documents conveying such land dedication.
map 8. Lots - The location, bearing and length of every line, with all lots to be numbered in
accordance with the property maps of the Town of Hampden indicated on the map plan.
map 9. Permanent Reference Monuments - The location of permanent monuments and pins, set
at all lot corners, and identified as existing or proposed indicated on the map plan.
text 10. Improvement Guarantee - Accompanying the plat shall be a letter from the Town
Manager indicating that the form, duration, and amount of the improvement guarantee is
sufficient and that it has been filed with him in accompanying written information.
map 11. Approval Space - Suitable space to record on the approved plan the date and conditions
of approval, if any indicated on the map plan. This space shall be similar to the
following example:
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
14 07-06-2016
(Additional Suggested Text)
This is to certify that after reviewing the
subdivision submission information for the
subdivision shown on this plan and considering
each of the criteria set forth in M.R.S.A. Title
30-A, Section 4404 (as amended) and in the
Hampden Subdivision Ordinance, the
undersigned have made findings of fact
establishing that this subdivision plan along with
its additional submission information has met all
the criteria set forth and therefore the
subdivision is approved.
Approved: Town of Hampden Planning Board
________________________,
Chairman
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
Date Approved: ________________________
Date Signed: ________________________
Conditions:_____________________________
text 12. Accompanying Data - The plans shall show the proposed location of all utilities (ie.
Water, sewer, electrical, telephone) with written letters from each respective utility
indicating their approval for the proposed design and location as shown on the plans.
Also there shall be a letter from the Fire Chief approving the number, size and location of
hydrants proposed and a letter from the Town Manager indicating the Town’s approval of
rental charges in accompanying written information. (Amended: 06-19-89)
text 13. Easements - If any easements have been required by the Planning Board, title to the
easement, drawn up in a form and substance acceptable to the town or the Hampden
Water District if applicable) shall be provided to the town (or the Hampden Water
District if applicable) by the subdivider before final approval is granted in accompanying
written information.
340. Review of Minor Subdivision
341. General - The Planning Board may require, in advance, where it deems it necessary for the
protection of public health, safety and welfare, that a minor subdivision or a minor subdivision plan
comply with all or any of the requirements specified for major subdivision or major subdivision
plans.
342. Procedure
1. Within six (6) months after classification of the sketch plan as a minor subdivision by the
Planning Board, the subdivider shall submit an application for approval of a subdivision plan.
The subdivision plan shall substantially conform to the layout shown on the sketch plan plus
any recommendations made by the Planning Board.
2. The application for approval of a minor subdivision shall be accompanied by a fee paid in
accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance payable by check to the Town of
Hampden, Maine. (Amended 11-17-03)
3. The subdivider or his duly authorized representative shall attend the meeting of the Planning
Board to discuss the subdivision plan.
4. The time of submission of the subdivision plan shall be considered to be the date of the regular
monthly meeting of the Planning Board, at least fifteen (15) days prior to which the application,
complete and accompanied by the required fee has been filed with the code enforcement
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
15 07-06-2016
officer. The Planning Board shall issue the subdivider a dated receipt for the subdivision plan
at the time of submission of the subdivision plan.
5. Fifteen (15) paper copies and two (2) transparent copies of the subdivision application,
containing all information required in section 343 of this Ordinance shall be submitted.
(Amended: 10-05-87)
6. Within thirty (30) days from receipt of a subdivision plan, the Planning Board shall notify the
subdivider in writing either that the application is a complete application or, if the application is
incomplete, the specific additional material needed to make a complete application. After the
Planning Board has determined that a complete application has been filed it shall notify the
subdivider and begin its full evaluation of the proposed subdivision.
7. In the event that the Planning Board determines to hold a public hearing on the proposed
subdivision, it shall hold such public hearing within thirty (30) days of having received a
complete subdivision application, and shall cause notice of the date, time and place of such
hearing to be given to the subdivider and to be published in a newspaper of general circulation
in Hampden at least two (2) times, the date of the first publication shall be at least seven (7)
days prior to the hearing. The decision to hold a public hearing is discretionary, and in making
its decision the Planning Board may consider the size and location of the subdivision, its
community impact, and whether any written requests for such hearing have been received.
8. The Planning Board shall, within thirty (30) days of a public hearing, or within sixty (60) days
of the time of submission, if no hearing is held, or within such other time limit as may be
mutually agreed to, issue an order denying or granting approval of the proposed subdivision, or
granting approval on such terms and conditions as it may deem advisable to satisfy the criteria
contained in these regulations and in Title 30, MRSA, section 4956, the state subdivision law,
and to preserve the public’s health, safety, and general welfare. In all instances, the burden of
proof shall be upon the subdivider. In issuing its decision, the Planning Board shall make
findings of fact establishing that the proposed subdivision does or does not meet the provisions
of these regulations and the state subdivision law.
9. Upon approval of the plan, at least a majority of the board members present and eligible to vote
shall sign both transparencies. The date and conditions of approval shall be written on both
transparencies. One signed transparency shall be returned to the subdivider for filing with the
registry of deeds and one signed transparency shall be retained by the Planning Board. The
Planning Board shall maintain a permanent record of their action with respect to the
subdivision.
10. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any subdivision plan after
approval has been given by the Planning Board and endorsed, in writing on the plan, unless the
plan is first resubmitted to the Planning Board and the board approves the modifications. In the
event that any such subdivision plan is recorded without complying with this requirement, the
same shall be considered null and void and the board shall institute proceedings to have the
plan stricken from the records of the registry of deeds.
11. The subdivider shall file a signed subdivision plan at the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds
within ninety (90) days of the date of approval. Any plan not filed within ninety (90) days will
be considered null and void unless the particular circumstances of said subdivider or
subdivision warrant the Planning Board to grant an extension which shall not exceed two (2)
additional ninety (90) day periods.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
16 07-06-2016
12. If the Planning Board fails to take action within thirty (30) days of a public hearing or within
sixty (60) days of the time of submission of a complete subdivision plan, if no hearing is held,
or within the mutually agreed to time, as specified above, the subdivision plan shall be deemed
disapproved.
343. Submissions - The subdivision plan of a minor subdivision shall be submitted in appropriate
number of paper and stable transparent copies. The subdivision plan shall be not less than eight and
one-half (8-1/2") inches by eleven (11") inches and not more than forty-eight (48") inches by thirtysix
(36") inches. The plan shall be drawn at a scale in which one inch equals no more than one
hundred (100') feet and shall be oriented so the north direction is the same on all sheets.
The application for approval of a minor subdivision shall include all of the following information:
343.1. Information About the Applicant
map & text 1. Name of owner indicated on the map plan and in accompanying written info.
map & text 2. Name of applicant (if other than owner) indicated on the map plan and in accompanying
written information.
text 3. If applicant is a corporation, state whether the corporation is licensed to do business in
Maine, and attach a copy of secretary of state’s registration in accompanying written
information.
text 4. Name of applicant’s authorized representative in accompanying written information.
map 5. Name, address, seal, signature, and number of the land surveyor who prepared the plan
indicated on the map plan.
text 6. Address to which all correspondence from the Planning Board should be sent in
accompanying written information.
text 7. What interest does the applicant have in the parcel to be subdivided (option, land
purchase contract, record ownership, etc.) in accompanying written information?
text 8. What interest does the applicant have in any property abutting parcel to be subdivided in
accompanying written information.
343.2. Information About the Parcel to be Subdivided
text 1. Location of property: book and page (from register of deeds) in accompanying written
information.
text 2. Location of property: map and lot (from assessor’s office) in accompanying written
information.
map & text 3. Current zoning of property indicated on the map plan and in accompanying written
information. Show location of zone boundaries on the parcel if any zone boundary
crosses the parcel.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
17 07-06-2016
text 4. Acreage of parcel to be subdivided in accompanying written information.
map 5. Names of property owners abutting parcel to be subdivided, and on opposite side of any
road from parcel to be subdivided as per tax assessor’s records indicated on the map plan.
map & text 6. Indicate the nature of any covenants or deed restrictions which are intended to cover all
or part of the tract indicated on the map plan and in accompanying written information.
map & text 7. An actual field survey of the boundary lines of the parcel, giving complete descriptive
data by bearings and distances, made and certified by a licensed land surveyor. The
corners of the tract shall be located on the ground and shall be marked by permanent
monuments, and shall be referenced and shown on the plan indicated on the map plan and
in accompanying written information.
map 8. Location of any watercourses, floodplain, wetland, or unique natural features on the
parcel indicated on the map plan.
343.3. Information About the Subdivision
map 1. Proposed name of subdivision indicated on the map plan.
map & text 2. Number of lots and lot sizes indicated on the map plan and in accompanying written
information.
map 3. Date, north point, graphic map scale indicated on the map plan.
map 4. The location of permanent monuments or pins, set at all lot corners and identified as
existing or proposed indicated on the map plan.
map 5. The location, bearing and length of every lot line with all lots to be numbered in
accordance with the property maps of the Town of Hampden indicated on the map plan.
map 6. Suitable space to record on the approved plan the date and conditions of approval, if any.
This space shall be similar to the following example:
(Additional Suggested Text)
This is to certify that after reviewing the
subdivision submission information for the
subdivision shown on this plan and considering
each of the criteria set forth in M.R.S.A. Title
30-A, Section 4404 (as amended) and in the
Hampden Subdivision Ordinance, the
undersigned have made findings of fact
establishing that this subdivision plan along with
its additional submission information has met all
the criteria set forth and therefore the
subdivision is approved.
Approved: Town of Hampden Planning Board
________________________,
Chairman
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
Date Approved: ________________________
Date Signed: ________________________
Conditions:_____________________________
map 7. Soils report. A soils report, identifying soil types and location of soil test areas. If
subsurface sewage disposal is to be used, evidence of soil suitability for subsurface
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
18 07-06-2016
sewage disposal as determined by the Maine Plumbing Code shall be presented. There
shall be at least one soils test per lot.
map 8. Location and name of existing public streets and way.
345. Review of Private Street Subdivision (Added 07-06-16)
346. Procedure (Amended 07-06-16)
1. Upon receipt of an application, the Town Planner may refer the application to the Public
Works Director for review and comment prior to scheduling the application before the Planning
Board.
2. The application for approval of a Private Subdivision Plan shall be accompanied by a fee paid
to defray costs of inspection, plan review, administration and enforcement of this Ordinance, in
accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance, payable by check to the Town of
Hampden, Maine.
3. The Public Works Director shall report in writing to the Planning Board as to whether or not
the proposed private street conforms to the standards and specifications of this Ordinance. Said
report may include any suggested conditions to be attached to the approval/ Permit that, in
the Public Works Director’s judgment, are necessary to achieve the intent of this Ordinance.
4. The Planning Board shall consider the application, the Public Works Director’s report, and all
other relevant information in determining whether to grant the approval of the application. If
the information submitted by the applicant does not establish that the proposed private street
will conform to the standards and specification of the Ordinance, the Planning Board shall not
grant the approval. The Planning Board shall impose such conditions on the approval of the
application as it deems necessary to achieve the intent and objectives of this Ordinance, which
may include, but need to be limited to, conditions suggested by the Public Works Director. The
breach of any such condition proposed by the Planning Board shall automatically invalidate the
approval.
5. As a condition to the granting of any approval under this Ordinance, the Planning Board shall
require that the applicant deposit with the Public Works Director a sum of money, bank letter or
credit or certified check, in an amount sufficient to guarantee that the applicant shall perform
the terms and conditions of the permit, including the payment of required fees. Upon
completion of all improvements required by this Ordinance, any unused portion of the deposit
shall be refunded to the applicant.
6. Upon receipt of the required deposit and predetermined fees and approval, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue the Permit/Approval pursuant to the terms established by
the either the Planning Board approving the application.
7. Only the Planning Board shall have the authority to approve or deny applications for a private
street.
347. Submissions - Each application for a Private Street Subdivision shall be accompanied by
completed plans labeled “plan of a private way” prepared and sealed by civil engineer or land
surveyor registered in the State of Maine, which include information contained herein. Where the
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
19 07-06-2016
required information is incorporated in the overall site plan of a development, separate road plans
shall not be required. (Amended 07-06-16)
The application and plans for a Private Street shall include all of the following information:
1. An approval block for the signatures of the board members. A copy of the signed standard
boundary survey of the roadway shall be included in the documentation.
2. The names and addresses of the lot or parcel owners to be served by the Private Street.
3. A vicinity map of a minimum scale of one inch equals two thousand feet (1”= 2,000’),
showing the location of the Private Street, any access roads and cross streets, road names,
scale, and a north arrow.
4. Existing topography at two (2) foot contour intervals for the portions of the site sufficient to
determine drainage from the Private Street easement to a suitable storm water outlet.
5. Proposed improvements (including but not limited to, roads, sewers, and ditches) shown on
plan and profile indicating all materials, grades, dimensions, and bearings in compliance with
the standards set forth in this Ordinance relative to Private Streets. The plans shall also show
all existing and proposed grades, the location of all existing and proposed drainage facilities,
the location of existing and/or proposed utilities and structures, other structures, physical or
natural conditions existing adjacent to such improvements, and any connections to existing
public and Private Streets.
6. The plan shall delineate the proposed way(s) and each of the lots to be served by the private
way(s), the location of existing buildings on the lots or parcels being served or intended to be
served by the private way(s), as well as, any existing buildings or structures in or adjacent to
any proposed road right-of-way. Lots shall conform to zoning requirements for size, frontage,
and setbacks for the area in which they are located. The land within the right-of-way of an
approved Private Street shall not be used to meet the area requirements of any lot obtaining
frontage from the Private Street.
7. A street plan and an erosion control plan is required for a single lot Private Street. A street plan,
cross section, erosion control, utility plan, and drainage plan shall be submitted for each private
way serving two or more lots. The utility plan should contain the following information:
locations and size of existing and proposed utility connections, including sewer, water, power,
telephone, stormwater drainage systems, power poles, light poles, and nearest hydrant(s).
8. A complete statement of all the terms and conditions of the proposed road easement, including
copies of all agreements or intended agreements regarding the maintenance and improvements
of the right-of-way and roadway. Agreements shall include authorization from servient land
owners allowing for any intensified or other use of the right of way. Furthermore, said
maintenance agreements shall be in such form to be recordable with the Penobscot Registry of
Deeds and shall specifically address the liability and responsibility of the parties to said
agreement to maintain the Private Street pursuant to the specifications of this Article, including,
but not limited to, the responsibility of removing snow from said roads. The recorded
statement which runs with the land, shall also inform subsequent purchasers that the road is
private and may never be maintained or accepted by the Town of Hampden. (Amended 07-06-16)
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
20 07-06-2016
9. The plan shall bear notes that the Town of Hampden will not be responsible for the
maintenance, repair, or plowing of the private way and that further lot divisions utilizing the
private way are prohibited without prior approval of the Planning Board.
10. Appropriate deed restrictions and/or master deed provisions shall provide for free and clear
vehicular access for emergency service vehicles on all private roads. All Private Streets shall
comply with the Town of Hampden E911 Addressing Ordinance.
ARTICLE 400
IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES
410. Improvement Guarantees Required
Before the submission of a Final Plan, the subdivider in all major subdivisions as defined in Article 1024
shall provide the town with improvement guarantees, in the form of one or more of the guarantee options
listed below in an amount that will cover at least one hundred (100) percent of the cost of completing the
improvements, including sewer, water, storm drainage, or street work, should the subdivider fail to
complete the required improvements or fail to complete them satisfactorily in accordance with the
approved final subdivision plan. Furthermore, the subdivider shall guarantee the improvements against
all defects from materials and/or workmanship for a period of one year from the date of acceptance
thereof by the Town. (Amended 02-12-02)
420. Procedure
The subdivider shall file with the Town Manager a proposed improvement guarantee (including a written
guarantee agreement) and the Town Manager shall determine whether the form, amount, and the duration
of the improvement guarantee are sufficient. In the event the Town Manager refuses to approve the
proposed improvement guarantee as filed by the subdivider, he/she shall so inform the subdivider and
shall inform the subdivider of his/her reasons for rejecting the guarantee. This shall be done in writing.
In the event the Town Manager approves the proposed improvement guarantee as filed by the subdivider,
he/she shall notify the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall not grant final approval until it has
received such notification from the Town Manager. The burden of submitting improvement guarantees in
compliance with this Ordinance shall at all times remain with the subdivider. (Amended 02-12-02)
430. Time Limit
431. Completion Deadline. All required improvements within a major subdivision shall be
completed within two (2) years of final subdivision approval. The improvement guarantee must
provide performance protection to the town during said two-year period plus at least eighteen (18)
months following the expiration of the two-year period. The additional eighteen-month period is
required as protection to the town in the event the subdivider fails to complete the required
improvements and for the one year guarantee period. (Amended 02-12-02) (Amended 07-06-2016)
432. Extension. The Town Manager may extend the completion deadline for two (2) additional
years at one-year increments only where the subdivider presents substantial reason for doing so.
No request for extension shall be considered until at least six (6) months prior to the original or
extended completion deadline. Before extending the initial deadline or the initial extension, the
Town Manager shall require that the improvement guarantee be extended in duration to cover the
extended period of time, plus an additional eighteen month period. Before extending the initial
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
21 07-06-2016
deadlines, or the initial extension, the Town Manager shall review the form and amount of the
improvement guarantee to make certain it remains adequate. (Amended 02-12-02)
440. Inspection and Certification
441. Prior to the initiation of construction, a pre-construction conference will be held with the
subdivider, Public Works Director, Hampden Water District (if applicable), Community and
Economic Development Director and Code Enforcement Officer. Evidence of issuance of required
state and local permits shall be provided by the subdivider at the time of the meeting. (Added 07-06-
2016)
442. The Town Manager or his/her duly appointed representative shall regularly inspect the
construction of the required improvements for defects. The subdivider shall cooperate with the
Town Manager or his/her representative who is carrying out these inspections. Upon completion of
the improvements the Town Manager shall notify the subdivider and the Planning Board, in
writing, that the improvements have or have not been satisfactorily completed according to the
approved final subdivision plan. If the improvements have not been satisfactorily completed, the
Town Manager shall provide a written list of the defects. (Amended 07-06-2016)
443. Upon completion of the improvements, the subdivider shall file the following with the Town
Manager:
1. A statement from the subdivider’s engineer that all required improvements are completed in
strict compliance with all applicable construction standards and the approved subdivision plan;
and that the engineer knows of no defects from any cause, in the improvements;
2. All site improvements with the exception of final paving are completed to the satisfaction of the
Town Manager or his/her representative.
444. No final inspection will be conducted by the Town Manager between November 15th and
April 15th. This does not prohibit council acceptance of improvements inspected between April 15th
and November 15th. (Amended: 06-19-89) (Amended 07-06-2016)
445. The costs of inspections, including the costs of review by a third party engineer if needed,
shall be paid by the subdivider prior to the issuance of the certification of completion. The Public
Works Director shall establish and determine the costs of inspection. If the subdivider does not
directly pay the costs of inspection, the same shall be paid from the deposit established by the
Public Works Director and held by the Town, and the balance, if any, shall be returned to the
subdivider. (Added 07-06-2016)
446. Private Streets need to be inspected by the Town’s staff or designee during the construction
process. If the owner did not include the Town’s staff in the construction process and wished to
have the Private Street serve as frontage for one or more newly created lots at a later date, the
owner would need to hire at the owner’s expense a professional engineer licensed in Maine to
inspect the roadway and to certify that the road has been constructed according to the Private Street
standards in this Ordinance. (Added 07-06-2016)
450. Release of Guarantee
As soon as the Town Manager or his/her authorized representative has inspected the improvements and
certified that they are satisfactorily completed, the subdivider has filed the letter required in Section 442
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
22 07-06-2016
of this Ordinance with the Town Manager, and the one year guarantee period has expired, the Town
Manager shall release the previously required improvement guarantee to the subdivider. (Amended 02-12-02)
460. Reduction of Guarantee
1. When all required improvements have been substantially and satisfactorily completed, the Town
Manager may release up to fifty (50) percent of the improvement guarantee. The improvement
guarantee shall be reduced in value by no more than fifty (50) percent until all required improvements
are satisfactorily completed.
2. Conditional acceptance may be authorized providing:
A. All site improvements with the exception of final paving are completed to the satisfaction of the
Town Manager or his/her representative.
B. The binder pavement layer is placed on all areas proposed to be paved.
C. The developer supplies the Town Manager with an improvement guarantee (article 410),
documented by a written estimate from a reputable paving contractor, for the placement of the
final finished pavement layer. Said guarantee shall be released in accordance with Section 450.
(Amended: 06-19-89) (Amended 07-06-2016)
3. Upon acceptance of the improvements by the Town, the Town Manager shall release up to eighty-five
(85) percent of the improvement guarantee, and shall release the remaining portion fourteen (14)
months after acceptance of the improvements by the Town, unless the Town Manager has provided
notice of a guarantee claim pursuant to Section 475, in which case the guarantee shall remain in place
until any such claims have been resolved to the satisfaction of the Town Manager. (Amended 02-12-02)
470. Incomplete or Unsatisfactory Work
If the Town Manager determines, according to the procedures laid out in section 440 of this Ordinance,
that the improvements have not been satisfactorily completed according to the accepted subdivision plan,
within the agreed upon time, he/she shall inform the subdivider in writing of the town’s intent to exercise
its rights against the improvement guarantee, he/she shall exercise any and all such rights; and may cause
the incomplete or unsatisfactory work to be completed. Any guarantee assets unused in the completion of
the unsatisfactory or incomplete work may be returned to the subdivider at the discretion of the town.
(Amended 02-12-02)
475. Defective Improvements. If the Town Manager, or designee, determines that the
improvements suffer from defective workmanship or materials, the Town Manager, or designee,
shall notify the subdivider in writing of the defects by not later than 30 days after the expiration of
the one year guarantee period. If the defects are not corrected to the satisfaction of the Town
Manager within 60 days after the issuance of the notice to the subdivider, the Town Manager, or
designee, shall inform the subdivider in writing of the Town’s intent to exercise its rights against
the improvement guarantee, shall exercise any and all such rights, and may cause the defective
workmanship or materials to be corrected. Any guarantee assets unused in the correction of any
defects may be returned to the subdivider at the discretion of the Town. (Amended 02-12-02)
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
23 07-06-2016
480. Improvement Guarantee Option
481. Performance Bond - Under this improvement guarantee option, the subdivider shall obtain a
subdivision bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the State of Maine.
The bond shall be payable to the Town of Hampden and shall be in an amount sufficient to cover
the full cost of all required improvements as estimated by a registered professional engineer and as
approved by the Town Manager. (Amended 02-12-02)
482. Property Escrow - Under this improvement guarantee option, the subdivider shall provide as a
guarantee personal property, including stocks and bonds. The value of such property shall be in an
amount sufficient to cover the full cost of all required improvements as estimated by a registered
professional engineer and as approved by the Town Manager.
482.1. Personal Property Escrow - If personal property is proposed for the improvement
guarantee, the subdivider must comply with the following requirements:
1. The subdivider shall provide the town with evidence of the value of the personal property
satisfactory to the Town Manager.
2. The subdivider shall, at his/her expense, provide the town with a title opinion from an
attorney, satisfactory to the town, that there exists no outstanding recorded security interest
in said property; the subdivider shall provide the town with evidence, satisfactory to the
Town Manager, of ownership of the proposed property.
3. The subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the town and execute a security interest
in favor of the town, which shall be filed as required by law; said agreement shall provide
that the ownership of the property shall be transferred to the town, unless the subdivider
satisfactorily completes the required improvements in accordance with this Ordinance and
with the approved final subdivision plan. Said agreement and security interest shall contain
such additional provisions as may be required by the Town Manager.
4. In the case of stocks, bonds, or other securities, the subdivider shall deliver to the town or
its designated trustee the original certificate for said security, together with a stock or bond
power endorsed in blank by the subdivider authorizing the transfer of ownership on the
books of the corporation. In the case of other personal property, the subdivider shall
deliver to the town, or its designated trustee, the personal property together with a
satisfactory security interest in such property.
5. In the case of stocks, bonds, or other securities, the Town Manager may require that the
value of said securities exceed the estimated cost of the required improvements in order to
protect the town from market fluctuations, or may at his/her option reject stocks, bonds or
other securities that in his opinion do not provide the town with satisfactory security.
483. Letter of Credit - Under this improvement guarantee option, the subdivider shall provide, as a
guarantee, an irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other reputable institution satisfactory to
the Town Manager, such letter of credit to be in form satisfactory to the Town Manager. The
amount of such letter of credit shall be in an amount sufficient to cover the full cost of all required
improvements as estimated by a registered professional engineer and as approved by the Town
Manager. The letter of credit shall be deposited with the Town Manager and shall certify the
following:
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
24 07-06-2016
1. That the creditor does guarantee funds in an amount equal to the costs as estimated for the
subdivider by a registered professional engineer and approved by the Town Manager, of
completing all required improvements;
2. That, in case of failure on the part of the subdivider to complete the specified improvements
satisfactorily within the required time period, the creditor shall pay to the Town of Hampden
immediately, and without further action, such funds as are necessary to finance the proper
completion of these improvements, up to the limit of credit stated in the letter. (Amended 02-12-02)
484. Cash Escrow - Under this improvement guarantee option, the subdivider shall provide as a
guarantee, cash held in an account at a bank or other reputable institution subject to the approval of
the Town Manager. The amount of cash shall be in an amount sufficient to cover the full cost of all
required improvements as estimated by a registered professional engineer and approved by the
Town Manager. The subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the town that shall stipulate the
terms under which a cash escrow may be accepted by the town.
ARTICLE 500
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS
In considering applications for subdivisions of land, the Planning Board shall be guided by the standards
set forth hereinafter. The said standards shall be considered to be minimum requirements and shall be
waived by the Planning Board only under circumstances set forth in Article 600 of this Ordinance.
510. General Requirements
511. Conformity with other laws and regulations. All proposed subdivisions shall be in conformity
with the comprehensive plan of the Town of Hampden, as amended, and with the provisions of all
pertinent state and local codes, ordinances, laws, and regulations.
512. Character of the land. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used
safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other menace. The
Planning Board shall not approve such portions of any proposed subdivision that are located on
land below sea level, within the one-hundred-year frequency floodplain, on wetland which must be
filled or drained, on land created by diverting a watercourse, or on land subject to slumping, mass
wasting, or land slides. In no instance shall the Planning Board approve any part of a subdivision
located on filled tidal land.
513. Soils - Subdivisions which contain poor soils due to organic materials, clays, or seasonal high
water table (less than 24 inches below grade) shall provide appropriate construction techniques,
including but not limited to, underdrains and geotextiles in public road construction. The same
construction techniques may be required of Private Streets if the Director of Public Works or
his/her designee determines, based on inspection, that these techniques are needed based on soil
quality. (Amended: 10-04-93, 07-06-16)
520. Lots
521. Lots to be Buildable - The lot arrangement shall be such that in constructing a building in
compliance with the Zoning Ordinance there will be no foreseeable difficulties as a result of other
natural conditions. Lots should not be of such dimension as to later encourage the creation of a
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
25 07-06-2016
second building lot out of the first. Land area delineated as freshwater wetlands, located between
the upper edges of perennial or intermittent streams, or designated for stormwater detention
facilities shall not be included as lot area for the purpose of the minimum lot area requirement
applicable to the subdivision lots. (Amended 10-03-05)
Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, non-cluster Rural District lots comprised of less
than two acres of upland may be approved if the Planning Board finds that the lot contains a
minimum of one acre of generally contiguous upland area, not delineated as freshwater wetlands,
and determines that the lot is suitable for development. (Amended 10-03-05)
Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, commercial and industrial subdivisions are
exempted from this provision. (Amended 02-12-02)
522. Side Lines - All side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight street lines and radial to
curved street lines, unless a waiver from or modification of this rule will give a better street or lot
plan.
Notwithstanding this subsection, variations to the right angle/radial of the street line are encouraged
where the Planning Board determines that variations of no more than 20 degrees will improve the
layout of the lots by meeting one or more of the following objectives: Simplification of lot layouts
by elimination of unnecessary property corners, foster creation of parallel side lot lines, foster
improved solar access, accommodation of pre-existing features such as perimeter property lines or
natural physical features such as wetlands and drainage ways. It is not the intent of the side lines
rule to promote the placement of additional pins and monuments located in close proximity to the
front property line. (Amended 10-03-05)
523. Corner Lots - In general, corner lots should be larger than interior lots to provide for proper
building setback from each street and to provide a desirable building site.
524. Lot Frontage - Lot frontage shall be deemed acceptable only if it is on a road or street as
defined in the Hampden Zoning Ordinance, or on a Private Street approved and constructed
pursuant to the standards in this Ordinance. Tie lines must be shown at the front setback line to
demonstrate that the lot meets the frontage requirement of the zoning district at the setback unless
the lot frontage exceeds the minimum frontage requirement by at least five feet. (Amended 10-03-05, 07-
06-16))
530. Drainage Requirements
531. General - The subdivider will be required to provide surface water and storm drainage
management facilities appropriate to the finished subdivision. The following requirements must be
met for both minor and major subdivisions. Minor subdivisions of single family dwellings in the
Rural District and Private Street Subdivisions are exempt from the following requirements. (Amended
07-06-2016)
1. A storm water management system will be designed to infiltrate, detain or retain water falling
on the site during a design storm, such that the post-development peak discharge and runoff
shall not exceed the peak discharge and runoff from the site prior to the development.
2. Pipe systems shall be designed to pass the peak discharge of a ten-year frequency, twenty-fourhour
duration storm. Open channel systems shall be designed to contain a design storm. In
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
26 07-06-2016
addition, areas expected to be flooded by the design storm will be indicated on the plans, and be
considered part of the drainage and storm water management system.
3. The storm water management system will take into consideration the upstream discharge and
runoff which must pass over or through the development site. The system will be designed to
pass upstream discharge and runoff, generated by the design storm, through the proposed
development without overloading the system or flooding areas not specifically planned for such
flooding.
A. The surface water and stormwater management system shall be designed so that no water
shall be stored in any ditches or drainage ways located along streets or roads during a 10
year, 24 hour storm event. (Amended 02-12-02)
4. Urban development which provides public sewer and water service shall be designed to handle
storm water drainage by means of an enclosed system with catch basins. Where necessary to
control storm water, asphalt curbing may be required.
5. Materials and Installation
A. Pipe Culverts and Storm Drains - Shall conform to Section 603 of the Maine Department of
Transportation (MDOT) Standard Specifications for Bridges and Highways, 1990 or
current version.
B. Manholes and Catch Basins - Shall conform to Section 604 of the MDOT Standard
Specifications for Bridges and Highways, 1990 or current version.
6. Drain inlet alignment shall be straight in both horizontal and vertical alignment, unless specific
approval of a curvilinear drain is obtained in writing from the Public Works Director. (Amended
07-06-16)
7. Manholes/catch basins shall be provided at all changes in vertical and horizontal alignment and
at all junctions. On straight runs, manholes shall be placed at a maximum of 400 foot intervals.
8. Upon completion, each catch basin or manhole shall be cleaned of all accumulated silt, debris,
or foreign matter until public acceptance. (Amended: 10-04-93)
532. Approvals - Applications for approval of all proposed subdivisions shall include
documentation that demonstrates that there will be no unreasonable effects on runoff/infiltration
relationships. This documentation shall include the following, as appropriate:
1. The proposed storm water management system shall be designed by a professional engineer
experienced in the design of storm water systems. The designer of the system will evaluate the
effectiveness of various storm water methods and develop and make available for review the
hydraulic calculations. These calculations will be based on accepted engineering practices and
must demonstrate that the requirements of section 531 will be met.
2. Where permanent embankment-type storage or retention basins are planned, the basins shall be
designed in accordance with good engineering practices, such as outlined in the current Soil
Conservation Service Engineering Field Manual or other appropriate references.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
27 07-06-2016
3. Rights-of-way or easements will be designated for all components of the drainage and storm
water management system lying outside the established street lines. Stormwater detention
facilities shall not be located on lots but on separate parcels to be conveyed to the town or
provided for by easement to include provisions for suitable annual maintenance by the town, if
for a Public Street, or by a private party, if for a Private Street. All rights-of-way and
easements for drainage and storm water management facilities for Public Streets will be turned
over to the town upon town acceptance of the road(s). Notwithstanding the provisions of this
subsection, commercial and industrial subdivisions, and Private Street Subdivisions, are
exempted from the provision requiring that stormwater detention facilities be separated from
lots and conveyed to the Town. (Amended 02-12-02)(Amended 07-06-16)
4. The developer shall certify in writing that all components of the storm water management
system will be maintained until the system is formally accepted by the municipality or a quasimunicipal
district, or is placed under the jurisdiction of a legally created association that will be
responsible for the maintenance of the system.
5. The storm water management system will be fully coordinated with the project site plans,
including consideration of street patterns, pedestrian ways, open space, building siting, parking
areas, recreational facilities, and other utilities. Stormwater drainage channels shall be directed
to run along property lines to avoid driveway and other utility crossings. (Amended 02-12-02)
6. When the construction of a development is to occur in phases, the planning of the storm water
management system shall encompass the entire site which may ultimately be developed, and
shall not be limited to an initial or limited phase of the development. (Amended: 11-18-85)
540. Open Space and Recreation Land – (Repealed 4-4-2016)
541. Approval Authority - (Repealed 4-4-2016)
542. Area Required - (Repealed 4-4-2016)
543. Standards for Land - (Repealed 4-4-2016)
544. Standards for Cash-in-Lieu of Land - (Repealed 4-4-2016)
545. Provisions for Ownership and Maintenance of Open Space or Recreation Areas - (Repealed 4-4-
2016)
546. Provisions for Ownership and Maintenance of Private Streets – In a Private Street
Subdivision, the subdivider shall make provisions for the permanent ownership, protection and
maintenance of such Private Street(s). The means for insuring the Private Street(s) will be
maintained in perpetuity shall be: (Added 07-06-2016)
1. Subdivider may retain ownership and responsibility for maintenance of such Private Street(s);
or
2. Subdivider shall provide for and establish one or more organizations for ownership and
maintenance of such Private Street(s). Such organization may be a nonprofit homeowners’
corporation or other organization as approved by the Planning Board. If such organization is
formed, it shall be formed and operated in accordance with the following rules:
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
28 07-06-2016
A. The organization shall be formed by the subdivider and be operating, with financial
subsidization by the subdivider if necessary, before the sales or lease of any lots or units
within the development.
B. Membership in the organization is mandatory for all purchasers of units therein and their
successors.
C. The organization shall be responsible for maintenance of Private Street(s) in the
subdivision. It shall also be responsible for insurance, as needed, for Private Street(s) in the
subdivision.
D. The members of the organization shall share equitably the cost of maintaining Private
Street(s) in the subdivision in accordance with written procedures established by them.
(Amended 07-06-16)
550. Street Standards
551. Layout of Streets - All streets in a subdivision shall be planned so as to meet the following
standards:
1. The proposed streets shall conform, as far as practical, to the adopted Comprehensive Plan or
policy statement of the Town of Hampden.
2. All streets in the subdivision shall be designed so as to provide safe vehicular travel and, in
minor streets and Private Streets, shall be designed so as to discourage movement of through
traffic. (Amended 07-06-16)
3. The arrangement of streets in a major subdivision shall provide for the continuation of arterial
and collector streets into adjoining unsubdivided land unless topographic or other factors make
continuance impracticable or undesirable. Where a subdivision is served by a minor street, the
Planning Board may require that a right-of-way or the minor street be projected to adjacent
unsubdivided land when the board finds that such a projected street would be in keeping with
the land use goals for the area and with sound planning practice.
4. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is
definitely placed with the town under conditions approved by the Town Council.
5. Intersections of streets shall be at angles as close to ninety (90) degrees as possible. In no case
shall two (2) streets intersect at an angle of less than sixty (60) degrees.
6. A distance of at least two hundred (200') feet shall be maintained between centerlines of offset
intersecting streets.
7. Whenever possible, subdivisions containing fifteen (15) lots or more shall have at least two (2)
street connections with existing public streets or streets shown on the official road map, if such
exists, or streets on an approved Subdivision Plan.
8. Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow road (below standards set herein) or when the
Comprehensive Plan indicates plans for realignment or widening of a road that would require
land in the subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to show areas for widening or
realigning such roads on the preliminary and the final plan, marked “Reserved for road
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
29 07-06-2016
realignment (or widening) purposes”. Land reserved for such purposes may not be counted in
satisfying setback or yard or area requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
552. Private Street Standards. All streets in a private subdivision shall be planned so as to meet
the following standards: (Added 07-06-16)
1. The design and construction of all Private Streets shall comply with this Ordinance relative to
Private Streets, subject to the approval of the Planning Board.
2. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Ordinance to the contrary, Private Streets in
subdivisions platted prior to the enactment of this Ordinance and Private Streets that are
contained in land divisions approved by the Town of Hampden prior to the enactment of this
Ordinance, shall continue to meet the specifications approved at the time of application. Upon
expansion, reconstruction, or major alteration of an existing Private Street, new construction
shall comply with then-current requirements of Private Streets.
3. Intersections of streets shall be at angles as close to ninety (90) degrees as possible. In no case
shall two (2) streets intersect at an angle of less than sixty (60) degrees.
4. A distance of at least two hundred (200') feet shall be maintained between centerlines of offset
intersecting streets.
5. The applicant will provide a stop sign and street name sign meeting Town specification at the
intersection with the public street.
553. Design and Construction Standards for Streets Eligible for Public Acceptance - All streets in
a subdivision shall be designed and constructed to meet the following standards for streets
according to their classification as determined by the Planning Board. (Amended 07-06-16)
Design and Construction Standards for Streets
Item Collector Minor
1. Minimum right-of-way width 66 ft. 66 ft.
2. Minimum pavement width 24 ft. 20 ft.
3. Minimum grade 0.5% 1.0%
4. Maximum grade 8% 8%
5. Maximum grade at intersection 3% 75 ft. 50 ft.
Within feet from intersection
6. Minimum centerline radii on curves 200 ft. 100 ft.
7. Minimum tangent length between 200 ft. 100 ft.
reverse curves
8. Depth of subgrade grading 22 in. 22 in.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
30 07-06-2016
Item Collector Minor
9. Sub base gravel depth 18 in. 18 in.
10. Upper base gravel 4 in. 4 in.
11. Pavement (see 552 item 2)
A. Grade B 2-1/2 in. 2-1/2 in.
B. Grade C 1-1/2 in. 1-1/2 in.
C. Total thickness 4 in. 4 in.
12. Minimum road crown-centerline 3 in. 3 in.
to edge of pavement.
13. Minimum shoulder width on each 2 ft. 2 ft.
side of road.
14. Sidewalks
A. Minimum width 5 ft. 4 ft.
B. Gravel base course 6 in. 6 in.
C. Surface pavement 2 in. 2 in.
15. Dead-end or cul-de-sac streets
A. Completely paved Radii of turn around at enclosed end
i. Right-of-way boundary minimum 60 ft. 50 ft.
ii. Outside pavement radius - min. 40 ft. 35 ft.
B. With island (see #26)
i. Right-of-way boundary – min. 65 ft. 55 ft.
ii. Inside pavement radius 26 ft. 25 ft.
iii. Outside pavement radius 50 ft. 49 ft.
iv. Minimum pavement width 24 ft. 24. ft.
(Amended: 10-03-05)
C. Temporary (See #27)
i. Radii at Right-of-way - min. 50 ft. 50 ft.
ii. Gravel turn around minimum 40 ft. 40 ft.
(Amended: 12-04-95)
16. Minimum pavement curb radii at intersections and where street meets cul-de-sac 20 ft. (Amended:
10-03-05)
17. Grade of streets should conform as closely as possible to the original relief of the land.
18. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves such as will provide clear visibility
for a distance of two hundred (200') feet.
19. Side slopes shall not be steeper than three (3') feet horizontal and one foot vertical, graded,
loamed (six [6] inches compacted) and seeded. If the side slope extends outside the required
right-of-way, the subdivider shall expand the right-of-way to include the entire side slope area.
20. All streets shall be provided with adequate drainage facilities to provide for the removal of
storm water. Driveway culverts shall be adequate to pass the design flow of the contiguous
ditches.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
31 07-06-2016
21. In construction of roads, the paved area, sidewalk, and shoulder shall be cleared of all stumps,
roots, brush, perishable material, and all trees not intended for preservation. All loam, loamy
material, clay, and other yielding material shall be removed from the roadway to at least
subgrade depth, or as directed by the Town Manager.
22. The roadway area shall be brought to the grade shown on the plan, profile and cross-section, by
suitable gravel. The subbase gravel shall meet the specifications for aggregate subbase courses
as contained in the current edition of “The Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges
of the State of Maine Department of Transportation”. The upper base gravel shall meet the
specifications for aggregate base courses in the same standards.
23. For Public Streets, after the upper base gravel has been thoroughly rolled, the surface of the
roadway shall be paved. The pavement material and the manner of application of such shall
conform to the requirements of the current edition of “The Standard Specifications for
Highways and Bridges of the State of Maine Department of Transportation”. (Amended 07-06-16)
24. The Planning Board may require curbing of roads in a subdivision including one or more Public
Streets. (Amended 07-06-16)
25. Where a green space is planned in the interior of a cul-de-sac, existing vegetation should be
preserved where possible. Any proposed landscaping shall be of a type which requires limited
maintenance. (Amended: 12-04-95)
26. Where a proposed street may be extended, the Planning Board may authorize a temporary culde-
sac. Temporary cul-de-sacs shall provide an escrow account for a period of five (5) years to
cover the cost of paving, which is renewable in five (5) year increments. Access shall be
prohibited from a temporary cul-de-sac. (Amended: 12-04-95)
554. Design and Construction Standards for Private Streets - All streets in a Private Street
Subdivision shall be designed and constructed to meet the following standards: (Added 07-06-16)
Design and Construction Standards for Private Streets
Item Private
1. Minimum right-of-way width 66 ft.
2. Minimum roadway travel width 20 ft.
3. Minimum pavement width Not Required
4. Maximum grade 8%
5. Maximum grade at intersection 3%
Within 75 feet from intersection
7. Minimum centerline radii on curves 150 feet
8. Minimum tangent length between reverse curves 100 ft.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
32 07-06-2016
9. Subbase course (heavy gravel) MDOT Type D 18 inches
(May be waived if pre-existing street)
10. Base course (crushed gravel MDOT Type A) 4 inches
(May be waived if pre-existing street)
11. Pavement Not Required
12. Minimum road crown-centerline N/A
to edge of pavement.
13. Minimum shoulder width on each side of road (if paved) 2 feet
14. Sidewalks Not Required
15. Turnaround at dead-end Hammerhead or T
See Sample Cross Section for Private Street Subdivision.
555. Utilities in Streets - In a major subdivision, the Planning Board shall, wherever possible,
require that underground utilities be placed in the street right-of-way between the paved roadway
and the street right-of-way line to simplify location and repair of lines when they require attention.
The subdivider shall install underground service connections to the property line of each lot within
the subdivision for such required utilities before the street is paved. In a Private Street Subdivision,
the owner or owners shall convey, where applicable, an easement to the Town, described by metes
and bounds, for sewer purposes over the entire right-of-way, and shall convey, where applicable, an
easement to the Hampden Water District, described by metes and bounds, for water purposes over
the entire right-of-way, and shall record both easements, as applicable, in the Penobscot County
Registry of Deeds. (Amended 07-06-16)
556. Street Names
1. Proposed street names shall be substantially different from existing street names so as not to be
confused in sound or spelling.
2. If proposed streets are extensions of existing streets they shall carry the same name.
3. Generally no street should change direction by more than ninety (90) degrees without a change
in street name.
4. In general, streets shall have names, not numbers or letters. (Amended: 09-21-87, 06-19-89)
560. Utilities
561. If public water and/or sewer is proposed, the system shall be designed so as to accommodate
any development which can reasonably be expected to tie into the system. In determining the
amount of reasonably expected development, the Planning Board shall consider existing land use,
existing zoning, the character of the land, topography, and existing constraints to development
(such as boggy areas), the carrying capacity of the land and of existing municipal services, and the
town’s Comprehensive Plan or sewer and water plan. If the system has to be built so that it is larger
than would normally be required under conditions of the maximum utilization of the subdivider’s
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
33 07-06-2016
contiguous land (including land on opposite sides of streets), the town will pay the difference in
cost for the larger pipes. The subdivider must cover all other expenses.
562. The subdivider shall install any new public utility system according to the approved
Subdivision Plan. If either the public sewer or water system follows a course which is not collinear
with the road network, the Planning Board shall require that the subdivider provide the Town of
Hampden or the Hampden Water District with a utility easement.
563. If individual wells are proposed for the subdivision, the Planning Board may require that the
subdivider’s engineer certify that sufficient water is available for the reasonable foreseeable needs
of the subdivision.
564. If subsurface sewage disposal is proposed, the Planning Board shall require that the
subdivider provide proof that a subsurface sewage disposal system which is in conformance with
the Maine State Plumbing Code can be installed on every lot.
565. Pump stations shall not be used in the construction of sewer systems in any proposed
development with the Town of Hampden, Maine, except as permitted under the Town’s Sewer
Ordinance. (Amended: 03-07-88) (Amended 08-06-07)
570. Buffer Strip - The Planning Board may require a buffer strip when a proposed major subdivision
will be located adjacent to a use where separation is desirable. (Amended 07-06-16)
ARTICLE 600
WAIVER AND MODIFICATIONS OF THESE REGULATIONS
610. Where the Planning Board finds that extraordinary and unnecessary hardship may result from strict
compliance with these regulations, or where there are special circumstances of a particular plan, it may
waive any of these regulations provided that such waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the purpose
of these regulations, the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Ordinance, or any other ordinance. Upon
recommendation of the Planning Board, fees may be adjusted or waived only with the approval of the
Hampden Town Council.
620. In granting any waiver, the Planning Board shall require such conditions as will, in its judgment,
secure substantially the objectives of the requirements so waived. (Amended: 12-01-86)
ARTICLE 700
VALIDITY, EFFECTIVE DATE, CONFLICT OF ORDINANCES, AND FILING
710. Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such
section shall not invalidate any other section or provision of these regulations, and to this end, the
provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. (Amended 07-06-16)
720. The effective date of this ordinance is June 17, 1982 (Amended 07-06-16)
730. These regulations shall not repeal, annul, or in any way impair or remove the necessity of
compliance with any other rule, regulation, ordinance, permit, or provision of law. Where these
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
34 07-06-2016
regulations impose a higher standard for the protection and promotion of health and safety, the provisions
of this ordinance shall prevail. (Amended 07-06-16)
740. A copy of this ordinance shall be filed with the Town Clerk and shall be accessible to any member
of the public. (Amended 07-06-16)
750. The Subdivision Ordinance of the Town of Hampden as adopted at the annual meeting March 3,
1970 and as amended, is hereby repealed.
ARTICLE 800
AMENDMENTS
810. Initiation of Amendment - An amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by:
1. The Planning Board, provided a majority of the Board has so voted;
2. Request of the Town Council to the Planning Board; or
3. Written petition of ten (10%) percent of the registered voters of the town.
820. Proposed Amendments - All proposed amendments shall be referred to the Planning Board for their
recommendation. Such recommendation shall be returned to the Council within thirty (30) days.
830. Adoption of Amendment - For an ordinance change to be adopted, it must be approved by a
majority vote of the Town Council if the change has been recommended by the Planning Board. If the
change has not been recommended by the Planning Board, a two-thirds vote of the Town Council will be
necessary to adopt it.
ARTICLE 900
APPEALS
An appeal may be taken, within thirty (30) days from the Planning Board’s decision on the Final Plan, by
any party to Superior Court in accordance with Rule 80B of the Rules of Civil Procedure.
ARTICLE 1000
DEFINITIONS
1010. Words and terms not defined in section 1020 shall have the meanings given them in the Zoning
Ordinance of the Town of Hampden, or in the absence of definitions in said Ordinance, such words and
terms shall have their customary dictionary meanings.
1020. The following words and terms, for the purpose of this Ordinance, shall be designated as follows:
1021. Subdivision. “Subdivision” means the division of a tract or parcel of land into 3 or more
lots within any 5 year period that begins on or after September 23, 1971. This definition applies
whether the division is accomplished by sale, lease, development, buildings or otherwise. The term
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
35 07-06-2016
“subdivision” also includes the division of a new structure or structures on a tract or parcel of land
into 3 or more dwelling units within a 5 year period, the construction or placement of 3 or more
dwelling units on a single tract or parcel of land and the division of an existing structure or
structures previously used for commercial or industrial use into 3 or more dwelling units with a 5
year period.
1. In determining whether a tract or parcel of land is divided into 3 or more lots, the first dividing
of the tract or parcel is considered to create the first 2 lots and the next dividing of either of
these first 2 lots and the next dividing of either of these first 2 lots, by whomever accomplished,
is considered to create a 3rd lot, unless:
A. Both dividings are accomplished by a subdivider who has retained one of the lots for the
subdivider’s own use as a single-family residence or for open space land as defined in
Title 36, M.R.S.A. Section 1102, for a period of at least 5 years before the 2nd dividing
occurs; or
B. The division of the tract or parcel is otherwise exempt under this definition.
1. The dividing of a tract or parcel of land and the lot or lots so made, which dividing or lots when
made are not subject to this Ordinance, do not become subject to this Ordinance by the
subsequent dividing of that tract or parcel of land or any portion of that tract or parcel. The
Planning Board shall consider the existence of the previously created lot(s) in reviewing a
proposed subdivision created by a subsequent dividing.
2. A lot of 40 or more acres shall not be counted as a lot, except:
A. When the lot or parcel from which it was divided is located entirely or partially within any
shoreland area as defined in the Hampden Zoning Ordinance, or any superseding state
statute.
3. A division accomplished by devise, condemnation, order of court, gift to a person related to the
donor by blood, marriage or adoption, or a gift to a municipality, or by the transfer of any
interest in land to the owner of land abutting that land, does not create a lot or lots for the
purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the transferor in any transfer or gift within this
paragraph is to avoid the objectives of this Ordinance. If the real estate exempt under this
paragraph by a gift to a person related to the donor by blood, marriage or adoption is transferred
within 5 years to another person not related to the donor of the exempt real estate by blood,
marriage or adoption, then the previously exempt division creates a lot or lots for the purposes
of this subsection.
4. The division of a tract or parcel of land into 3 or more lots and upon each of which lots
permanent dwelling structures legally existed before September 23, 1971, is not a subdivision.
5. In determining the number of dwelling units in a structure, the provisions of this subsection
regarding the determination of the number of lots apply, including exemptions from the
definition of a subdivision of land.
6. The grant of a bona fide security interest in an entire lot that has been exempted from the
definition of subdivision under paragraph D, or subsequent transfer of that entire lot by the
original holder of the security interest or that person’s successor in interest, does not create a lot
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
36 07-06-2016
for the purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the transfer is to avoid the objectives of
this Ordinance.
Exceptions
This Ordinance does not apply to:
1. Previously approved subdivisions. Proposed subdivisions approved by the Planning Board
before September 23, 1971, in accordance with laws then in effect;
2. Previously existing subdivisions. Subdivision in actual existence on September 23, 1971, that
did not require approval under prior law; or
3. Previously recorded subdivision. A subdivision, a plan of which had been legally recorded in
the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds before September 23, 1971.
(Amended: 02-07-94)
1022. Private Street Subdivision – A subdivision which includes construction of one or more
Private Streets, and does not involve the construction or reconstruction of a Public Street. (Added 07-
06-16)
1023. Tract or parcel of land - All contiguous land in the same ownership, provided that lands
located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall be considered each a separate tract or
parcel of land unless such road was established by the owner of land on both sides thereof.
1024. Minor Subdivision - A subdivision with less than five (5) lots which does not involve the
construction or reconstruction of a new street, or the extension of public sewer lines, or the
extension of public water lines, or the construction of a storm drainage system.
1025. Major Subdivision - A subdivision which is not a minor subdivision or a Private Street
Subdivision. (Amended 07-06-16)
1026. Street or Road - Shall mean a right-of-way, intended for motorized traffic, in the Town of
Hampden, which is either: (Amended 07-06-2016)
1. Owned, established, and maintained by the Town of Hampden, the County of Penobscot, or the
State of Maine; or
2. Is shown on a plan of a subdivision which has been duly approved by the Hampden Planning
Board and recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds.
1027. Minor Street - A street which serves primarily as an access to abutting properties.
1028. Collector Street - A street which connects one or more minor streets with an arterial street.
1029. Arterial Street - A street which serves heavy flows of traffic and which is used primarily as a
route for traffic between communities and/or other heavy traffic-generating areas.
1030. Design Storm - A storm with a frequency or recurrence interval of twenty-five (25) years and
a duration of twenty-four (24) hours.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
37 07-06-2016
1031. Private Street (or Road) – A Street within a deeded right-of-way that provides access to more
than one principal structure and is privately owned and has not been dedicated to public use other
than access by emergency and public safety vehicles, and is maintained by its private owners. A
Private Street (or Road) shall be protected by a permanent easement which shall conform to the
Road Classification Standards Table and which shall be shown on the plan. The limits of a private
way shall begin from the edge of the traveled way of a Public Street and all associated sub roads
that spur off from this road. Maintenance of this right-of-way area shall be the responsibility of the
homeowner’s association. (Added 07-06-16)
1032. Public Street (or Road) - A public or dedicated right-of-way, which affords the principal
means of vehicular access to abutting property and which is under public ownership or control.
(Added 07-06-16)
1033. Pump Stations - For the purpose of this Ordinance, pump stations shall be defined as any
device intended and designed for the purpose of transporting, pumping or lifting of sanitary sewage
from residences, commercial institutions or central collection points to the municipal sanitary sewer
system. This shall not include lift pumps used in self-contained, on-site subsurface disposal
systems. (Amended: 11-18-85, 9-19-88)
1034. Freshwater Wetland - Freshwater Swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas which are:
1. Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration sufficient to
support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soils; and
2. Not considered part of a great pond, coastal wetland, river, stream or brook.
These areas may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not conform to the
criteria of this subsection. For the purposes of this Ordinance, “wetland” shall mean the same as
freshwater wetland. Freshwater wetlands shall be delineated in accordance with the current
authorized federal manual, unless the Planning Board approves a different delineation method.
(Amended: 12-20-93)
1035. Dwelling Unit - “Dwelling unit” means any part of a structure which, through sale or lease,
is intended for human habitation, including single-family and multi-family housing, condominiums,
apartments and time-share units. (Amended: 02-07-94)
1036. New Structure or Structures - “New structure or structures” includes any structure for which
construction begins on or after September 23, 1988. The area included in the expansion of an
existing structure is deemed to be a new structure for the purposes of this Ordinance. (Amended: 02-07-
94)
Town of Hampden, Maine
Subdivision Ordinance
38 07-06-2016
Sample Cross Section for Private Street Subdivision
(Added 07-06-2016)
1
TOWN OF HAMPDEN
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING POLICY
The following are the Town of Hampden’s Tax Increment Financing (TIF) policy and
application guidelines.
A Tax Increment Financing District is an economic development tool available to the
Town of Hampden. A TIF may be established for purposes to finance municipal
investments. A TIF may also be enacted to provide incentive or financing to a private
development in the form of a tax rebate through an associated Credit Enhancement
Agreement (CEA).
This Policy sets forth the guidelines and requirements for a private enterprise to request
that the Town establish a TIF District and associated CEA to support their project. The
Town may, at its own discretion, create a TIF District for municipal purposes, regardless
of request or plans for any CEA.
POLICY GUIDELINES
For the TIF (and CEA) application to be considered by Planning and Development
Committee and the Hampden Town Council, the application must meet a majority of the
following guidelines.
Notwithstanding compliance with any or all of the guidelines, the creation of a TIF
District is a policy choice to be made by the Hampden Town Council on a case-by-case
basis; a TIF is not a right under Maine law and meeting these guidelines does not
create a right or entitlement in an applicant.
I. Basic Provisions:
1. The Town of Hampden has the option of issuing bonds, which are retired using
the tax increment, or paying the tax increment directly to the investing business
via a Credit Enhancement Agreement. In order to minimize risk to the citizens of
Hampden, Tax Increment Financing provided via a CEA is preferred. The
applicant must provide any and all other documentation that will protect the
Town’s economic and financial position, and/or that conform both to the letter
and spirit of the underlying agreement between the applicant and the Town.
2. A Credit Enhancement Agreement, if awarded, will provide for a recapture of the
benefits if the project should move to another municipality. Assignments to future
owners of the property (project) may be allowed only for conventional commercial
financing purposes or where the proposed assignee agrees to be bound by the
same terms and condition as the original applicant.
2
3. The applicant is obligated to apply for any State reimbursement programs for
personal property and/or real estate taxes. All proceeds from a State
reimbursement will be returned to the Town, with some exceptions. The
applicant may be allowed to retain this reimbursement under certain
circumstances, such as: significant real estate value not subject to the TIF,
economic necessity, or other project specific concerns. Any State Exemptions for
personal property taxes shall not be subject to this provision.
4. The applicant will provide verified documentation as to the value of the fixed
assets, being real or personal property, as of the date of the acceptance of the
final application. The Town and applicant will agree upon the original assessed
value for TIF purposes if there is a difference between the committed value and
the April 1 assessed value.
5. The Town may establish TIF Districts to provide for municipal TIF funds for public
purposes, without consideration of a CEA. The Town need not hold itself to the
limits set forth in this Policy in regards to the size of investment. The primary
purpose of this Policy is to set forth the guidelines for requests to establish a TIF
District and an associated CEA by a private investment.
II. Guidelines:
1. The Town’s participation is economically necessary and involvement by the
Town is needed in order for the project to be undertaken. Justification for
economic need and Town involvement must be demonstrated by:
a. A need to offset infrastructure costs unique to the site, or
b. A need to offset economic advantages available to the entity if it should
build or expand outside of Hampden, or
c. The unavailability of sufficient private or other public funding sources to
meet the full capital investment needs of the entity seeking assistance.
2. The project creates new incremental real estate tax equal to, or greater than, five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000). The value of new, incremental personal
property tax value may be considered if the value is equal to, or greater than, the
value of new incremental real estate value.
3. The applicant must provide evidence of financial capability to undertake the
project by submitting one of the following:
3
a. A letter from a financial institution, government agency, or other funding
agency indicating a commitment to provide a specified amount of funds,
and the uses for which the funds may be utilized.
b. In cases where funding is required but there can be no commitment of
money until approvals are received, a letter of “Intent to Fund” from the
appropriate funding institution indicating the amount of funds and their
specified uses.
c. The applicant’s most recent corporate (or other entity) annual report
indicating availability of sufficient funds to finance the development,
together with explanatory material interpreting the report.
d. Evidence indicating availability of funds if the developer will personally
finance the development.
4. Compliance with all statutory and regulatory guidelines of the Town and State.
III. Conditions of Approval and Guidelines to Determine Level of Town
Participation:
Although an applicant need not meet each of the following criteria, the Town may use
them to determine the level of participation.
1. The project assists an established business in the Town of Hampden, thus
retaining existing employment or existing tax base.
2. The project creates long-term, permanent employment opportunities.
3. The project improves the general economy of Hampden.
4. The project improves and broadens the tax base.
5. The project improves a distressed area within the community in need of
redevelopment, or an area identified as a priority by the Town of Hampden for
redevelopment.
6. The project improves a distressed area or blighted building in need of
rehabilitation, or a building identified as a priority by the Town of Hampden for
rehabilitation.
7. The project creates public infrastructure facilities or benefits, which have
application beyond the particular development, such as traffic upgrades, public
parking facilities, etc.
4
8. If not from the beginning of the district, then as soon as possible, the project will
support community projects or create public benefits, such as granting access to
open spaces, creating student internships, providing job training, supporting local
contractors and suppliers, etc. The Town shall set forth the goals for municipal
benefit in any TIF application that may be required within the TIF District or the
TIF Municipal Development Plan.
IV. Application Guidelines
The Town’s Planning and Development Committee will act as a clearinghouse and
coordinate all activity regarding TIF & CEA proposals, and in cooperation with the
Finance Committee, negotiate the conditions of the proposed tax increment financing as
requested by applicants. Working with potential applicants, the Community and
Economic Development Director, her/his designee or consultant(s) as directed by the
Director, as the designated representative of the Planning and Development
Committee, will:
1. Provide information on tax increment financing.
2. Discuss project proposals and accept preliminary application information from
applicants.
3. Review preliminary applications, based on policy guidelines, to insure that
application is complete, and advise applicants of determination.
4. Make a recommendation to the Planning and Development Committee whether
to accept or reject the application. If deemed necessary by the Town Manager
and the Community and Economic Development Director, the advice and
assistance of other departments within the Town of Hampden may be requested.
The Community and Economic Development Director will provide a written
decision of the Planning and Development Committee to the applicants
approving (with or without conditions), or disapproving, the preliminary
application.
Approval of the preliminary application by the Planning and Development
Committee shall not create any vested rights in the applicants.
5. Will, following approval by the Planning and Development Committee, assist
applicants to complete a final application suitable for presentation to the Town
Council and the Maine Department of Economic and Community Development
for formal review and approval.
6. Make presentation to the Town Council with the recommendation of the Planning
and Development Committee. The applicant shall be present at the public
hearing to answer any questions prior to a final vote by the Town Council.
5
7. Advise applicants, in writing, of the decision of the Town Council.
8. Assist the applicant in submitting the necessary documents and information to
the Town so that the Town can make application to the State, based on direction
from the Town Council.
9. Finalize, with the assistance of staff, the Credit Enhancement Agreement
between the Town of Hampden and the applicant. If the applicant transfers
ownership of its property within the District, the applicant must notify the Town
Manager, in writing, prior to finalizing the transfer. The new owner must agree, in
writing, to accept the provisions of the TIF/Credit Enhancement Agreement as
presented to and approved by the Town Council, before the Finance Director will
release any further TIF payments. The Credit Enhancement Agreement is
subject to the approval of the Town Council.
10. Monitor ongoing public and private investment in the development project.
Preliminary tax increment financing applications will be available from the Community
and Economic Development Director, Town of Hampden, 106 Western Avenue,
Hampden, ME 04444.
All applicants must pay all costs associated with the preparation of the application and
agree to reimburse the Town of all costs of review and out-of-pocket expenses,
including, but not necessarily limited to, legal, professional, and any other review costs,
whether or not the TIF application is approved.
The applicant must further agree to advance whatever funds are necessary or
requested by the Town for any of the costs or reimbursements set forth herein, to be
held in escrow.
Amended by vote of Hampden Town Council, August 3, 2015
TOWN COUNCIL COMPENSATION ORDINANCE
The Town of Hampden hereby ordains that the following ordinance be enacted.
Section 1. Pursuant to Sec. 203 of the Town Charter, the Hampden Town
Council hereby determines that the annual salary of the chairman and councilors
shall be as follows:
Chairman $35.00/meeting
Other Councilors $30.00/meeting
Section 2. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a meeting shall include all regular
or special meetings of the Town Council, as well as the meetings of its
Committees provided, however, that if a Committee meeting takes place on the
same date as and immediately prior to or following a meeting of the Town
Council, the two adjacent meetings shall be considered a single meeting for the
purposes of compensation. In order to be eligible for compensation for a
meeting, the chairman or councilor must have been present at the meeting.
Section 3. Pursuant to Sec. 203 of the Town Charter, the foregoing increase in
salary shall become effective as of the first regularly scheduled meeting in
January 2006, said meeting being the commencement of the terms of councilors
elected at the next regular election scheduled for November 8, 2005.
Adopted by Town Council: 9/19/2005
Effective: 1/01/2006
Amended: 08/21/2017
Town of Hampden, Maine
Board of Appeals Ordinance
1
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
BOARD OF APPEALS ORDINANCE
ADOPTED: Hampden Town Council, June 19, 2006
Effective Date: July 19, 2006
Amended: October 15, 2018
Effective: November 14, 2018
CERTIFIED BY:
Paula A. Scott, Town Clerk
Town Clerk
Title Affix Seal
BOARD OF APPEALS ORDINANCE
CONTENTS
ARTICLE PAGE
1. ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION 2
2. JURISDICTION 2
3. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF APPEALS 2
4. APPEAL PROCEDURE 3
5. CONFLICT OF INTEREST 5
6. RECONSIDERATION 5
7. STAY OF PROCEEDINGS 6
8. NEW APPEALS 6
9. EFFECTIVE DATE 6
Town of Hampden, Maine
Board of Appeals Ordinance
2
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
BOARD OF APPEALS ORDINANCE
ARTICLE 1
ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
1.1 Composition of the Board of Appeals. A Board of Appeals is hereby established which shall
consist of five (5) members and one (1) alternate. (Amended 10/15/2018) The term of office of all members
is three (3) years, serving staggered terms. Neither a municipal officer nor his/her spouse may be a
member of the Board of Appeals. Members of the Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Town
Council. When there is a permanent vacancy, the Municipal Officers shall appoint a new member for the
remainder of the unexpired term. Members of the Board of Appeals may be removed from office by the
Town Council for cause upon written charges and after hearing. The Board of Appeals shall elect a
chairperson and secretary from its own membership.
1.2 Present Board Re-Established. The present Zoning Board of Appeals for the Town of Hampden as
now constituted, shall constitute the Board of Appeals under this ordinance, and each member thereof
shall serve the remainder of his or her present term.
ARTICLE 2
JURISDICTION
2.1. Jurisdiction of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals is authorized to hear appeals from
decisions made under the following Codes and Ordinances of the Town of Hampden, as the same may be
amended from time to time. All appeals and variance requests shall be in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the subject code or ordinance, including any provisions thereof specifying the jurisdiction of
the Board.
1. Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code
2. Fire Prevention Code.
3. Floodplain Management Ordinance.
4. Historic Preservation Ordinance.
5. Life Safety Code Ordinance.
6. Mobile Home Park Ordinance.
7. Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
8. Special Amusement Ordinance.
9. Zoning Ordinance.
10. Any other State or Locally adopted code, ordinance or standard that references appeals,
interpretation, or review by the Municipal Board of Appeals.
2.2. Enforcement Decisions. The Board of Appeals' authority does not include appeals from enforcement
decisions made by the Code Enforcement Officer, Building Official, Fire Inspector, or other enforcement
official. The term enforcement decisions refer to violation determinations and enforcement actions taken
by the enforcement official.
ARTICLE 3
POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF APPEALS
3.1. Powers and Duties of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers
as provided for in the subject code or ordinance:
Town of Hampden, Maine
Board of Appeals Ordinance
3
3.1.1. De novo Review. To hear and decide, on a de novo basis, an administrative appeal alleging that
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made in writing by, or failure to
act by, the Code Enforcement Officer, Building Official, Fire Inspector, or other official in regard to
an application for a permit under the subject code or ordinance.
3.1.2. Appellate Review. If authorized by the subject code or ordinance, to hear and decide on an
appellate basis, an administrative appeal alleging that there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by, or a failure to act by, the reviewing authority body in regard to an
application for a permit, license, or approval under the subject code or ordinance.
3.1.3 Standard of Review. When acting in a de novo capacity, the Board of Appeals shall hear and
decide the administrative appeal afresh, undertake its own independent analysis of the evidence
presented and the law, research its own decision, and make findings and conclusions in support of its
decision. When acting in an appellate capacity, the Board of Appeals shall limit its review to the
record of the proceedings before the reviewing authority body, and may reverse the decision of that
body only upon a finding that the decision was contrary to specific provisions of the subject code or
ordinance or was not supported by substantial evidence in the record. The Board of Appeals shall not
substitute its judgment for that of the reviewing authority body. If the Board reverses the decision of
the reviewing authority body, it shall remand the matter to that body for further consideration.
3.1.4. Variances. To authorize variances in specific cases but only within the limitations set forth in
the subject code or ordinance of the Town of Hampden.
3.1.5. Interpretation of Ordinances. As provided in the subject code or ordinance, the Board of
Appeals shall have the authority to hear appeals to interpret the provisions of a code or ordinance
called into question. The Board of Appeals shall interpret the provision called into question based on
any of the following considerations: the context in which the word is used in the subject code or
ordinance; the legislative intent implicit in the use of the word; definitions given by experts qualified
in the field under consideration; other evidence which is germane to the issue but does not involve the
specific proposal at hand; and ordinary usage of the word.
3.1.6. Adoption of Rules. The Board of Appeals shall have the authority to adopt rules of procedure
to govern the conduct of its business as long as the rules are consistent with this ordinance and any
other applicable codes or ordinances, and with state laws.
ARTICLE 4
APPEAL PROCEDURE
4.1. Making an Appeal
4.1.1. Appeals to the Board of Appeals shall be taken within thirty (30) days of the decision appealed
from, and not otherwise, except that the Board, upon a showing of good cause, may waive the thirty
(30) day requirement.
4.1.2. Such an appeal shall be made by filing with the Board of Appeals a written notice of appeal,
specifying the grounds for such appeal. For an appellate appeal, the application, record of the
reviewing authority body, decision of the body, and any written arguments on the appeal shall be filed
by applicant at least 7 days before the hearing. In addition, for a de novo appeal, all written materials
and exhibits in support of the appeal must be filed by the applicant at least 7 days before the hearing.
Any opposing parties may file a response to such materials at least 3 days before the hearing. No
Town of Hampden, Maine
Board of Appeals Ordinance
4
exhibits or other written materials that were not filed within these time limits shall be admitted at the
hearing except by leave of the Chair for good cause shown.
4.1.3. The Board of Appeals shall notify the town official, or reviewing authority body, and applicant
of the appeal.
4.1.4. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within thirty-five (35) days of
its receipt of an appeal application. Notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be placed
in newspapers of general circulation in the area at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. In
addition, at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing, notice of the appeal shall be sent by mail to the
owners of properties that abut the property for which the application or appeal is made. Failure of an
abutter to receive notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. A fee shall be paid for application of all
appeals, variances and sewer reviews consistent with the provisions of the Town of Hampden Fees
Ordinance. The cost of the appeal shall be borne by the person(s) filing the appeal.
4.2. Hearings
4.2.1. For an appellate appeal, the Board may not accept new evidence on the subject matter of the
appeal, but may receive oral or written argument concerning the merits of the appeal.
4.2.2. For de novo appeals, the Board may receive any oral or documentary evidence, but shall
provide as a matter of policy for the exclusion of irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious
evidence. Every party shall have the right to present his/her case or defense by oral or documentary
evidence, to submit rebuttal evidence and to conduct such cross examination as may be required for a
full and true disclosure of the facts. Unsubstantiated hearsay and third party hearsay shall not be
given the same weight as documented evidence.
4.2.3. The appellant's case shall be heard first. To maintain orderly procedure, each side shall
proceed without interruption. Questions may be asked through the Chair. All persons at the hearing
shall abide by the order of the Chairman.
4.2.4. At any hearing a party may be represented by agent or attorney. Hearings shall not be
continued to other times except for good cause.
4.2.5. The town official, or representative of the reviewing authority body, whose action or nonaction
is under appeal, shall attend all hearings and may present to the Board of Appeals all plans,
photographs, or other material deemed appropriate for an understanding of the appeal.
4.2.6. The transcript of testimony, if any, and exhibits, together with all papers and requests filed in
the proceedings, shall constitute the record.
4.3. Decisions of the Board of Appeals
4.3.1. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of deciding
an appeal. A member who abstains shall not be counted in determining whether a quorum exists.
4.3.2. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse
any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the town official or reviewing authority body, or
to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter on which it is required to act under this Ordinance, or
to effect any variation in the application of this Ordinance.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Board of Appeals Ordinance
5
4.3.3. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
4.3.4. The Board shall decide all appeals within thirty-five (35) days after hearing, and shall issue a
written decision on all appeals.
4.3.5. All decisions shall become a part of the record and shall include a statement of findings and
conclusions as well as the reasons or basis therefore, upon all the material issues of fact, law or
discretion presented, and the appropriate order, relief or denial thereof. Notice of any decision shall
be mailed or hand delivered to the appellant, or appellant's representative or agent, and the town
official or reviewing authority body whose action or non-action was the subject matter of the appeal
within seven (7) days of the decision date.
4.3.6. Upon notification of the granting of an appeal or variance or the interpretation of an ordinance
by the Board of Appeals, the town official or reviewing authority body shall promptly act in a manner
consistent with the Board's decision, unless an appeal is taken therefrom to Superior Court.
(Note that if the enforcement officer, board or council has denied an application based on multiple
non-compliance issues reversal of a solitary decision might not have the effect of reversing the overall
basis of the denial. For example if a building permit application failed to meet building code and
zoning standards relief from one standard would not result in an approval of the project).
4.3.7. A copy of all variances effecting shoreland zoning granted by the Board of Appeals shall be
submitted to the Dept. of Environmental Protection within fourteen (14) days of the decision.
4.4. Appeal to Superior Court - Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings
before the Board of Appeals, and has standing to do so, may take an appeal to Superior Court in
accordance with Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure within forty-five (45) days from the
date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE 5
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
5.1. Voting Procedure for Determination of Conflict of Interest. Any question of whether a particular
issue involves a "conflict of interest" sufficient to disqualify a member from voting thereon, shall be
decided by a majority vote of the members, except the member whose potential conflict is under
consideration.
5.2. Conflict of Interest. The term "conflict of interest" shall be construed to mean direct or indirect
pecuniary interest, which shall include pecuniary benefit to any member of the person's immediate family
(e.g., grandfather, father, wife, son, grandson) or to the member's employer or the employer of any
member of the person's immediate family or any other prejudice that would prevent a Board member
from rendering an unfair and/or impartial decision.
ARTICLE 6
RECONSIDERATION
6.1. Reconsideration of Decisions. The Board of Appeals may reconsider any decision within forty-five
(45) days of its prior decision. A request to reconsider must be filed within ten (10) days of the decision to
be reconsidered. A vote to reconsider and the action taken on the reconsideration must occur and be
completed within forty-five (45) days of the date of the vote on the original decision. The Board may
conduct additional hearings and receive additional evidence and testimony. Notwithstanding Section 4.4,
Town of Hampden, Maine
Board of Appeals Ordinance
6
appeal of a reconsidered decision must be made within fifteen (15) days after the decision on
reconsideration.
ARTICLE 7
STAY OF PROCEEDINGS
7.1. Stay of Proceedings. An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board after the notice of appeal has
been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life and property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a court
of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.
ARTICLE 8
NEW APPEALS
8.1 New Appeals. After a decision has been made by the Board of Appeals, a new appeal of similar
import shall not be submitted to, or entertained by, the Board until one (1) year has elapsed from the date
of the decision.
ARTICLE 9
EFFECTIVE DATE
9.1. Effective Date. The effective date of this Ordinance shall be 30 days from the date of adoption by
the Town Council.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Cemetery Ordinance
1
TOWN OF HAMPDEN
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
CEMETERY ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1. CEMETERIES, DEFINITION 2
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS 2
SECTION 3. LOT OWNERSHIP 2
SECTION 4. CEMETERY SEXTON 2
SECTION 5. PRICE SCHEDULE 3
SECTION 6. CARE OF CEMETERY 3
SECTION 7. REGULATIONS FOR IMPROVING LOTS 3
ADOPTED: Hampden Town Council September 8, 1981
Effective Date: October 8, 1981
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council November 7, 1983
Effective Date: December 7, 1983
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council September 8, 1986
Effective Date: October 15, 1986
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council November 17, 2003
Effective Date: December 17, 2003
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council September 18, 2017
Effective Date: October 18, 2017
CERTIFIED BY: _______________________________________
Paula A. Scott, Town Clerk
Town of Hampden, Maine
Cemetery Ordinance
2
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
CEMETERY ORDINANCE
Section 1. Cemeteries, Definition
The term cemeteries, as used in this ordinance, shall be construed to include all lands now or hereafter
deeded to and accepted by the Town of Hampden for burial purposes including the following locations:
1. Locust Grove (downtown)
2. Riverview (East Hampden)
3. Neally’s Corner (Kennebec Road)
4. Lakeview (Western Avenue/Route 9)
5. Old Burial Grounds
Section 2. Definitions
1. Cemetery Deed – A document that conveys burial rights, or the right of Interment for a Cemetery Lot.
A deed establishes the lot owners and lineage of direct heirs to the lot. The recorded lot owner is
determined by the purchaser at the time of the sale. The Cemetery Deed will detail, and not be
limited to the following: name of the Cemetery; location of the cemetery lot(s) (row, area/section, plot
number and grave or lot number); amount paid; name of person who purchased the lot(s); name of lot
owner/grantee; lineage of direct heirs, if applicable; and trustee and witness signatures.
2. Grave – An area suitable for the interment of one body, except in the case of parent and child or two
infants buried in one casket simultaneously. Further variation may be made in the case of cremations
with family lots subject to the placing of markers and upon approval of the Cemetery Sexton.
3. Lot – A plot of land approximately 4 feet by 8 feet sufficient for one or more graves.
4. Resident – A person who has resided in the Town for at least two years during some point in their
life, or is a current resident of the Town.
5. Grave-stones – Any stone which marks a grave or grave site.
Section 3. Lot Ownership
1. Right of Burial – The term “owner of lot” shall mean an individual who, either through purchase,
grant, or transfer, acquired the right and privilege of burial of the dead, of constructing mausoleums
and of erecting cenotaphs or other monuments or ornaments in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance as it exists or may hereafter be amended.
2. Transfer – The granting, transfer, and sale of lots in municipal cemeteries shall be under the control
of the Cemetery Sexton subject to the rules and regulations adopted by the Town Council and the
general supervision of the Town Manager. Owners transferring, granting or selling lots in municipal
cemeteries must obtain prior consent of the Cemetery Sexton.
3. Purchase – Any individual wishing to purchase a cemetery lot shall apply to the Cemetery Sexton
and then select from those lots available the lot he/she desires to purchase. Upon payment to the
Town Treasurer in accordance with the Fees Ordinance, the Cemetery Sexton shall provide a
Town of Hampden, Maine
Cemetery Ordinance
3
Cemetery Deed. A Cemetery Deed may be purchased at a time of need, or may be purchased in
advance for pre-planning burial arrangements.
Section 4. Cemetery Sexton
1. Appointment – The Cemetery Sexton shall be appointed by the Town Manager. The sexton shall
serve until removed by the action of the manager. He/she shall be responsible to the Town Manager
for the control and management of all municipal cemeteries; for the direction of all assistants under
his/her direct supervision, and for the administration of the Cemetery Ordinance adopted by the Town
Council.
2. Authority – The Cemetery Sexton or his/her designated assistants have the authority to enter upon
any lot with the necessary equipment for the purpose of improving the appearance and condition of
any objectionable object that may have been placed contrary to the regulations of the cemetery; to
remove any dead or dangerous tree, shrub, vine, neglected vegetation, fence, railing or enclosures;
and to remove any artificial floral design or decoration not removed by September 10 of each year.
Section 5. Price Schedule
1. Lot Prices
Lots purchased for non-residents *
Lots purchased for residents *
Lots purchased for non-resident infants or cremations *
Lots purchased for resident infants or cremations *
*Price Schedule and Fees are in accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance in effect at
the time of purchase.
(Amended: 11-17-03)
2. Interment Prices
Adult grave opened during weekday *
Adult grave opened during weekend or holiday *
Infant or cremation grave opened during weekday *
Infant or cremation grave opened during weekend or holiday *
*Price Schedule and Fees are in accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance in effect at
the time of purchase.
(Amended: 11-17-03)
3. Additional Fees
Funerals will pay an hourly fee* for services required by the Town beyond 3:00 P.M. There will be a
fee* for the use of the receiving vault by non-residents.
*Services and Fees are in accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance in effect at the time
of purchase. (Amended: 11-17-03)
Section 6. Care of Cemetery
1. Cemetery Care – Any person who purchases a lot is required to pay to the Town Treasurer the sum
established in accordance with this ordinance as a reasonable amount for the care of said lots. The
care of cemeteries shall include the cutting of the grass on the lot at reasonable intervals, the raking
and cleaning of the lot, and such work as may be necessary to keep the grave in a neat condition, and
for the care and maintenance of the cemetery. Care by the Town shall not include maintenance or
repair of any monuments, planting of flowers or shrubs upon any lot, nor shall the Town be
Town of Hampden, Maine
Cemetery Ordinance
4
responsible to move, replant or replace any real or artificial flowers or decorations in conjunction
with the maintenance of said lot.
2. One half of all lot sale fees will remain in a capital account for perpetual lot care. Remaining funds
shall be used to offset costs of additional maintenance activities for all Hampden cemeteries.
Section 7. Regulations for Improving Lots
1. Enclosures - No enclosure of any nature, such as fences, copings, hedges or ditches shall hereafter be
erected on any lot.
2. Grade – Grave mounds shall not be allowed. No lots shall be raised above the established grade.
3. Placement – All flowers/decorations will be placed around the upright monument, or top of the grave.
The middle and foot of the grave shall be left clear to allow for maintenance activities.
4. Trees/Shrubs – No trees shall be planted in the Town of Hampden cemeteries. Shrubs may be
planted in the Town of Hampden cemeteries with the consent of the Cemetery Sexton.
5. Grave-stones – All headstones and monuments shall have a foundation. All graves where interment
has occurred shall be marked by a grave-stone. All markers shall be no more than 3 ½ feet in length
if a single lot is owned; the Cemetery Sexton may authorize wider markers if more than one adjacent
lot is in common ownership. Markers may not require a foundation. The location of all grave-stones
and markers shall meet the approval of the Cemetery Sexton.
6. Permitted and Prohibited Activities – Lot owners may improve, cultivate and care for their lots and
existing trees, shrubs and plants in accordance with ordinance and may utilize sound wood, concrete
or metal containers, plants or flowers of such kind or size as do not interfere with the adjacent lots.
Owners shall not change the grade of any lot or interfere in any way with the general plan of
landscaping of cemeteries, nor add any material to his/her lot which is considered by the Sexton to be
unfit for the cultivation of grass.
7. Application of Ordinance to Undertakers, Etc. – Undertakers, monumental concerns, contractors,
florists or other individuals or corporations working within the cemetery must comply with this
ordinance. All work done by such individuals or concerns must be preceded by notice provided to the
Sexton, and all work is to be performed under the supervision of, and meet the approval of, the
Cemetery Sexton.
8. Vaults – The casket must be placed in a container of permanent character, such as concrete or other
suitable material substance.
9. Trespass – No unauthorized person shall be allowed upon the grounds after dark.
10. Vandalism – No person shall injure any tree or shrub, or mar any landmarks, marker, memorial or
structure, or any way deface the grounds of the cemetery.
11. Disclaimer – The cemetery Town of Hampden shall not be responsible for any theft or damage to
items present on the grave lots.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Cemetery Ordinance
5
12. Vehicles – Any person driving in the cemetery shall be responsible for any damage done by his/her
vehicle. Speeds of over 10 mph will not be permitted and no person shall drive his/her vehicle upon
the lawns.
13. Dogs – Dogs shall not be permitted within cemetery grounds.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Charter
- 1 -
C H A R T E R
OF THE
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
ADOPTED: Hampden Town Council, January 17, 1972
CERTIFIED BY: _________________________________
Denise R. Hodsdon, Town Clerk
Affix Seal
AMENDED: September 24, 1973
AMENDED: December 5, 1977
AMENDED: January 8, 1979
AMENDED: March 13, 1979
AMENDED: November, 1979
AMENDED: March, 1982
AMENDED: June 8, 1982
AMENDED: November 6, 1984
AMENDED: November 5, 1985
AMENDED: November 4, 1986
AMENDED: November 6, 1990
AMENDED: November 6, 2001
AMENDED: November 5, 2002
AMENDED: November 2, 2004
AMENDED: November 6, 2007
AMENDED: November 5, 2013
AMENDED: June 10, 2014
AMENDED November 4, 2014
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Charter
- 2 -
COUNCIL-MANAGER CHARTER
OF THE
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
CONTENTS
PAGE
ARTICLE I POWERS OF THE TOWN 4
Section. 101 Powers of the Town 4
Section. 102 Construction 4
Section. 103 Intergovernmental Relations 4
ARTICLE II TOWN COUNCIL 4
Section. 201 Composition and Term of Office 4
Section. 202 Eligibility 4
Section. 203 Compensation 4
Section. 204 Mayor and Deputy Mayor 4
Section. 205 Powers and Duties 5
Section. 206 Prohibitions 5
Section. 207 Vacancies; Forfeiture Of Office; Filling Of Vacancies 5
Section. 208 Council to Judge Qualifications of Its Members 5
Section. 209 Induction of Council Into Office 5
Section. 210 Investigations 5
Section. 211 Procedure 6
Section. 212 Action Requiring an Ordinance 6
Section. 213 Ordinances in General 7
Section. 214 Emergency Ordinances 7
Section. 215 Authentication and Recording; Codification; and Printing 8
ARTICLE III ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES 8
Section. 301 Titles and Appointment 8
Section. 302 Creation of Departments 8
Section. 303 Merit Principle 9
ARTICLE IV TOWN MANAGER 9
Section. 401 Town Manager; Qualifications 9
Section. 402 Removal 10
Section. 403 Powers and Duties of the Town Manager 10
Section. 404 Absence of Town Manager 11
ARTICLE V TAX ADMINISTRATION 11
Section. 501 Assessment Administration, Assessor 11
Section. 502 Board of Assessment Review, Appointments; Vacancies 11
Section. 503 Board of Assessment Review; Powers; Duties 11
ARTICLE VI ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS AND 11
PLANNING BOARD
Section. 601 Composition and Terms 11
Section. 602 Planning Board; Appointment 11
Section. 603 Planning Board; Organization and Rules 12
Section. 604 Planning Board; Comprehensive Plan 12
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Charter
- 3 -
PAGE
ARTICLE VII FINANCIAL PROCEDURES 12
Section. 701 Fiscal Year 12
Section. 702 Submission of Budget and Budget Message 12
Section. 703 The Budget Message 12
Section. 704 Budget 12
Section. 705 Capital Program 13
Section. 706 Council Action on Budget 13
Section. 707 Council Action on Capital Program 14
Section. 708 Public Records 14
Section. 709 Amendments After Adoption 14
Section. 710 Lapse of Appropriations 15
Section. 711 Administration of Budget 15
Section. 712 Annual Post-Audit 15
ARTICLE VIII NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 15
Section. 801 Conduct of Elections 15
Section. 802 Officials Nominated and Elected At Large 16
Section. 803 Nomination Paper and Specimen Ballot 16
Section. 804 Ordering Candidate Surnames 16
Section. 805 Election Provisions 16
Section. 806 Nomination 16
Section. 807 District Boundaries 17
ARTICLE IX REFERENDUM INITIATIVE 18
Section. 901 General Authority 18
Section. 902 Referendum on Council Action 18
Section. 903 Commencement of Proceedings 18
Section. 904 Ordinances, Orders or Resolves Submitted to Popular Vote 19
Section. 905 Enactment of Ordinances by Initiative 19
Section. 906 Attorney's Examination 19
ARTICLE X GENERAL PROVISIONS 19
Section. 1001 Oath of Office 19
Section. 1002 Activities Prohibited 19
Section. 1002.A Forfeiture of Office by Council Decision 20
Section. 1003 Charter Amendment 20
Section. 1004 Ordinances Not Inconsistent Continue in Force 20
Section. 1005 Deleted June 2, 1982 20
Section. 1006 Existing Contracts Not Invalidated 20
Section. 1007 Short Title 20
Section. 1008 Separability Clause 20
Section. 1009 Repealing Clause 20
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Charter
- 4 -
ARTICLE I
POWERS OF TOWN
Sec. 101 Powers of the Town - The town shall have all powers possible for a municipality to have under
the Constitution and laws of Maine.
Sec. 102 Construction - The powers of the town under this charter shall be construed liberally in favor of
the town, and the specific mention of particular powers in the charter shall not be construed as limiting in
any way the general power stated in this Article.
Sec. 103 Intergovernmental Relations - The town may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its
functions and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise,
with any one or more states or civil divisions or agencies thereof, or of the United States or any agency
thereof.
ARTICLE II
TOWN COUNCIL
Sec. 201 Composition and Term of Office
(a) Composition - There shall be a town council of seven (7) members, four (4) of whom shall be
district councilors and three (3) of whom shall be at large councilors.
(b) Term of Office - The term of office for councilors elected on or after the regular municipal
election held in 2005 shall be three (3) years. Provided, however, that any councilor elected to fill a
vacancy shall serve the unexpired term of that position. (Amended: November 2, 2004)
Sec. 202 Eligibility - Only registered voters who reside in the town shall be eligible to hold office as
councilors at large. Only a registered voter and a resident of a district may be elected as councilor for
the district. Any registered voter seeking office must be a resident of the town for at least one year. (Amended:
June 8, 1982)
Sec. 203 Compensation - The Town Council may determine the annual salary of the chairman and
councilors by ordinance, but no ordinance increasing such salary shall become effective until the
commencement of the terms of councilors elected at the next regular election. Salaries of councilors shall
be paid on a quarterly basis for services performed in the preceding quarter. Councilors elected in a special
election shall be paid on a pro rata basis for the time they shall actually serve. Initially annual salaries shall
be twenty dollars ($20.00) per meeting for each councilor and town counselor and twenty-five dollars
($25.00) per meeting for council mayor. (Amended: June 8, 1982)
Sec. 204 Mayor and Deputy Mayor - At the first council meeting in January of each year the town’s attorney
shall, after the swearing of council members, preside over the town council’s election of one of its members
as mayor for the ensuing year. The mayor shall preside at the meetings of the council and may vote on all
matters that come before the council. The mayor shall represent the interests of his/her constituency in all
matters before the council. The mayor shall be recognized as the head of the town government for all
ceremonial purposes and by the Governor for the purposes of military law, but shall have no regular
administrative duties. A newly elected mayor’s first official act shall be to preside over the council’s
election of one of its members as a deputy mayor for the ensuing year. The deputy mayor shall exercise all
the powers of the mayor during the temporary absence or temporary disability of the mayor. The mayor
and/or the deputy mayor may resign, with or without explanation and with or without the consent of the
council, their respective positions at any time. Should the office of mayor become vacant at any time other
than as prescribed above, the town’s attorney shall, as the next order of council business preside over the
election of a mayor. Should the deputy mayor become vacant, the mayor shall, as the next order of council
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Charter
- 5 -
business preside over the election of a deputy mayor. (Amended: November 5, 1985, November 6, 1990, Amended: November
6, 2007)
Sec. 205 Powers and Duties - Except as otherwise provided by state statute or this charter, all powers of
the town shall be vested in the town council, which shall be the general legislative body of the town. The
town council shall be the municipal officers of the Town of Hampden.
Sec. 206 Prohibitions - Except where authorized by state statute no councilor shall hold any other town
office or town employment during the term for which that person was elected to the town council.
Neither the council nor any of its members shall, in any manner, dictate the appointment or removal of any
adminstrative officials or employees whom the manager or any subordinates are empowered to appoint, but
the council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the manager anything pertaining to
appointment and removal of such officials and employees.
Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative services
solely through the manager and neither the council nor any member, thereof shall give orders to any
subordinates of the manager, either publicly or privately. (Amended: November 6, 1990)
Sec. 207 Vacancies; Forefeiture of Office; Filling of Vacancies
(a) Vacancies - The office of councilor shall become vacant upon nonacceptance, resignation,
abandonment, death, permanent disability, permanent incompetency, failure to qualify for the
office within 10 days after written demand by the council, forefeiture of office, or failure of the
municipality to elect a person for the office. (Amended: November 6, 1990)
(b) Forfeiture of Office - A councilor shall forfeit that person's office if that person (1) lacks at any
time during that person's term of office any qualification for the office prescribed by this charter or
by law, (2) violates any express prohibition of this charter, (3) is convicted of a crime or offense
which is, during that person's term, reasonably related to that person's ability to serve as councilor,
or (4) fails to attend six (6) regular or special meetings of the council in the prior twelve
month period. (Amended: November 5, 1985, November 6, 1990, November 5, 2013)
(c) Filling of Vacancies - If a seat on the town council becomes vacant more than 6 months prior to
the next regular municipal election, the council shall call a special election to fill the unexpired
term within 60 days from the date that the vacancy occurred. If a seat on the council becomes vacant
less than 6 months prior to the next regular municipal election, the council may call a special
election. (Amended: November 2, 2004)
Sec. 208 Council to Judge Qualifications of Its Members - The town council shall be the judge of the
election and qualifications of its members and for such purposes shall have power to subpoena witnesses
and require productions of records, but the decision of the council in any such case shall be subject to review
by the courts.
Sec. 209 Induction of Council Into Office - The town council shall meet at the usual time and place for
holding meetings on the first regularly scheduled meeting in January and at said meeting councilors-elect
shall be sworn to the faithful discharge of their duties by the town clerk or by the town counselor. For any
person elected at a special election to fill a vacancy, the councilor-elect shall be sworn to the faithful
discharge of the councilor-elect’s duties by the town clerk or by the town counselor at the first regularly
scheduled meeting of the town council after certification of the election results. (Amended: June 8, 1982, November
6, 2007)
Sec. 210 Investigations - The council may make investigations into the affairs of the town and the conduct
of any town department, office or agency and for this purpose may enact an ordinance providing
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Charter
- 6 -
for the compulsory attendance of witnesses, the administering of oaths, the taking of testimony and the
compulsory production of evidence.
Sec. 211 Procedure –
(a) Meetings - The council shall meet regularly at least once in every month at such times and places
as the council may prescribe by rule. Special meetings may be held on the call of the mayor or of
five (5) or more members by causing a notification to be given or left at the usual dwelling place
of each council member. If practicable, such notice shall be given not less than twelve hours before
the special meeting and shall be published in a paper having general circulation in the town. All
meetings shall be public; however, the council may recess for the purpose of discussing in a closed
or executive session limited to its own membership, town manager and to other persons the council
votes to admit, any matter which would tend to defame or prejudice the character or reputation of
any person, provided that the precise subject matter for consideration is expressed in the motion
calling for such session and that final action thereon shall not be taken by the council until the
matter is placed on the agenda. The foregoing action shall be governed by state law, MRSA, Title
l, §405, as amended. Any citizen at the meeting shall have the opportunity to speak upon any subject
before the council. (Amended: June 8, 1982)
(b) Rules and Journal - The council shall determine its own rules.
(c) Secretary - The town clerk shall act as secretary of the town council and shall keep a record of all
council proceedings including all roll call votes. The Town Clerk or designee shall act as recording
secretary at town council meetings. (Amended: December 5, 1977)
(d) Voting - The ayes and nays of any vote taken by the town council shall be entered in the record of
the proceedings of the council by the Town Clerk, or designee. Four members of the council shall
constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may meet from time to time and may compel the
attendance of absent members in the manner and subject to the penalties prescribed by the rules of
the council. No action of the council shall be binding or valid unless adopted by the majority vote
of those present. (Amended: June 8, 1982, November 6, 2007, November 4, 2014)
(e) Agenda - Any subject may be placed on the agenda for a council meeting by a councilor, the town
manager or at the request of any citizen. Any subject presented by a citizen must be received at the
town office at least 5 calendar days prior to the council meeting. The agenda shall be prepared and
posted in the town office at least one business day prior to a scheduled council meeting.
Sec. 212 Action Requiring an Ordinance - In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provision
of this charter to be done by ordinance, those acts of council shall be by ordinance which:
(1) Adopt or amend an administrative code, or establish, alter or abolish any town department, office
or agency;
(2) Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or regulation for violation of which a fine or
other penalty is imposed;
(3) Grant, renew or extend a franchise;
(4) Regulate the rate charged for its services by a public utility;
(5) Authorize the borrowing of money other than tax anticipation notes;
(6) Convey or lease or authorize the conveyance or lease of any lands of the town;
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Charter
- 7 -
(7) Amend or repeal any ordinance previously adopted;
(8) Amend or establish town fees; and
Acts other than those referred to in the preceding sentence may be done by ordinance, by order or by
resolution. (Amended: June 8, 1982)
Sec. 213 Ordinances In General
(a) Form - Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final
adoption. No ordinance shall contain more than one subject which shall be clearly expressed in its
title. The enacting clause shall be "The Town of Hampden hereby ordains...." Any ordinance which
repeals or amends an existing ordinance or part of the Hampden Code shall set out in full the
ordinance sections or subsections to be repealed or amended and shall indicate matter to be omitted
by enclosing it in brackets or by strikeout type and shall indicate new matter by underscoring or by
italics.
(b) Procedure - An ordinance may be submitted as an agenda item by any member of the council at
any regular or special meeting. Copies of the proposed ordinance are to be included with the council
packet. After council discussion, the proposed ordinance may be introduced as submitted or
amended for public hearing. A reasonable number of copies of said ordinance shall be filed in the
town clerk's office and such other public places as the council may designate, and a notice setting
out the time and place for a public hearing on same shall be published. The public hearing shall
follow the publications at least seven (7) days, may be held separately or in conjunction with a
regular or special council meeting and may be adjourned from time to time; all persons interested
shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard. After the hearing the council may adopt the
ordinance with or without amendment or may reject it; but if it is amended as to any matter of
substance, the council may not adopt it until the ordinance or its amended sections have been
subjected to all the procedures hereinbefore required in the case of a new ordinance. As soon as
practicable after adoption of any ordinance, the town clerk shall publish a notice of its adoption.
(11) (Amended: June 8, 1982)
(c) Effective Date - Except as otherwise provided in this charter every adopted ordinance shall become
effective at the expiration of 30 days after adoption or at any later date as specified therein.
(d) "Publish" Defined - As used in this section, the term "publish" means to print in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the town; (1) the ordinance or a brief summary thereof, and
(2) the place where copies of the complete text have been filed and the time when they are available
for public inspection. (Amended: June 8,1982)
Sec. 214 Emergency Ordinances - To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public
peace, the council may adopt one or more emergency ordinances; but said ordinances may not grant, renew
or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by a public utility for its services or authorize the borrowing
of money except where any emergency notes or renewals thereof are paid within twentyfour months of the
adoption of said ordinances. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner
prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance
and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it
in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected
at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least all members present shall be
required for adoption. After its adoption the ordinance shall be published and printed as prescribed for other
adopted ordinances. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every
emergency ordinance except one authorizing the issuance of emergency notes shall automatically stand
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Charter
- 8 -
repealed as of the 61st day following the date on which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment
of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An
emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner
specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances.
Sec. 215 Authentication and Recording; Codification; and Printing
(a) Authentication - All ordinances and resolutions adopted by the council shall be authenticated by
the signature of the secretary of the council and recorded in full by the town clerk in a properly
indexed book kept for that purpose.
(b) Codification - Within three years after adoption of this charter and at least every ten years thereafter,
the council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all ordinances and
resolutions having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the
council by ordinance and shall be printed promptly in bound or loose-leaf form, together with this
charter and any amendments thereto, pertinent provisions of the Constitution and other laws of the
State of Maine and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the council
may specify. Any codification ordinance may be published by title. This compilation shall be
known as the Hampden Code. Copies of the code shall be furnished to officials, placed in libraries
and public offices for free public reference and made available for purchase by the public at a
reasonable price fixed by the council.
(c) Printing of Ordinances and Resolutions - The council shall cause each ordinance and resolution
having the force and effect of law and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly
following its adoption, and the printed ordinances, resolutions and charter amendments shall be
distributed or sold to the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the council. Following
publication of the first Hampden Code and at all times thereafter, the ordinances, resolutions and
charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect
and shall be suitable in form for integration therein. The council shall make such further
arrangements as it deems desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current
changes in or additions to the provisions of the Constitution and other laws of the State of Maine,
or the codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code.
ARTICLE III
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Sec. 301 Titles and Appointment - The following officials and boards shall be appointed by a majority vote
of the members of the town council: Town Manager, board of assessment review, planning board, board of
appeals and other boards or officials when such appointment is required by state statute or municipal
ordinance. The council may, where appropriate, and where not prohibited by law, vest in the town manager
all or part of the duties of any office. (Amended: November 6, 2007)
The town manager shall appoint the town clerk, treasurer, tax collector, town assessor and department heads
subject to the confirmation of the town council, and shall have the power to remove such appointees when
necessary. The town manager shall appoint and remove when necessary all other administrative officials
and town employees, except as the manager may authorize the head of a department or office and except
as otherwise provided in this charter. (Amended: November 6, 1990)
Sec. 302 Creation of Department - The town council, by ordinance, may establish, change and abolish
town departments, offices or agencies other than those created by this charter and may prescribe the
functions of all departments, offices and agencies, except that no functions assigned by this charter to a
particular department, office or agency may be discontinued or, unless specifically provided by this charter,
assigned to any other.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Charter
- 9 -
Sec. 303 Merit Principle - All appointments and promotions of town officials and employees, subject to
the direction and supervision of the manager, shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness
demonstrated by examination or other evidence of competence.
Personnel Appeals Board
There shall be a personnel appeals board consisting of three members appointed by the town council from
among the qualified voters of the town. The first appointments to this board shall be made in the following
manner: One member for three years, one member for two years and one member for one year. All
succeeding appointments shall be made for terms of three years.
Personnel Rules
The town manager, or the manager's appointee, shall prepare personnel rules. The town manager shall
submit such rules to the council which council shall adopt by ordinance with or without amendment. These
rules shall provide: (Amended: November 6, 1990)
(a) The classification of all town positions, based on the duties, authority and responsibility of each
position, with adequate provision for reclassification of any position whenever warranted by
changed circumstances;
(b) A pay plan for all town positions;
(c) Methods for determining the merit and fitness of candidates for appointment or promotion,
demonstration or dismissal;
(d) The policies and procedures regulating reduction in force and removal of employees;
(e) A retention and retirement plan for town employees;
(f) The hours of work, attendance regulations and provisions for sick and vacation leave;
(g) The policies and procedures governing persons holding provisional appointments;
(h) The policies and procedures governing relationships with employee organizations;
(i) Policies regarding in-service training program;
(j) Grievance procedure, including procedures for the hearing of grievances by the personnel appeals
board, which may render recommendations based on its findings to the town council with a copy
to the town manager and to the aggrieved employee;
(k) Other practices and procedures necessary to the administration of the town personnel system.
ARTICLE IV
TOWN MANAGER
Sec. 401 Town Manager; Qualifications - The town council shall appoint a town manager for a definite
term and fix the amount of compensation. The manager shall be appointed on the basis of executive and
administrative qualifications. The manager need not be a resident of the town or state at the time of
appointment but may reside outside the town while in office only with approval of the council. No councilor
shall receive such appointment during the term for which that person shall have been elected, nor within
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Charter
- 10 -
one year after the expiration of that person's term, nor shall any member of the town council act in the
capacity. (Amended: November 4, 1986, November 6, 1990)
Sec. 402 Removal - The council may remove the manager from office in accordance with the following
procedures:
(1) The council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution
which must state the reasons for removal, and may suspend the manager from duty which may be
effective immediately for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered
promptly to the manager.
(2) Within 10 days after receiving a copy of the resolution, the manager may file with the council a
written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held at a council meeting not earlier than
15 nor later than 30 days after the request is filed. The manager may file with the council a written
reply not later than five days before the hearing.
(3) The council may adopt a final resolution of removal which may be made effective immediately, by
affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after 10 days from the date when a
copy of the preliminary resolution was received by the manager, if the manager has not requested
a public hearing, or at any time after the public hearing if the manager has requested one. (Amended:
November 6, 1990)
Sec. 403 Powers and Duties of the Town Manager - The manager shall be the chief administrative official
of the town. The manager shall be responsible to the town council for the administration of all town affairs
placed in that person's charge by or under this charter. The manager shall have the following powers and
duties:
(1) Administration. The manager shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments,
offices and agencies of the town, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law.
(2) Attend Council Meeting. The manager shall attend council meetings, except when the manager's
removal is being considered, and shall have the right to take in discussions but may not vote.
(3) Enforcement. The manager shall see that all laws, provisions of this charter and acts of the council,
subject to enforcement by the manager or by officials subject to the manager's direction and
supervision, are faithfully executed.
(4) Annual Budget. The manager shall prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the
council.
(5) Report on Finances, Etc. The manager shall submit to the council and make available to the public
a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the town as of the end of each
fiscal year.
(6) Other Reports. The manager shall make such other reports as the council may require concerning
the operations of town departments, offices and agencies subject to that person's direction and
supervision.
(7) Advise and Make Recommendations to Council. The manager shall keep the council fully advised
as to the financial condition and future needs of the town and make such recommendations to the
council concerning the affairs of the town as deemed desirable.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Charter
- 11 -
(8) Administrative Code. The manager shall prepare an administrative code or amendments to an
existing administrative code as required, to be proposed to the council, and the council may by
ordinance adopt them with or without amendment.
(9) Other Duties. The manager shall perform such other duties as are specified in this charter or
may be required by the council. (Amended: November 6, 1990)
Sec. 404 Absence of Town Manager - By letter filed with the town clerk the manager shall designate,
subject to approval of the town council, a qualified town administrative official to exercise the powers and
perform the duties of manager during any temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability
the council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another official of the town to serve until
the manager shall return or the disability shall cease. In the event of failure of the manager to make such
designation, the council may by resolution appoint any administrative official of the town to perform the
duties of the manager until the manager shall return or the disability shall cease. (Amended: November 6, 1990)
ARTICLE V
TAX ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 501 Assessment Administration, Assessor - There shall be a single assessor appointed by the manager
subject to the approval of the town council. The assessor shall perform all duties and responsibilities
provided for assessors under general law. The salary, hours and working conditions shall be determined by
the town manager, subject to the approval of the town council. Cause shall not include any disagreement
with respect to an assessing practice employed by the assessor where such practice
is generally accepted and lawful. (Amended- June 8, 1986, November 6, 1990)
Sec. 502 Board of Assessment Review, Appointments; Vacancies - There shall be a Board of Assessment
Review to consist of five members who will be appointed by the town council for a term of three years,
except of those first appointed, one shall be for a term of two years and one for a term of one year. Two
alternates serving staggered terms, shall also be appointed. Three (3) members will constitute a quorum and
they shall elect their own chairman. Vacancies in the membership of such board shall be filled by
appointment by the council for the unexpired term. (Amended: March 13, 1979)
Sec. 503 Board of Assessment Review Duties - The Board of Assessment Review shall have the powers
and duties conferred upon such boards by the laws of the State of Maine.
ARTICLE VI
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS AND PLANNING BOARD
Sec. 601 Composition and Terms - There shall be a zoning board of appeals whose composition and term
of office shall be in accordance with state law. Further reference is made to the Town of Hampden Zoning
Ordinance. (Amended: June 2, 1982)
Sec. 602 Planning Board: Appointment
(1) Appointment to the board shall be made by the municipal officers.
(2) The board shall consist of seven members and two associate members.
(3) The term of each member and associate member shall be five years.
(4) Not more than one municipal officer may serve as a member or associate member. (Amended: June 2,
1982)
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Charter
- 12 -
Sec. 603 Planning Board: Organization and Rules
(1) The board shall elect a chairperson and a secretary from among its members and create and fill
such other offices as it may determine. The term of offices shall be one year with eligibility for reelection.
(2) When a member is unable to act because of interest, physical incapacity, absence or any other
reason satisfactory to the chairperson, the chairperson shall designate an associate member to sit in
that person's stead.
(3) An associate member may attend all meetings of the board and participate in its proceedings, but
may vote only when so designated by the chairperson to sit for a member.
(4) Any question of whether a member shall be disqualified from voting on a particular matter shall be
decided by a majority vote of the members except the member who is being challenged.
(5) The chairperson shall call at least eight regular meetings of the board each year.
(6) No meetings of the board shall be held without a quorum consisting of four members or associate
members authorized to vote.
(7) The board shall adopt rules for transaction of business and the secretary shall keep a record of its
resolutions, transactions, correspondence, findings, and determinations. All records shall be
deemed public and may be inspected at reasonable times. (Amended: June 2, 1982, November 6, 1990)
Sec. 604 Planning Board: Comprehensive Plan - The town council shall approve no changes in the
comprehensive plan without the recommendation of the Planning Board. Such recommendations may be
overturned by an affirmative vote of five councilors.
ARTICLE VII
FINANCIAL PROCEDURE
Sec. 701 Fiscal Year - Effective July 1, 1985, the fiscal year of the Town shall begin on the first day of
July and end on the last day of June of the following year. (Amended: November 6, 1984)
Sec. 702 Submission of Budget and Budget Message - On or before the lst day of May of each year the
Town Manager shall submit to the Town Council a budget for the next fiscal year and an accompanying
message. (Amended: November 4, 1986)
Sec. 703 The Budget Message - The manager's message shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and
in terms of the work programs. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of the town for the ensuing
fiscal year, describe the important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current year
in financial policies, expenditures and revenues together with the reasons for such changes, summarize the
town's debt position and include such other material as the manager deems desirable.
Sec. 704 Budget - The budget shall begin with a clear summary of its contents. It will show in detail all
estimated income and all proposed expenditures, including debt service, the actual and estimate portion of
the SAD #22 Budget allocated to Hampden, the estimated and actual portion of the Penobscot County
budget allocated to the Town of Hampden and the proposed tax levy. It shall provide a complete financial
plan of all town funds and activities for the next fiscal year and except as required by this Charter, be in
such form as the Town Manager deems desirable and the Town Council may require. It will be so arranged
as to show comparative budget and expenditure figures between the proposed budget and the prior and
current fiscal year budgets. It shall indicate in separate sections as follows: (Amended:November 5, 2002)
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Charter
- 13 -
(1) Proposed expenditures for operations detailed by offices, departments and agencies for the next
fiscal year; and
(2) Proposed Capital Expenditures detailed by offices, departments, and agencies for the next fiscal
year; and
(3) Anticipated net surplus or deficit for the next fiscal year of each utility owned or operated by the
Town, if any, and the proposed method of its disposition; subsidiary budgets for each utility giving
detailed income and expenditure information shall be attached as appendices to the budget. (Amended:
June 2, 1982)
THE TOTAL OF PROPOSED EXPENDITURES SHALL NOT EXCEED THE TOTAL OF
ESTIMATED INCOME.
Sec. 705 Capital Program
(a) Submission to Council: The manager shall prepare and submit to the council a five-year capital
program at the same time as the manager submits the budget. (Amended: November 6, 1990)
(b) Contents: The capital program shall include:
(1) A clear general summary of its contents;
(2) A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken during the five fiscal
years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such
improvements;
(3) Cost estimates, methods of financing and recommended time schedules for each improvement;
and
(4) The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or
acquired.
The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still
pending or in process of construction or acquisition.
Sec. 706 Council Action on Budget
(a) Notice and Hearing. The council shall publish in one or more newspapers of general circulation in
the town the general summary of the budget and a notice stating:
(1) The times and places where copies of the message and budget are available for inspection by
the public, and
(2) The time and place of the public hearing on the budget. The public hearing shall be held no
sooner than two weeks after said publication but in no case later than the third Monday in June.
(Amended: November 6, 1984)
(b) Amendment Before Adoption. After the public hearings the council may adopt the budget with or
without amendment. In amending the budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts and may
delete or decrease any programs or amounts, except expenditures required by law or for debt deficit,
provided that no amendment to the budget shall increase the authorized expenditures to an amount
greater than the total of estimated income.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Charter
- 14 -
(c) Adoption. On or before January 1, 1985 the town council shall adopt a budget for the period from
January 1, 1985 to July 1, 1985. Thereafter the council shall adopt the budget before the first day
of July each year and if it fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for current
operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a monthto-
month basis, with all items in it prorated accordingly, until such time as the council adopts a
budget for the ensuing fiscal year. (Amended: November 6, 1984)
Adoption of the budget shall be done by council order listing a chart of accounts and shall be
enumerated by appropriations of the amounts specified therein as expenditures from the funds
indicated and shall constitute a levy of the property tax therein proposed. (Amended: June 2, 1982)
Sec. 707 Council Action on Capital Program
(a) Notice and Hearing. The council shall publish in one or more newspapers of general circulation in
the town the general summary of the capital program and notice stating:
(1) The times and places where copies of the capital program are available for inspection by the
public,
(2) The time and place, not less than two weeks after such publication, for a public hearing on the
capital program.
(b) Adoption. The council by resolution shall adopt the capital program with or without amendment
after the public hearing and before the lst day of July. (Amended: November 6, 1984)
Sec. 708 Public Records - Copies of the budget and the capital program as adopted shall be public records
and shall be made available to the public at suitable places in the town.
Sec. 709 Amendments After Adoption
(a) Supplemental Appropriations. If during the fiscal year the manager certifies that there are available
for appropriation revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget, the council by ordinance may
make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess.
(b) Emergency Appropriations. To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the
public peace, the council may make emergency appropriations. Such appropriations may be made
by emergency ordinance. To the extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues to meet
such appropriations, the council may by emergency ordinance authorize the issuance of temporary
notes which may be renewed from time to time, but the temporary notes and renewals of any fiscal
year shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding that in which the
emergency appropriation was made.
(c) Reduction of Appropriations. If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to the manager
that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, the manager shall
report to the council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial
action taken and a recommendation as to any other steps to be taken. The council shall then take
such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit and for that purpose it
may by resolution or order reduce one or more appropriations. (Amended: November 6, 1990)
(d) Transfer of Appropriations. At any time during the fiscal year the manager may transfer part or all
of any unencumbered funds within an appropriation. Upon written request by the manager, the
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Charter
- 15 -
council may by affirmative vote of five members transfer part or all of any unencumbered
appropriation balance from one appropriation to another.
(e) Limitations: Effective Date. No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred and
no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more
than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. The supplemental and emergency
appropriations and reduction or tansfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made
effective immediately upon adoption.
Sec. 710 Lapse of Appropriations - Every general fund appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital
expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been expended or
encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which
it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed
abandoned if three years pass without any activity or encumbrance of the appropriation by the council.
(Amended: June 2, 1982)
Sec. 711 Administration of Budget
(a) Work Programs and Budgets. At such time as the manager shall specify, each department, office
or agency shall submit the work programs for the ensuing fiscal year. The manager shall review
and authorize such budgets with or without revision as early as possible in the fiscal year. The
manager may revise such budget during the year if the manager deems it desirable and shall revise
them to accord with any supplemental, emergency, reduced or transferred appropriation made
pursuant to Section 709. (Amended: June 2, 1982, November 6, 1990)
(b) Payments and Obligations Prohibited. No payment shall be made or obligation except in accordance
with appropriations duly made and unless the manager or designee first certified that there is a
sufficient unencumbered balance in such appropriation and that sufficient funds therefrom are or
will be available to cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due and payable. Any
authorization of payment or incurring of obligation in violation of the provisions of this charter
shall be void and any payment so made illegal; such action shall be cause for removal of any official
who knowingly authorized or made such payment or incurred such obligation, and that official shall
also be liable to the town for an amount so paid. However, except where prohibited by law, nothing
in this charter shall be construed to prevent the making or authorizing of payments or making of
contracts for capital improvements to be financed wholly or partly by the issuance of bonds or to
prevent the making of any contract or lease providing for payments beyond the end of the fiscal
year, provided that such action is made or approved by ordinances.(Amended: June 2, 1982 , November 6,
1990)
Sec. 712 Annual Post-Audit - Council shall each year appoint a certified public accountant for the purpose
of conducting the annual post-audit of the prior fiscal year municipal finances, as authorized by law. Said
audit shall be received in its entirety within the first quarter of the ensuing year. (Amended: June 2, 1982)
ARTICLE VIII
NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
Sec. 801 Conduct of Elections - The regular municipal election shall be held on the Tuesday
following the first Monday of November in each year. Except as otherwise provided by this
charter, the provisions of Title 21-A of the Maine Revised Statutes shall apply to elections held
under this charter. All elections called for under this charter shall be conducted by the election
officials established under Title 21-A. In the event that this charter or Title 21-A do not address a
particular election matter, any relevant election provision of Title 30-A of the Maine Revised
Statutes shall apply. For the conduct of elections, for the prevention of fraud in such elections and
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Charter
- 16 -
for the recount of ballots in case of doubt, the council shall adopt by ordinance all regulations
which it considers desirable, consistent with law and this charter. Qualified voter shall mean any
person qualified and registered to vote under law. (Amended: June 2, 1982, November 5, 2013)
Sec. 802 Officials Nominated and Elected At Large
(a) Councilors at Large. The full names and street addresses of all candidates nominated for councilor
at large, except those who have withdrawn, died, or become ineligible shall be printed on the
official ballots under a heading reading: "Nominees for Councilor at Large". (Amended: November 6,
1990, Novembet 5, 2013)
(b) District Councilors. The full names and street addresses of all candidates nominated for district
councilor, except those who have withdrawn, died,or become ineligible, shall be printed only on
the official ballots under the separate heading reading: "Nominees for District Councilor".
Sec. 803 Nomination Paper for Specimen Ballot
.
(a) Nomination Paper will be provided upon request from town office.
(b) Specimen ballot will be provided upon request from town office.
Sec. 804 Ordering Candidate Surnames - When two or more candidates have been nominated for any
office, the names of said candidates shall appear on the ballot in the order determined by lot. The municipal
clerk shall determine, by lot, the order that said candidates' names shall appear on the ballot, provided the
proceedings shall be public and the candidates shall be given an opportunity to be present.
Sec. 805 Election Provisions - Provisions of Title 21-A of the Maine Revised Statutes relating to the
qualifications of voters, registration, the manner of voting, the duties of election officers and all
other particulars respective to preparation for, conducting and management of elections, so far as
they may be applicable, shall govern all municipal elections, except as otherwise provided in this
charter. In the event that this charter or Title 21-A do not address a particular election matter, any
relevant election provision of Title 30-A of the Maine Revised Statutes shall apply. (Amended: November
5, 2013)
Sec. 806 Nomination - Any Hampden voter may be nominated for the town council in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter and of the laws of the State of Maine. A candidate for district councilor must
obtain the names of not less than 10, nor more than 25, Hampden voters, who must reside in the candidate's
district. At large candidates must obtain the names of not less than 25, nor more than 35, Hampden voters,
who may reside any place in the town. (Amended: November 2, 2004)
(a) The signatures to a nominating petition need not all be affixed to one paper, but to each separate
paper of a petition there shall be attached an affidavit executed by its circulator stating the number
of signers of the paper and that the circulator believes each signature to be the genuine signature of
the person whose name it purports to be. The signatures shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil.
Each signer shall indicate next to that person's signature the date of signing and the street address
where that person resides. (Amended: November 6, 1990)
The regular election to choose members of the town council, School Administrative District 22,
and the Water Board, shall be held on the Tuesday following the first Monday of November.
(Amended: June 2, 1982)
(b) Filing and Acceptance of Nomination Petitions. All separate papers comprising a nominating
petition for district councilor shall be assembled and filed with the municipal clerk as one
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Charter
- 17 -
instrument not earlier than 90 days or later than 60 days before the election. The clerk shall make
a record of the exact time when each petition is filed. No nominating petition shall be accepted
unless accompanied by signed acceptance of the nomination. (Amended: November 6, 1990)
(c) Procedure After Filing Nomination Petitions. Within five days after the filing of a nominating
petition, the clerk shall notify the candidate and the person who filed the petition whether or not it
satisfies the requirements prescribed by this charter. If a petition is found insufficient, the clerk
shall return it immediately to the person who filed it with a statement certifying wherein it is found
insufficient. Within the regular time for filing petitions such a petition may be amended and filed
again as a new petition or a different petition may be filed for the same candidate. The clerk shall
keep on file all petitions found sufficient at least until the expiration of the term for which the
candidates are nominated in those petitions.
Sec. 807 District Boundaries - District boundaries are as follows: (Amended November 6, 2001; June 10, 2014)
DISTRICT I: Beginning on the shore of the Penobscot River at the Hampden/Bangor town line; thence
southwesterly by and along the shore of the Penobscot River to the centerline of the extension of Carver
Road; thence northwesterly by and along the centerline of Carver Road to the centerline of Route 1A; thence
southwesterly by and along the centerline of Route 1A to the centerline of Coldbrook Road; thence
northwesterly by and along the centerline of Coldbrook Road to the centerline of Route 202; thence
northeasterly by and along the centerline of Route 202 to the Hampden/Bangor town line; thence
northeasterly and southeasterly by and along the Hampden town line to the point of beginning.
DISTRICT II: Beginning at the shore of the Penobscot River at the extension of the centerline of Carver
Road; thence southwesterly by and along the shore of the Penobscot River to the centerline of Reed’s Brook;
thence westerly by and along the centerline of Reed’s Brook to the centerline of Route 1A; thence southerly
by and along the centerline of Route 1A to the centerline of Kennebec Road; thence westerly by and along
the centerline of Kennebec Road to the centerline of Mayo Road; thence northwesterly by and along the
centerline of Mayo Road to the centerline of Route 9; thence westerly by and along the centerline of Route
9 to the railroad tracks; thence northerly by and along the centerline of the railroad tracks to the
Hampden/Hermon town line; thence easterly by and along the Hampden/Hermon and Hampden/Bangor
town line to the centerline of Route 202; thence southwesterly by and along the centerline of Route 202 to
the centerline of Coldbrook Road; thence southeasterly by and along the centerline of Coldbrook Road to
the centerline of Route 1A; thence northeasterly by and along the centerline of Route 1A to the centerline
of Carver Road; thence southeasterly by and along the center line of Carver road to the point of beginning.
DISTRICT III: Beginning on the shore of the Penobscot River at the centerline of Reed’s Brook; thence
southerly by and along the shore of the Penobscot River to the Hampden/Winterport town line; thence
southwesterly by and along the Hampden/Winterport town line to the centerline of Route 69; thence
northwesterly by and along the centerline of Route 69 to the centerline of Kennebec Road; thence easterly
by and along the centerline of Kennebec Road to the centerline of Meadow Road; thence northwesterly by
and along the centerline of Meadow Road to the centerline of Patterson Road; thence northeasterly by and
along the centerline of Patterson Road to the centerline of Route 9; thence easterly by and along the
centerline of Route 9 to the centerline of Mayo Road; thence southeasterly by and along the centerline of
Mayo Road to the centerline of Kennebec Road; thence easterly by and along the centerline of Kennebec
Road to the centerline of Route 1A; thence northerly by and along the centerline of Route 1A to the
centerline of Reed’s Brook; thence easterly by and along the centerline of Reed’s Brook to the point of
beginning.
DISTRICT IV: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of the railroad tracks and the centerline of
Route 9; thence westerly by and along the centerline of Western Avenue to the centerline of Patterson Road;
thence southwesterly by and along the centerline of Patterson Road to the centerline of Meadow Road;
thence southeasterly by and along the centerline of Meadow Road to the centerline of Kennebec Road;
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Charter
- 18 -
thence westerly by and along the centerline of Kennebec Road to the centerline of Route 69; thence
southeasterly by and along the centerline of Route 69 to the Hampden/Winterport town line; thence
southwesterly by and along the Hampden/Winterport town line to the Hampden/Newburgh town line;
thence northerly by and along the Hampden/Newburgh town line to the intersection of the
Hampden/Newburgh/Carmel/Hermon town lines; thence northeasterly, northerly, southeasterly, and
northeasterly by and along the Hampden/Hermon town line to the centerline of the railroad tracks; thence
southerly by and along the centerline of the railroad tracks to the point of beginning.
ARTICLE IX
REFERENDUM AND INITIATIVE
Sec. 901 General Authority
(a) Referendum. The qualified voters of the town shall have power to require reconsideration by the
council of any adopted ordinance and, if the council fails to repeal or change an ordinance so
reconsidered, to approve or reject it by referendum at an election, provided that such power shall
not extend to the budget or capital program or any emergency ordinance or ordinance relating to
appropriations of money, levy taxes, or salaries of officers or employees. (Amended November 4, 2014)
(b) Initiative. The qualified voters shall have the power to propose ordinances to the council and, if the
council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or reject
it at an election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any
ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes or salaries of officials or employees.
(Amended November 4, 2014)
Sec. 902 Referendum on Council Action - All ordinances, resolves, or orders appropriating 10% or more
of the previous year's town operating budget exclusive of those funds set aside for SAD #22 and all
ordinances, orders or resolves authorizing general obligation of bond issues of 10% or more of the previous
year's town operating budget for capital improvements shall be submitted to referendum. (Amended: June 2,
1982, November 6, 1990)
Sec. 903 Commencement of Referendum Proceedings - Any 5 registered voters may begin referendum
proceedings by a request in writing, to the town clerk for the appropriate petition blanks. All papers of the
petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. They shall
contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance sought to be
reconsidered. The petition shall be signed only by registered voters of the town and each voter's signature
shall be followed by that person's printed name and street address. (Amended November 4, 2014)
Each paper of the petition, when filed, shall have attached to it an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof
stating that the circulator personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the
signatures were affixed in the circulator's presence, that the circulator believes them to be the genuine
signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before
signing to read the full text of the ordinance sought to be reconsidered.
If within 20 days after the enactment of any such ordinance, the appropriate petition signed by not less than
10% of the registered voters of the town is filed with the town clerk requesting its reference to a referendum,
the town council shall call a public hearing to be held within 30 days from the date of the filing of such
petition with the town clerk, and shall order the question of adopting such ordinance submitted to a
referendum vote to be held at the next scheduled election, or in the case of no election being scheduled
within 6 months of the date of said public hearing, the council may order a special election to be held for
that purpose, unless such ordinance shall be repealed by the council prior to the call for said election.
Pending action by the voters of the town, the referred ordinance shall be suspended from going into
operation until it has received a vote of the majority of the voters voting on said question. (Amended: November
6, 1990, November 4, 2014)
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Charter
- 19 -
Sec. 904 Ordinances, Orders or Resolves Submitted to Popular Vote - The town council may submit on
its own initiative a proposition for the enactment, repeal or amendment of any ordinance, order or resolve,
except as herein otherwise provided, to be voted upon at any municipal election, and should such
proposition receive a majority of the votes cast thereon at such election, such ordinance, order or resolve
shall be enacted, repealed or amended accordingly.
Sec. 905 Enactment of Ordinances by Initiative - Ordinances may be enacted by the following initiative
procedure:
Any 5 registered voters may begin initiative proceedings by request in writing to the town clerk for the
appropriate petition blanks. The complete text of the proposed ordinance shall be included with the request.
All papers of the petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for
filing. They shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the proposed
ordinance. The petition shall be signed only by registered voters of the town and each voter's signature shall
be followed by that person's printed name and street address. (Amended November 4, 2014)
Each paper of the petition shall have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof
stating that the circulator personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the
signatures were affixed in the circulator's presence, that the circulator believes them to be the genuine
signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before
signing to read the full text of the proposed ordinance.
Upon receipt by the town clerk of the appropriate petition signed by not less than 10% of the registered
voters of the town, the town council shall call a public hearing to be held within 30 days from the date of
the filing of such petition with the town clerk, and shall order the question of adopting such ordinance
submitted to a vote to be held at the next scheduled election, or in the case of no election being scheduled
within six months of the date of said public hearing, the council may order a special election to be held for
that purpose, unless such ordinance shall be enacted by the council prior to the call for said town election.
Such ordinance shall be enacted and take effect when a majority of those voting thereon shall have voted
in the affirmative. (Amended: June 2, 1982)
Sec. 906 Attorney's Examination - Any such proposed ordinance shall be examined by an attorney before
being submitted to the voters. This attorney is authorized to correct the form of such proposed ordinance
for the purpose of avoiding repetitions, illegalities and unconstitutional provisions, and to assure accuracy
in text and references, and clearness and preciseness in its phraseology, but the attorney shall not materially
change its meaning and effect and cause it to be placed upon a ballot the form of which will be determined
by the Town Council.
ARTICLE X
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1001 Oath of Office - Every officer of the town shall, before entering upon the duties of office, take
and subscribe to the following oath or affirmation, to be filed and kept in the office of the town clerk.
"I....................... do affirm, that I will support the Constitution of the United States, and of this State, so
long as I shall continue a citizen hereof, that I will in all respects observe the provisions of the charter and
ordinances of the Town of Hampden, Maine and I will faithfully discharge all the duties incumbent upon
me as.............. according to the Constitution and laws of the state, so help me, God." (Amended: June 2, 1982,
November 6, 1990)
Sec. 1002 Activities Prohibited - No person shall be appointed to or removed from, or in any way favored
or discriminated against with respect to any town position or appointive town administrative office because
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Charter
- 20 -
of religion, age, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, race, color, ancestry, national origin, physical or
mental disability. (Amended: June 2, 1982, November 4, 2014)
Sec. 1002.A Forfeiture of Office by Council Decision - Any person serving on any town board or
committee shall forefeit that person's seat if that person (1) lacks at any time during the term of office any
qualification for the office prescribed by this charter or by law, (2) violates any express prohibition of this
charter, (3) is convicted of a crime or offense which is, during the term, reasonably related to that person's
ability to serve or (4) fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings or no more than a maximum of six
(6) regular meetings per year of the board without being excused by said board. (Amended: November 5, 1985,
November 6, 1990)
Sec. 1003 Charter Amendment or Revision (Amended November 4, 2014)
(1) Proposal of Amendment or Revision. Amendments or revisions to this charter may be initiated by
the town council or by petition of the voters of the town in accordance with the applicable
requirements and procedures set forth in Title 30-A M.R.S. Sections 2101 through 2105, as may be
amended or replaced from time to time. (Amended November 4, 2014)
(2) The town council is hereby authorized to correct typographical errors and misspelled words within
the text of the charter for the purpose of accuracy in its phraseology except that there shall be no
additions to or deletions from the subject matter of the charter other than by ordinance as prescribed
by Section 212. (Amended: December 5, 1977, November 4, 2014)
Sec. 1004 Ordinances Not Inconsistent Continue in Force - All ordinances of the Town of Hampden in
force at the time when this charter takes effect, not inconsistent with this charter, shall continue in force
until amended or repealed.
Sec. 1005 Deleted June 2, 1982
Sec. 1006 Existing Contracts Not Invalidated - All rights, actions, proceedings, prosecutions, and contracts
of the town, pending or unexecuted when this charter goes into effect, shall be enforced, continued or
completed in all respects as though begun or executed hereunder.
Sec. 1007 Short Title - This charter shall be known and may be cited as the "Council-Manager Charter of
the Town of Hampden, Maine". The clerk shall cause it to be printed and made available to the public
promptly.
Sec. 1008 Separability Clause - If any portion of this Act shall be held to be invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
Sec. 1009 Repealing Clause - All Acts and parts of Acts of the private and special laws of Maine relating
to the Town of Hampden, Maine, inconsistent with this charter, are repealed, as to their force and effect on
the Town of Hampden.
TOWN OF HAMPDEN
EMERGENCY ORDINANCE REGARDING
MEDICAL MARIJUANA RETAIL STORES
WHEREAS, the legislative body of the Municipality of Hampden (the "Municipality,,) makes
the following findings:
(I) The Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act (the "Act"), codified in the Maine Revised
Statutes in Title 22, Chapter 558-C, authorized registered primary caregivers to possess,
cultivate, and transfer medical marijuana to qualifying patients, as those terms are defined by
22 M.R.S. § 2422; and
(2) On July 9, 2018, the Maine Legislature enacted PL 2017, c. 452 (LD 1539), An Act to Amend
Maine's Medical Marijuana Law, which revised the term "registered primary caregiver" to
"registered caregiver" and which includes express authorization for registered caregivers to
operate retail stores for the sale of harvested medical marijuana to qualifying patients; and
(3) On July 9, 2018 the Maine Legislature enacted as emergency legislation PL 2017, c. 447 (LD
239), An Act to Amend the Maine Medical Marijuana Law, which expressly recognizes
municipal home rule authority to regulate registered caregiver operations; and
( 4) The unregulated location and operation of medical marijuana retail stores within the
Municipality raises legitimate and substantial questions about the impact of such activity on
the Municipality, including questions as to compatibility with existing land uses and
developments in the Municipality; the sufficiency of municipal infrastructure to
accommodate such activity; and the possibility of unlawful sale of medical marijuana and
medical marijuana products; and
(5) As a result of the foregoing issues, the location and operation of medical marijuana retail
stores within the Municipality have potentially serious implications for the health, safety and
welfare of the Municipality and its residents; and
(6) The Municipality currently has no regulations governing medical marijuana retail stores, and
existing ordinances are insufficient to prevent serious public harm that could result from the
unregulated development of medical marijuana retail stores; and
(7) An overburdening of public facilities and resources, including public safety resources, is a
reasonably foreseeable result of the unregulated location and operation of medical marijuana
retail stores in the Municipality; and
(8) In the judgment of the legislative body of the Municipality, the foregoing findings and
conclusions constitute an emergency within the meaning of 30-A M.R.S. § 4356 requiring
immediate legislative action.
NOW THEREFORE, pursuant to 30-A M.R.S. Chapter 111, be it ordained by the Municipality
as follows:
Section 1. Prohibition. The Municipality does hereby declare a prohibition on the location,
operation, permitting, approval, or licensing of any and all medical marijuana retail stores within
the municipality. No person or organization shall develop or operate a medical marijuana retail
store within the Municipality on or after the effective date of this Ordinance. During the time this
Ordinance is in effect, no officer, official, employee, office, administrative board or agency of
the Municipality will accept, process, approve, deny, or in any other way act upon any
application for a license, building permit, conditional use, site plan, or any other type of land use
approval or permit and/or any other permits or licenses related to a medical marijuana retail
store.
Section 2. Defmitions. For purposes of this ordinance, the term "medical marijuana retail store"
means an establishment having the attributes of a typical retail sales establishment, such as, but
not limited to, signage, regular business hours, accessibility to the public, and sales directly to
the consumer of the product, that is used by a registered caregiver to offer harvested medical
marijuana for sale to qualifying patients, regardless of its location within the Municipality.
Section 3. Pending Proceedings. Notwithstanding 1 M.R.S. § 302 or any other law to the
contrary, this Ordinance governs any proposed medical marijuana retail store for which an
application for a building permit, certificate of occupancy, conditional use, site plan or any other
required approval has been submitted to the Municipality, whether or not a pending proceeding,
prior to the enactment of this Ordinance.
Section 4. Conflicts/Savings Clause. Any provisions of the Municipality's ordinances that are
inconsistent or conflicting with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent
applicable for the duration of this moratorium. If any section or provision of this Ordinance is
declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such a declaration shall not
invalidate any other section or provision.
Section 5. Violations. If any medical marijuana retail store is established in violation of this
Ordinance, each day of any continuing violation constitutes a separate violation of this
Ordinance and the Municipality is entitled to all rights and remedies available to it pursuant to
30-A M.R.S. § 4452, including, but not limited to, fines and penalties, injunctive relief, and its
reasonable attorney's fees and costs in prosecuting any such violations.
Section 6, Effective Date. This Ordinance becomes effective immediately upon its adoption and
will remain in full force and effect for a period of 60 days thereafter, unless extended pursuant to
law or until a new and revised set of regulations is adopted by the Municipality, whichever first
occurs.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Ways Ordinance
1
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
TOWN WAYS ORDINANCE
Adopted: Hampden Town Council, 2/20/1979
Effective: 3/20/1979
Amended: 3/4/1991
Effective: 4/2/1991
Amended: 12/7/1987
Effective: 1/5/1988
Amended: 8/18/2003
Effective: 9/17/2003
Amended: 02/01/2010
Effective: 03/03/2010
Amended: 04/19/ 2016
Effective: 05/19/2016
Amended: 10/15/2018
Effective: 11/14/2018
CERTIFIED BY:
Paula Scott, Town Clerk
Affix Seal
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Ways Ordinance
2
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
TOWN WAYS ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I – GENERAL PAGE 3
1.1. Plan Required 3
1.2. Acceptance by Town Council 3
1.3. Definitions 3
1.4. Town Engineer Defined ……………………………………………………..3
1.5. Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances or Resolves 4
ARTICLE II – STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 4
2.1. Connection with Existing Town Way 4
2.2. Intersections 5
2.3. Widths of Town Ways 5
2.4. Grades 5
2.5. Clearing of Stumps and Roots 5
2.6. Side Slopes 5
2.7. Subgrade 5
2.8. Gravel Base 5
2.9. Surface Treatment 5
2.10. Cul-de-sac (Dead-end Street) 5
2.11. Culverts 5
2.12. Opening Town Ways or Streets 6
2.13. Modified or Additional Standards 6
ARTICLE III – LIMITATIONS OF TRUCK TRAFFIC…………………………………..6
3.1. Limitation/Prohibition of Truck Traffic 6
3.2. Enforcement 6
3.3. Civil Penalties 6
ARTICLE IV – VEHICLE WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS…………………………………...6
4.1. Vehicle Weight Restrictions………………………………………………… 6
4.2. Restrictions and Notices……………………………………………………..7
4.3 Exemptions ………………………………………………………………….7
4.4 Enforcement ………………………………………………………………....9
4.5 Civil Penalties ……………………………………………………………….9
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Ways Ordinance
3
TOWN OF HAMPDEN
TOWN WAYS ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I
GENERAL
1.1 Plan Required - Petitioner for acceptance of a town way shall submit a plan to the Road
Commissioner of such a way prepared by or approved by a registered professional engineer.
(Amended 02-01-10)
1.2 Acceptance by Town Council – The acceptance of any street or road as a town way shall be
subject to the approval of the Town Council. (Amended 02-01-10, 04-19-16)
1.2.1 The Town Council shall not consider the acceptance of a street or road as a town way
unless and until the following conditions have been satisfied:
1. All outstanding application fees, inspection fees and other costs and expenses
must be paid in full.
2. Submission of a sworn written statement from the owner/developer and/or
owner’s/ developer’s engineer that all required improvements have been
completed in strict compliance with all applicable construction standards and the
approved subdivision plan, and that the owner/developer and/or engineer knows
of no defects, from any cause, in the improvements.
3. Submission of a written statement from Town’s Public Works Director that all
site improvements, including paving and any drainage facilities, have been
satisfactorily completed. The written statement shall also indicate if public
water and power have been installed and accepted.
4. Deposit of sum of money or other suitable improvement guarantee equal to
fifteen percent (15%) of the amount of the full improvement guarantee required
by the Subdivision Ordinance with the Town Treasurer. Said money to be used
by Town to correct any defects in design, materials, or workmanship that arise
within one year from the date of acceptance of the improvements by the Town
Council. Any money not used for such purpose by Town within two (2) years of
acceptance shall be returned to the payor.
5. Submission of a written statement from owner’s/developer’s surveyor that all
required property pins have been installed for the lots in the approved
subdivision.
6. Submission to the Town Attorney of the document(s) conveying any land,
improvements, and any easements to the Town. Owner/Developer shall cause
the following documentation to be delivered to the Town Attorney at least three
(3) weeks prior to the Town Council meeting at which acceptance is desired:
a. Copy of recorded subdivision plan;
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Ways Ordinance
4
b. Copy of proposed Warranty Deed conveying the street(s) and
improvement(s), as well as any easement(s) appurtenant thereto, to the
Town;
c. Copy of proposed Warranty Deed conveying any dedicated open space
and access easement(s) to the Town;
d. Title Opinion or Title Agent’s Certificate of Title evidencing that the
land, street(s), improvements, open space, and easement(s) are free and
clear of any encumbrances, liens, mortgages, etc. If title is not free and
clear, owner/developer shall furnish documentation demonstrating that
the title matters will be resolved prior to acceptance by the Town; and
e. Owner’s Affidavit to the effect that all contractors, subcontractors, and
material providers have been paid in full, and that the property is not
subject to a mechanic’s/materialman’s lien under Maine law.
7. Approval by the Town Attorney of the document(s) conveying any land,
improvements, or easements to the Town.
8. Delivery of the duly executed Warranty Deed(s), Easements, Real Estate Tax
Transfer Tax Declaration form(s), any documents necessary to provide free and
clear title, and check payable to the Registry of Deeds in the amount of the
recording fee(s) to the Town Manager.
9. Payment of Town’s legal fees and expenses incurred in reviewing the
documentation called for by this ordinance.
10. Letter from the applicable electric company indicating that all power utilities
have been accepted.
11. In cases where Public Water has been installed, a letter from the Hampden Water
District Superintendent indicating that the water has been installed and tested to
their satisfaction.
1.2.2. At the sole discretion of the Town Council, it may accept a street or road as a town
way if all improvements have been satisfactorily completed, excepted for the final
layer of paving, and the developer/owner has provided a performance bond, letter of
credit, or some other form of guarantee acceptable to the Town Council and in an
amount the Town Council determines to be adequate to ensure completion of the
final paving.
1.3 Definitions – Except as otherwise provided herein, the definitions contained in Title 29-A
M.R.S.A. shall govern the construction of words contained in his Ordinance. Any words not
defined therein shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. (Added 10-15-2018)
1.4 Town Engineer Defined – Town engineer means any person licensed as a professional civil
engineer by the State of Maine and employed or designated by the Town Manager. (Amended 10-15-
2018)
1.5 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances or Resolves – All ordinances and resolves or parts thereof
in conflict with this ordinance or inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby
repealed. (Amended 10-15-2018)
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Ways Ordinance
5
ARTICLE II
STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
2.1 Connection with Existing Town Way – All streets or roads shall provide connection with
existing Town approved town ways. (Amended 02-01-10)
2.2 Intersections – Shall not be less than sixty (60) degrees.
2.3 Widths of Town Ways – Except for industrial streets or roads, town ways shall have a rightof-
way width of sixty-six (66) feet. Industrial roads shall have a right-of-way width of one
hundred (100) feet. (Amended 02-01-10)
2.4 Grades – Grade shall not have less than 0.5% nor more than 8%. The roadway area of said
way shall be graded to its full width of twenty-six (26) feet for the distance for which acceptance
is requested and shall conform accurately to the grades and cross-sections shown on the plan and
profile of said town way and as accepted by the Hampden Planning Board. All roads and streets
shall be properly drained with suitable ditches and street culverts so that all storm water will be
drained from the area. The Road Commissioner or the Hampden Planning Board may require
loaming and seeding of slopes to help prevent erosion. (Amended 02-01-10)
2.5 Clearing of Stumps and Roots – Said way shall be cleared of all stumps, roots, brush,
perishable material and all trees not intended for preservation. All loam, loamy material, clay, and
other yielding material shall be removed from said way to at least subgrade depth, or as directed
by the Road Commissioner or Public Works Dept.
2.6 Side Slopes — Petitioner shall provide the land necessary for cut or fill slopes beyond the
limits of the street right-of-way.
2.7 Subgrade — With the exception of industrial ways, said way shall be graded to the subgrade
of eighteen (18) to twenty-four (24) inches as specified by the Hampden Planning Board or Road
Commissioner. Industrial ways shall be graded to a subgrade depth of not less than twenty-four
(24) inches.
2.8 Gravel Base – The roadway area of said way shall be brought to the grade shown on the plan,
profile, and cross-section of said way by suitable gravel or material approved by the Road
Commissioner or Public Works Dept. The base gravel shall be brought to within four (4) inches
of the finish grade, and the top four (4) inches shall be selected materials suitable for finish grade
on gravel roads. All gravel shall be thoroughly compacted and rolled and the final surface left
true to the established lines and grades.
2.9 Surface Treatment – After the fine gravel has been thoroughly rolled, the surface of the
roadway shall be treated with a bituminous pavement. Pavement shall conform to the
specifications currently specified by the Maine Department of Transportation for use on State Aid
Roads and shall be placed in one-and-a-half-inch thickness. Pavement width shall be not less than
twenty (20) feet, except in industrial zones where it shall be not less than twenty-four (24) feet,
and the roadway shall be provided with a three (3) inch crown from the center line to edge of
pavement to insure runoff of water.
2.10 Cul-de-sac (Dead-end Street) - All permanent dead-end streets shall be provided with a
turn-around with a minimum diameter of sixty (60) feet. In all other respects said turn-arounds
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Ways Ordinance
6
shall be constructed in accordance with the same specifications as herein above specified for town
ways. (Amended 02-01-10)
2.11 Culverts - All driveway culverts shall be not less than twelve (12) inches in diameter of
corrugated HDPE pipe and not less than twenty (20) feet in length. Said culverts shall be
furnished and installed by the owner under the supervision of the Road Commissioner. The Road
Commissioner reserves the right to specify culvert diameter in excess of 12” where necessary to
achieve drainage of projected volumes. (Amended 04-19-16)
2.12 Opening Town Ways or Streets - No town way or street shall be opened for the purpose of
installing or repairing sewers, water, gas, or for any other purpose, unless the individual or
corporation wishing to make such an opening shall first obtain from the Road Commissioner a
Street Opening/Utility Connection permit to do so and agree to pay the full cost of repairing the
damage to the street caused by such opening. Refer to the Town of Hampden Street
Opening/Utility Connection Ordinance for permit requirements. (Amended 04-19-16)
2.13 Modified or Additional Standards - The Road Commissioner may modify or require
additional standards due to local soil, physical, or topographical conditions, provided that
modifications and variances secure substantially the objectives of the standard or requirement so
varied or modified.
ARTICLE III
LIMITATION OF TRUCK TRAFFIC
3.1 Limitation/Prohibition of Truck Traffic - Upon designation by the Town Manager and
approval of the Town Council truck traffic may be limited or prohibited on specified roads or
streets passing through residential areas within the Town of Hampden. There shall be a sign
posted at each end of the streets or portions of street so designated showing that the same is a
residential street and that through heavy traffic is not allowed. A schedule of those streets or
portions of streets so designated shall be maintained in the town office and be available for public
inspection during regular business hours. (Amended: 12/7/87, 3/4/91)
3.2 Enforcement - When any violation of any limitation or prohibition on truck traffic imposed
under Section 1.1 shall be found to exist, any police officer of the Town of Hampden, or any law
enforcement officer authorized to enforce traffic violations in the Town of Hampden, is hereby
authorized to institute any and all actions and proceedings in the name of the Town of Hampden,
either legal or equitable, that may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance. (Amended: 3/4/91)
3.3 Civil Penalties - Whoever violates any limitation or prohibition on truck traffic imposed
under Section 3.1 shall, upon conviction therefore, be liable for a civil penalty in the amount of
$50.00 for the first offense and $100.00 for each subsequent offense. Each and every violation
shall constitute a separate offense. All civil penalties shall inure to the benefit of the Town of
Hampden. (Amended: 3/4/91)
ARTICLE IV
VEHICLE WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
(Added 10-15-2018)
4.1. Vehicle Weight Restrictions - Upon designation by the Town Manager and approval
of the Town Council, vehicle weight limits and restrictions may be applied to bridges and
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Ways Ordinance
7
culverts as may be located on town public ways, to prevent damage to town ways and
bridges in the Town of Hampden. Such restrictions may be applied to vehicles of
excessive weight, to lessen safety hazards and the risk of injury to the traveling public, to
extend the life expectancy of town ways and bridges, and to reduce the public expense of
their maintenance and repair. The Town Ways Ordinance is amended and adopted
pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3009; 29-A M.R.S.A. §§ 2395, 2387-2388; and 23
M.R.S.A. § 563.
4. 2. Restrictions and Notices - The Town Manager may, either permanently or
seasonally, impose such restrictions on the gross registered weight of vehicles as may, in
the Town’s judgment, be necessary to protect the traveling public and prevent abuse of
the highways, and designate the town ways and bridges to which the restrictions shall
apply.
Whenever notice has been posted as provided herein, no person may thereafter operate
any vehicle with a gross registered weight in excess of the restriction during any
applicable time period on any way or bridge so posted unless otherwise exempt as
provided herein.
Pursuant to 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2395, the notice shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information: the name of the way or bridge, the gross registered weight limit, the time
period during which the restriction applies, the date on which the notice was posted. The
notice shall be conspicuously posted at each end of the restricted portion of the way or
bridge in a location clearly visible from the traveled way, unless on a dead-end way
where only the entering side shall be posted.
The Town may post specific vehicle weight restrictions on bridges or town ways as may
be deemed necessary for temporary conditions of bridges, culverts and town ways.
Whenever a restriction expires or is lifted, the notices shall be removed wherever posted.
Whenever a restriction is revised or extended, existing notices shall be removed and
replaced with new notices. No person may remove, obscure or otherwise tamper with any
notice so posted except as provided herein.
4. 3. Exemptions - The Town acknowledges the following exemptions, as defined by and
from time to time may be changed, Maine Statute. Additionally, the Town may deem it
appropriate upon petition by a citizen to review requests for a waiver for a specific
vehicle or circumstance at a given location that otherwise is not directly addressed in the
exemptions listed below.
• The following vehicles are exempt under State law: Any vehicle delivering home
heating fuel or organic animal bedding and operating in accordance with a permit
issued by the MDOT under 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2395 (4) and, when necessary
during a period of drought emergency declared by the governor, any vehicle
transporting well-drilling equipment for the purpose of drilling a replacement well
or for improving an existing well on property where that well is no longer
supplying sufficient water for residential or agricultural purpose and operating in
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Ways Ordinance
8
accordance with a permit issued by the MDOT under 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2395 (4-
A).
• Frozen road exemption: This ordinance shall not apply to any restricted road
which is frozen. The highway is considered “frozen” only when the air
temperature is 32° F or below and no water is showing in the cracks of the road.
Both conditions must be met.
• The following vehicles are also exempt under the specific provisions of this
ordinance:
1. Any vehicle or combination of vehicles registered for a gross weight of
23,000 pounds or less.
2. Any vehicle or combination of vehicles registered for a gross weight in excess
of 23,000 pounds and traveling without a load other than tools or equipment
necessary for the proper operation of the vehicle. This exemption does not
apply to special mobile equipment. It shall be a defense to a violation of this
sub-4. if the combined weight of any vehicle or combination of vehicles
registered for a gross weight in excess of 23,000 pounds and its load is in fact
less than 23,000 pounds.
3. MaineDOT vehicles or other vehicles authorized by MaineDOT; or
maintenance vehicles operated by the Town of Hampden or other municipality
or county to maintain the roads under their authority.
4. Any vehicle authorized by the Town of Hampden deemed necessary for the
service or maintenance of properties not otherwise accessible accept via
passage over a particular bridge or culvert located on a town way.
5. Authorized emergency vehicles as defined in 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2054, school
buses, a wrecker towing a disabled vehicle of legal weight from a posted
highway, and vehicles with three axles or fewer under the direction of a public
utility and engaged in utility infrastructure maintenance or repair.
6. Any two axle vehicles registered for a gross weight in excess of 23,000
pounds and less than or equal to 34,000 pounds that are carrying any of the
Special Commodities may operate without a permit. Special Commodities
includes any of the following:
a. Home delivered heating fuel (oil, gas, coal, stove size wood that is
fewer than 36” in length, propane and wood pellets);
b. Petroleum products;
c. Groceries;
d. Bulk milk;
e. Bulk feed;
f. Solid waste;
g. Organic animal bedding;
h. Returnable beverage containers;
i. Sewage from private septic tanks or porta-potties; or
j. Medical gases.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Town Ways Ordinance
9
4. 4. Enforcement - This Ordinance shall be administered and may be enforced by the
municipal officers or their duly authorized designee [such as town manager, road
commissioner, code enforcement officer or law enforcement officer].
4. 5. Civil Penalties - Any violation of this Ordinance shall be a civil infraction subject to
a fine of not less than $250.00 nor more than $1000.00. Each violation shall be deemed a
separate offense. In addition to any fine, the municipality may seek restitution for the cost
of repairs to any damaged way or bridge and reasonable attorney fees and costs.
Prosecution shall be in the name of the Town of Hampden and shall be brought in the
Maine District Court.
HAMPDEN PUBLIC SAFETY TRAINING ROOM USE POLICY
A. Room Use Priorities
Use of the Public Safety Training Room is limited to the following purposes, in this
priority:
1. Voting location for all municipal, state, federal elections
2. Hampden Public Safety Department Training
3. Training for other Hampden municipal departments
4. Training space for other governmental entities, including regional trainings
5. As a general rule, non-governmental events, trainings, or functions will not be
permitted in the training room. However, the Town Manager, upon
consultation with the Director of Public Safety, may approve or deny any
requests for such use on a case by case basis.
With the exception of voting, use of the room will be on a first come, first served
basis. Staff members wishing to utilize the room should check the schedule and
reserve dates as early as possible. Scheduling shall be done through the Hampden
Public Safety administrative assistant.
B. Responsibility of Municipal Personnel for Training Room Use
A Hampden employee shall serve as the single point of contact for any use of the
Training Room, including regional trainings, and shall be responsible for completing,
or ensuring completion of, all associated responsibilities.
The Municipal Department or Personnel requesting use of the room, or “sponsoring”
its use by a non-Hampden governmental entity, shall be responsible for:
1. Communicating with attendees about where they should and shouldn’t park,
and addressing any concerns with parking should it arise.
2. Maintaining building security - at no time shall anyone be permitted
unescorted access to areas designated as public safety work or storage
space.
3. Set up prior to and clean up after use.
C. Rules for use of Training Room by non-Hampden governmental entities:
1. Parking for room users (during the work day) shall be along the sides of the
building in the upper lot, in spaces in the lower lot, and in free spaces behind
the post office. No parking during the day in spaces in front of the municipal
building. (See attached diagram for entrance and parking areas)
2. Wireless internet is available on site, but there is no availability on site for
photocopying, technical support, or provision of projectors or other
equipment.
3. Room use is confined to the Training Room only. Access to the remainder of
the Public Safety office and living space is not available. This includes the
kitchen, unless special permission is granted in advance.
4. Entities utilizing the room shall be required to pay for any and all damages to
the facility caused by participants of their activity.
D. Effective Date
Policy Effective Date: July 7, 2009
Council Approved: July 6, 2009
Council Amended: January 4, 2016
Town Of Hampden, Maine
Victualers Ordinance
1
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
VICTUALERS ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1 - PURPOSE. 2
SECTION 2 - LICENSE. 2
SECTION 3 - EXCEPTIONS. 2
SECTION 4 - COMPLIANCE. 2
SECTION 5 - APPLICATION 2
SECTION 6 - PENALTY. 3
SECTION 7 - SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE 3
SECTION 8 - SEVERABILITY. 3
ADOPTED: Hampden Town Council - April 20, 1998
Effective: May 19, 1998
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council - November 17, 2003
Effective: December 17, 2003
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council - May 16, 2005
Effective: June 15, 2005
AMENDED: Hampden Town Council – January 22, 2013
Effective: February 21, 2013
CERTIFIED BY: _______________________________________________
Denise Hodsdon
Town Clerk
AFFIX SEAL
Town Of Hampden, Maine
Victualers Ordinance
2
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
VICTUALERS ORDINANCE
The Town of Hampden hereby ordains:
Section 1. Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to regulate the sale of prepared food for
consumption on or off the premises.
Section 2. License. Any person who owns or operates a place where food is prepared and served to the
public as a profit-making venture for consumption on or off the premises, including but not limited to a
restaurant, motel and hotel, deli, movie theater, soda fountain, bakery, sandwich shop, convenience store,
or outdoor facility, shall be licensed annually as a victualer in order to operate within the Town.
(Amended: 01-22-13)
At the time of application for a license or license renewal, applicant shall pay a fee in accordance with the
Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance. (Amended: 11-17-03; 05-16-05)
Section 3 Exceptions. A public or private school, public service organization, private club, church
organization, fire department or any other non-profit organization selling food or drink to raise money for
a charitable cause shall be exempt from the requirements of this Ordinance. Grocery stores, except those
selling food items prepared on the premises, shall also be exempt. Establishments selling food and drink
only through vending machines shall also be exempt.
The Hampden Town Council shall have the authority to decide if an establishment is exempt or not.
(Amended: 05-16-05)
Section 4. Compliance
A. All establishments must be inspected by the code enforcement officer and the fire inspector to
determine if they are in compliance with all municipal ordinances, including zoning, state life safety,
and liquor regulations. Failure to be in compliance with any of the foregoing shall be grounds for
denial of the application. In addition, failure to allow the code enforcement officer and the fire
inspector to inspect the establishment shall be grounds for denial of the application. (Amended: 01-22-13)
B. The treasurer and tax collector must certify that all sewer user fees and personal property taxes are
paid in full, as of the date of the application. Failure to meet these requirements shall be grounds for
denial of the application.
Section 5. Application. (Amended: 05-16-05; 01-22-13)
A. Application forms for a victualer’s license or renewal shall be on a form designed for that purpose by
the Town. Victualer applications, except for renewal applications under Subsection B below, shall
be advertised by publishing notices in a local newspaper and by posting notices in at least two public
places, at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting. The council shall conduct a public hearing on the
applications at the next scheduled council meeting, and shall make a decision within 30 days
following the public hearing. Written notice of the decision shall be provided to the applicant.
(Amended: 05-16-05; 01-22-13)
Town Of Hampden, Maine
Victualers Ordinance
3
B. As long as there are no unresolved complaints or violations, licenses for renewal applications for the
same owner and the same place of business may be issued by the code enforcement officer, after
consultation with the fire inspector, treasurer and tax collector, upon determination of compliance
with the provisions of this Ordinance. If the code enforcement officer determines that there are
unresolved complaints or violations, the application shall be processed in accordance with Subsection
A above. (Amended: 05-16-05; 01-22-13)
C. A new license, when granted, shall be valid for one year and renewed annually in the month in which
the license was issued. An establishment shall at all times display its current victualer license in a
place within the establishment where it can be readily viewed by any member of the public.
Section 6. Penalty.
A. Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty.
B. In addition to a civil penalty, the Town may enjoin or abate any violation of this article by appropriate
action, and may also proceed to revoke the victualer’s license, after a hearing on the matter.
C. Any person operating as a victualer within the Town without a victualer’s license shall be subject to a
civil penalty of $100.00 per day for all days of operation without the required license. (Amended: 05-16-
05)
Section 7. Suspension or Revocation of License.
A. Applicability of State Regulations; Effect of Suspension or Revocation of State License. All victualers
shall be subject to all state regulations of food service establishments, such regulations being enforced
by state agencies. It is not the intent of this article to establish for the town a food service regulation
scheme apart from that provided under state law. Accordingly, any suspension or revocation of a
state license shall be considered as a suspension or revocation, as the case may be, of the victualer’s
license issued under this article on the same terms as imposed by the state. (Amended: 05-16-05)
B. Local Suspension or Revocation of License. The Town Council, upon notice and hearing, for cause,
may at any time suspend or revoke a victualer’s license issued pursuant to this article. Cause shall
mean the violation of any license provision or any provision of this article, or any condition
constituting a threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, including but not necessarily limited to
neighborhood disruption, disorderly customers, and excessively loud or unnecessary noise that
initiates complaints to or requires a response from police, fire, or other town regulatory bodies or
employees. (Amended: 05-16-05)
Section 8. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of the Ordinance.

Shoreland Zoning
Ordinance
Hampden Maine
Effective December 4, 2019

Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
-i-
Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
TABLE OF CONTENTS
NOTE: This document is based on Chapter 1000 Guidelines for Municipal Shoreland Zoning Ordinances.
Page
1. Purposes.................................................................................................................................................. 1
2. Authority ................................................................................................................................................ 1
3. Applicability ........................................................................................................................................... 1
4. Effective Date ......................................................................................................................................... 1
5. Availability ............................................................................................................................................. 1
6. Severability ............................................................................................................................................. 2
7. Conflicts with Other Ordinances ............................................................................................................ 2
8. Amendments ........................................................................................................................................... 2
9. Districts and Zoning Map ....................................................................................................................... 2
A. Official Shoreland Zoning Map ....................................................................................................... 2
B. Scale of Map .................................................................................................................................... 2
C. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map .............................................................................. 2
D. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning Map .............................................................................. 2
10. Interpretation of District Boundaries ...................................................................................................... 2
11. Land Use Requirements ......................................................................................................................... 2
12. Nonconformance .................................................................................................................................... 3
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................................. 3
B. General ............................................................................................................................................. 3
C. Nonconforming Structures ............................................................................................................... 3
D. Nonconforming Uses ....................................................................................................................... 6
E. Nonconforming Lots ........................................................................................................................ 6
13. Establishment of Districts....................................................................................................................... 7
A. Resource Protection District ............................................................................................................ 7
B. Limited Residential District ............................................................................................................. 8
C. General Development 1 District ...................................................................................................... 8
D. General Development 2 District ...................................................................................................... 8
E. Stream Protection District ................................................................................................................ 8
14. Table of Land Uses ................................................................................................................................. 9
15. Land Use Standards .............................................................................................................................. 11
A. Minimum Lot Standards ................................................................................................................ 11
B. Principal and Accessory Structures ............................................................................................... 11
C. Campgrounds ................................................................................................................................. 14
D. Individual Private Campsites ......................................................................................................... 14
E. Commercial and Industrial Uses .................................................................................................... 14
F. Parking Areas ................................................................................................................................. 15
G. Roads and Driveways .................................................................................................................... 15
H. Signs............................................................................................................................................... 17
I. Storm Water Runoff ....................................................................................................................... 17
J. Septic Waste Disposal.................................................................................................................... 17
K. Essential Services........................................................................................................................... 17
L. Mineral Exploration and Extraction ............................................................................................... 18
M. Agriculture ..................................................................................................................................... 18
...........................................................................................................................................................
Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
-ii-
...........................................................................................................................................................
N. Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other than Timber Harvesting ........................ 19
O. Hazard Trees, Storm-Damaged Trees, and Dead Tree Removal ................................................... 21
P. Exemptions to Clearing and Vegetation Removal Requirements .................................................. 22
Q. Revegetation Requirements ........................................................................................................... 23
R. Erosion and Sedimentation Control ............................................................................................... 25
S. Soils ............................................................................................................................................... 26
T. Water Quality. ................................................................................................................................ 26
U. Archaeological Site. ....................................................................................................................... 26
16. Administration ...................................................................................................................................... 26
A. Administering Bodies and Agents ................................................................................................. 26
B. Permits Required ............................................................................................................................ 26
C. Permit Application ......................................................................................................................... 27
D. Procedure for Administering Permits ............................................................................................ 27
E. Special Exceptions ......................................................................................................................... 28
F. Expiration of Permit ....................................................................................................................... 29
G. Installation of Public Utility Service .............................................................................................. 29
H. Appeals .......................................................................................................................................... 29
I. Enforcement ................................................................................................................................... 32
17. Definitions ............................................................................................................................................ 33
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 1 -
Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
1. Purposes. The purposes of this Ordinance are to further the maintenance of safe and healthful
conditions; to prevent and control water pollution; to protect fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird
and other wildlife habitat; to protect buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion; to
protect archaeological and historic resources; to protect commercial fishing and maritime industries;
to protect freshwater and coastal wetlands; to control building sites, placement of structures and land
uses; to conserve shore cover, and visual as well as actual points of access to inland and coastal
waters; to conserve natural beauty and open space; and to anticipate and respond to the impacts of
development in shoreland zones.
2. Authority. This Ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 38 sections
435-449 of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated (M.R.S.A.).
3. Applicability. This Ordinance applies to (see Exhibit 1):
A. All land areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of
• the normal high-water line of any great pond or river, which in Hampden includes Ben Annis
Pond, Hammond Pond, Hermon Pond, Patten Pond, Souadabscook Stream, and the West
Branch of Souadabscook Stream from the confluence with Brown Brook downstream;
• the upland edge of a coastal wetland, including all areas affected by tidal action, which in
Hampden is the Penosbscot River; or
• the upland edge of a freshwater wetland.
B. All land areas within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream.
C. This ordinance does not apply to any structure built on, over or abutting a dock, wharf, pier, or
other structure extending or located below the normal high-water line of a water body or within a
wetland; such structures are subject to other regulatory bodies.
4. Effective Date
A. Effective Date of Ordinance and Ordinance Amendments. This Ordinance, which was
adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Hampden on November 4, 2019, will not be
effective unless approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection.
A certified copy of the Ordinance, or Ordinance Amendment, attested and signed by the Town
Clerk, must be forwarded to the Commissioner for approval. If the Commissioner fails to act on
this Ordinance or Ordinance Amendment, within 45 days of his/her receipt of the Ordinance, or
Ordinance Amendment, it will be automatically approved.
Any application for a permit submitted to the Town within the 45 day period will be governed by
the terms of this Ordinance, or Ordinance Amendment, if the Ordinance, or Ordinance
Amendment, is approved by the Commissioner.
B. Repeal of Prior Shoreland Zoning Provisions. Upon the effective date of this Ordinance
pursuant to Section 4(A) above, the “Town of Hampden, Maine Shoreland Zoning Ordinance”
adopted March 1, 2010 as amended August 15, 2011, and July 12, 2014 is hereby repealed.
5. Availability. A certified copy of this Ordinance will be filed with the Town Clerk and is accessible to
any member of the public. Copies will be made available to the public at reasonable cost at the
expense of the person making the request. Notice of availability of this Ordinance will be posted.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 2 -
6. Severability. Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be
invalid, such decision will not invalidate any other section or provision of the Ordinance.
7. Conflicts with Other Ordinances or Between Provisions of This Ordinance. Whenever a
provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision of this Ordinance
or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute administered by the Town, the more restrictive
provision controls.
8. Amendments. This Ordinance may be amended by majority vote of the Town Council. Copies of
amendments, attested and signed by the Town Clerk, must be submitted to the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection following adoption by the Town Council and will not be
effective unless approved by the Commissioner. If the Commissioner fails to act on any amendment
within 45 days of his/her receipt of the amendment, the amendment is automatically approved. Any
application for a permit submitted to the Town within the 45 day period will be governed by the terms
of the amendment, if such amendment is approved by the Commissioner.
9. Districts and Shoreland Zoning Map
A. Official Shoreland Zoning Map. The areas to which this Ordinance is applicable are hereby
divided into the following districts as shown on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map which is
made a part of this Ordinance:
(1) Resource Protection (RP)
(2) Limited Residential (LR)
(3) General Development 1 (GD1)
(4) General Development 2 (GD2)
(5) Stream Protection (SP)
B. Scale of Map. The Official Shoreland Zoning Map is to be drawn at a scale of not less than 1
inch = 2,000 feet. District boundaries are to be clearly delineated and a legend indicating the
symbols for each district is to be placed on the map.
C. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map. The Official Shoreland Zoning Map must be
certified by the attested signature of the Town Clerk and must be located in the municipal office.
D. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning Map. If amendments, in accordance with Section 8,
are made in the district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Shoreland Zoning
Map, such changes must be made on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map within thirty (30) days
after the amendment has been approved by the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection.
10. Interpretation of District Boundaries. Unless otherwise set forth on the Official Shoreland Zoning
Map, district boundary lines are the boundaries of the shoreland area as defined herein. Where
uncertainty exists as to the exact location of district boundary lines, the Board of Appeals is the final
authority as to location. Property owners who disagree with the boundaries as depicted on the map
may file an application for a determination of the boundaries in question with the Board of Appeals.
11. Land Use Requirements. Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure or land may
hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof may hereafter be erected,
constructed, expanded, moved, or altered and no new lot may be created except in conformity with all
of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located, unless a variance is granted.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 3 -
12. Nonconformance
A. Purpose. It is the intent of this Ordinance to promote land use conformities, except that
nonconforming conditions that existed before the effective date of this Ordinance (March 1,
2010) or amendments thereto will be allowed to continue, subject to the requirements set forth in
Section 12. Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, a nonconforming condition will not
be permitted to become more nonconforming.
B. General
(1) Transfer of Ownership. Nonconforming structures, lots, and uses may be transferred, and
the new owner may continue the nonconforming use or continue to use the nonconforming
structure or lot, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
(2) Repair and Maintenance. This Ordinance allows, without a permit, the normal upkeep and
maintenance of nonconforming uses and structures including repairs or renovations that do
not involve expansion of the nonconforming use or structure, and such other changes in a
nonconforming use or structure as federal, state, or local building and safety codes may
require.
C. Nonconforming Structures
(1) Expansions. A nonconforming structure may be added to or expanded after obtaining a
permit from the same permitting authority as that for a new structure, if such addition or
expansion does not increase the nonconformity of the structure and is in accordance with
subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) below.
(a) No structure that is located within 25 feet of the normal high-water line of a water body,
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland can be expanded such that any portion of
the expansion is within 25 feet of the resource.
(b) Notwithstanding paragraph (a), above, if a legally existing nonconforming principal
structure is entirely located less than 25 feet from the normal high-water line of a water
body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, that structure may be expanded as
follows, as long as all other applicable municipal land use standards are met and the
expansion is not prohibited by Section 12(C)(1).
(i) The maximum total footprint for the principal structure may not be expanded to a
size greater than 800 square feet or 30% larger than the footprint that existed on
January 1, 1989, whichever is greater.
(ii) The maximum height of the principal structure may not be made greater than 15 feet
or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater.
(c) All other legally existing nonconforming principal and accessory structures that do not
meet the water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback requirements may be expanded
or altered as follows, as long as other applicable municipal land use standards are met and
the expansion is not prohibited by Section 12(C)(1) or Section 12(C)(1)(a), above.
(i) For structures located less than 75 feet from the normal high-water line of a water
body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, the maximum combined total
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 4 -
footprint for all structures may not be expanded to a size greater than 1,000 square
feet or 30% larger than the footprint that existed on January 1, 1989, whichever is
greater. The maximum height of any structure may not be made greater than 20 feet
or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater.
(ii) For structures located less than 100 feet from the normal high-water line of a great
pond classified as GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified as GPA, the
maximum combined total footprint for all structures may not be expanded to a size
greater than 1,500 square feet or 30% larger than the footprint that existed on January
1, 1989, whichever is greater. The maximum height of any structure may not be made
greater than 25 feet or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater. Any
portion of those structures located less than 75 feet from the normal high-water line
of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland must meet the footprint
and height limits in Section 12(C)(1)(b)(i) and Section 12(C)(1)(c)(i), above.
(iii) In addition to the limitations in subparagraphs (i) and (ii), for structures that are
legally nonconforming due to their location within the Resource Protection District
when located at less than 250 feet from the normal high-water line of a water body or
the upland edge of a wetland, the maximum combined total footprint for all structures
may not be expanded to a size greater than 1,500 square feet or 30% larger than the
footprint that existed at the time the Resource Protection District was established on
the lot, whichever is greater. The maximum height of any structure may not be made
greater than 25 feet or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater,
except that any portion of those structures located less than 75 feet from the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland must
meet the footprint and height limits in Section 12(C)(1)(b)(i) and Section
12(C)(1)(c)(i), above.
(d) An approved plan for expansion of a nonconforming structure must be recorded by the
applicant with the registry of deeds, within 90 days of approval. The recorded plan must
show the existing and proposed footprint of the nonconforming structure, the existing and
proposed structure height, the footprint of any other structures on the parcel, the
shoreland zone boundary and evidence of approval by the municipal review authority.
(2) Foundations. Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is constructed under a
nonconforming structure, the structure and new foundation must be placed such that the
setback requirement is met to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer (CEO), basing his decision on the criteria specified in Section 12(C)(3)
Relocation, below.
(3) Relocation. A nonconforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries of the parcel
on which the structure is located provided that the site of relocation conforms to all setback
requirements to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer,
and provided that the applicant demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage disposal
system meets the requirements of State law and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules (Rules), or that a new system can be installed in compliance with the law and
said Rules. In no case may a structure be relocated in a manner that causes the structure to be
more nonconforming.
In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback to the greatest practical
extent, the Code Enforcement Officer will consider the size of the lot, the slope of the land,
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 5 -
the potential for soil erosion, the location of other structures on the property and on adjacent
properties, the location of the septic system and other on-site soils suitable for septic systems,
and the type and amount of vegetation to be removed to accomplish the relocation.
When it is necessary to remove vegetation within the water or wetland setback area in order
to relocate a structure, the Code Enforcement Officer will require replanting of native
vegetation to compensate for the destroyed vegetation in accordance with Section 15(Q). In
addition, the area from which the relocated structure was removed must be replanted with
vegetation. Replanting will be required as follows:
(a) Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted with at least one native
tree, three feet in height, for every tree removed. If more than five trees are planted, no
one species of tree can make up more than 50% of the number of trees planted. Replaced
trees must be planted no further from the water or wetland than the trees that were
removed.
Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and ground cover, that are removed or
destroyed in order to relocate a structure must be re-established. An area at least the same
size as the area where vegetation and/or ground cover was disturbed, damaged, or
removed must be reestablished within the setback area. The vegetation and/or ground
cover must consist of similar native vegetation and/or ground cover that was disturbed,
destroyed or removed.
(b) Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel the original location of the
structure must be replanted with vegetation which may consist of grasses, shrubs, trees,
or a combination thereof.
(4) Reconstruction or Replacement. Any nonconforming structure which is located less than
the required setback from a water body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed,
or damaged or destroyed, regardless of the cause, by more than 50% of the market value of
the structure before such damage, destruction or removal, may be reconstructed or replaced
provided that a permit is obtained within 12 months of the date of said damage, destruction,
or removal, and provided that such reconstruction or replacement is in compliance with the
water body, tributary stream or wetland setback requirement to the greatest practical extent
as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with the purposes of this
Ordinance. No structure can be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its
nonconformity. If the reconstructed or replacement structure is less than the required setback
it cannot be any larger than the original structure, except as allowed pursuant to Section
12(C)(1) above, as determined by the nonconforming footprint of the reconstructed or
replaced structure at its new location. If the total footprint of the original structure can be
relocated or reconstructed beyond the required setback area, no portion of the relocated or
reconstructed structure can be replaced or constructed at less than the setback requirement
for a new structure. When it is necessary to remove vegetation in order to replace or
reconstruct a structure, vegetation must be replanted in accordance with Section 12(C)(3)
above.
Any nonconforming structure which is located less than the required setback from a water
body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed by 50% or less of the market value,
or damaged or destroyed by 50% or less of the market value of the structure, excluding
normal maintenance and repair, may be reconstructed in place if a permit is obtained from the
Code Enforcement Officer within one year of such damage, destruction, or removal.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 6 -
In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the setback to the
greatest practical extent the Code Enforcement Officer will consider, in addition to the
criteria in Section 12(C)(3) above, the physical condition and type of foundation present, if
any.
(5) Change of Use of a Nonconforming Structure. The use of a nonconforming structure may
not be changed to another use unless the Planning Board, after receiving a written
application, determines that the new use will have no greater adverse impact on the water
body, tributary stream, or wetland, or on the subject or adjacent properties and resources than
the existing use.
In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, written documentation from the
applicant must be submitted to the Planning Board regarding the probable effects on public
health and safety, erosion and sedimentation, water quality, fish and wildlife habitat,
vegetative cover, visual and actual points of public access to waters, natural beauty,
floodplain management, archaeological and historic resources, and commercial fishing and
maritime activities, and other functionally water-dependent uses.
D. Nonconforming Uses
(1) Expansions. Expansions of nonconforming uses are prohibited, except that nonconforming
residential uses may, after obtaining a permit from the Planning Board, be expanded within
existing residential structures or within expansions of such structures as allowed in Section
12(C)(1) above.
(2) Resumption Prohibited. A lot, building or structure in or on which a nonconforming use is
discontinued for a period exceeding one year, or which is superseded by a conforming use,
may not again be devoted to a nonconforming use except that the Planning Board may, for
good cause shown by the applicant, grant up to a one year extension to that time period. This
provision does not apply to the resumption of a use of a residential structure provided that the
structure has been used or maintained for residential purposes during the preceding five year
period.
(3) Change of Use. An existing nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming
use provided that the proposed use has no greater adverse impact on the subject and adjacent
properties and resources than the former use, as determined by the Planning Board. The
determination of no greater adverse impact will be made according to criteria listed in Section
12(C)(5) above.
E. Nonconforming Lots
(1) Nonconforming Lots: A nonconforming lot of record as of March 1, 2010 may be built
upon, without the need for a variance, provided that such lot is in separate ownership and not
contiguous with any other lot in the same ownership, and that all provisions of this Ordinance
except lot area, lot width and shore frontage can be met. Variances relating to setback or
other requirements not involving lot area, lot width or shore frontage are obtained by action
of the Board of Appeals.
(2) Contiguous Built Lots: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in a single or joint
ownership of record as of March 1, 2010, if all or part of the lots do not meet the dimensional
requirements of this Ordinance, and if a principal use or structure exists on each lot, the
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 7 -
nonconforming lots may be conveyed separately or together, provided that the State Minimum
Lot Size Law (12 M.R.S.A. sections 4807-A through 4807-D) and the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules are complied with.
If two or more principal uses or structures existed on a single lot of record on March 1, 2010,
each may be sold on a separate lot provided that the above referenced law and rules are
complied with. When such lots are divided each lot thus created must be as conforming as
possible to the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance.
(3) Contiguous Lots - Vacant or Partially Built: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are
in single or joint ownership of record as of March 1, 2010, if any of these lots do not
individually meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance or subsequent amendments,
and if one or more of the lots are vacant or contain no principal structure, the lots must be
combined to the extent necessary to meet the dimensional requirements.
This provision does not apply to two or more contiguous lots, at least one of which is
nonconforming, owned by the same person or persons on December 16, 1991 and recorded in
the registry of deeds if the lot is served by a public sewer or can accommodate a subsurface
sewage disposal system in conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules; and
(a) Each lot contains at least 100 feet of shore frontage and at least 20,000 square feet of lot
area; or
(b) Any lots that do not meet the frontage and lot size requirements of Section 12(E)(3)(a)
are reconfigured or combined so that each new lot contains at least 100 feet of shore
frontage and 20,000 square feet of lot area.
13. Establishment of Districts
A. Resource Protection District (RP). The Resource Protection District includes areas in which
development would adversely affect water quality, productive habitat, biological ecosystems, or
scenic and natural values. This district includes the following areas that fall within 250 feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of any great pond or river (see the definitions of
“great pond” and “river” for a listing of these in Hampden), or of the upland edge of the
Penobscot River (classified as coastal wetland), or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland,
except where other shoreland districts apply:
(1) Floodplains along rivers including artificially formed great ponds along rivers, and adjacent
to tidal waters (the Penobscot River) defined by the 100 year (a.k.a. 1% chance in any given
year) floodplain as designated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA)
Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in the
absence of these, by soil types identified as recent floodplain soils.
(2) Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of 20% or greater.
(3) Areas of two or more contiguous acres supporting wetland vegetation and hydric soils, which
are not part of a freshwater or coastal wetland as defined, and which are not surficially
connected to a water body during the period of normal high water.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 8 -
(4) Land areas along rivers subject to severe bank erosion, undercutting, or river bed movement,
and lands adjacent to tidal waters which are subject to severe erosion or mass movement,
such as steep coastal bluffs.
B. Limited Residential District (LR). The Limited Residential District includes those areas within
250 feet, horizontal distance, of the shoreline that are suitable for residential and recreational
development. It includes areas other than those in the Resource Protection or Stream Protection
Districts and areas which are used less intensively than those in the General Development
Districts.
C. General Development 1 District (GD1). The General Development 1 District includes the
following types of existing, intensively developed areas:
(1) Areas of two or more contiguous acres devoted to commercial, industrial or intensive
recreational activities, or a mix of such activities, including but not limited to the following:
(a) Areas devoted to manufacturing, fabricating or other industrial activities;
(b) Areas devoted to wholesaling, warehousing, retail trade and service activities, or other
commercial activities; and
(c) Areas devoted to intensive recreational development and activities, such as, but not
limited to amusement parks, race tracks and fairgrounds.
(2) Areas otherwise discernible as having patterns of intensive commercial, industrial or
recreational uses.
(3) Portions of the General Development 1 District may also include residential development, but
such residential uses may not be a majority of the uses in the district.
D. General Development 2 District (GD2). The General Development 2 District includes the same
types of areas as the General Development 1 District but is to be used whenever any new areas
are to be designated General Development (i.e. any area to be designated GD is automatically
GD2, for the purpose of differentiating between those areas already developed as of the original
date of adoption of shoreland zoning and newly developing areas).
There will be no newly established GD2 districts, including as expansions of existing GD1
districts, in areas adjacent to great ponds classified GPA or adjacent to rivers flowing to great
ponds classified GPA.
E. Stream Protection District (SP). The Stream Protection District includes all land areas within 75
feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream, exclusive of those areas zoned
Resource Protection. See the definition of “stream” for a list of streams in Hampden.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 9 -
14. Table of Land Uses. All land use activities, as indicated in Table 1, Land Uses in the Shoreland
Zone, must conform with all of the applicable land use standards in Section 15. The district
designation for a particular site is determined from the Official Shoreland Zoning Map.
Key to Table 1:
Yes - Allowed (no shoreland permit required; must comply with other ordinances and
codes.)
No - Prohibited
PB - Allowed with permit issued by the Planning Board.
CEO - Allowed with permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
LPI - Allowed with permit issued by the Local Plumbing Inspector
District Abbreviations:
SP - Stream Protection
RP - Resource Protection
LR - Limited Residential
GD - General Development
(includes GD1 & GD2)
Note: A permit from the Department of Environmental Protection is
required for any of the following activities, pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A.
section 480-C, if the activity occurs in, on, over or adjacent to any
freshwater or coastal wetland, great pond, river, stream or brook and
operates in such a manner that material or soil may be washed into the
resource area: A. Dredging, bulldozing, removing or displacing soil,
sand, vegetation or other materials; B. Draining or otherwise dewatering;
C. Filling, including adding sand or other material to a sand dune; or D.
Any construction or alteration of any permanent structure.
Continued on the next page.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 10 -
TABLE 1. LAND USES IN THE SHORELAND ZONE
DISTRICT
LAND USES SP RP LR GD
1. Non-intensive recreational uses not requiring structures such as hunting, fishing and
hiking
yes
yes
yes
yes
2. Motorized vehicular traffic on existing roads and trails yes yes yes yes
3. Clearing or removal of vegetation for activities other than timber harvesting CEO13 CEO1, 13 yes13 yes13
4. Fire prevention activities yes yes yes yes
5. Wildlife management practices yes yes yes yes
6. Soil and water conservation practices yes yes yes yes
7. Mineral exploration no yes2 yes2 yes2
8. Mineral extraction including sand and gravel extraction no PB3 PB PB
9. Surveying and resource analysis yes yes yes yes
10. Emergency operations yes yes yes yes
11. Agriculture yes PB yes yes
12. Aquaculture PB PB PB yes
13. Principal structures and uses
A. One and two family residential, including driveways
PB4
PB9
CEO
CEO
B. Multi-unit residential no no PB PB
C. Commercial no10 no10 no10 PB
D. Industrial no no no PB
E. Governmental and institutional no no PB PB
F. Small non-residential facilities for educational, scientific, or nature
interpretation purposes PB4 PB CEO CEO
14. Structures accessory to allowed uses PB4 PB CEO yes
15. Conversions of seasonal residences to year-round residences LPI LPI LPI LPI
16. Home occupations PB PB PB yes
17. Private sewage disposal systems for allowed uses LPI LPI LPI LPI
18. Essential services - - - -
A. Roadside distribution lines (34.5kV and lower) CEO6 CEO6 yes12 yes12
B. Non-roadside or cross-country distribution lines involving 10 poles or less in
the shoreland zone PB6 PB6 CEO CEO
C. Non-roadside or cross-country distribution lines involving eleven or more poles
in the shoreland zone PB6 PB6 PB PB
D. Other essential services PB6 PB6 PB PB
19. Service drops, as defined, to allowed uses yes yes yes yes
20. Public and private recreational areas involving minimal structural development PB PB PB CEO
21. Individual, private campsites CEO CEO CEO CEO
22. Campgrounds no no7 PB PB
23. Road construction PB no8 PB PB
24. Parking facilities no no7 PB PB
25. Marinas PB no PB PB
26. Filling and earth moving of <10 cubic yards CEO CEO yes yes
27. Filling and earth moving of >10 cubic yards PB PB CEO CEO
28. Signs yes yes yes yes
29. Uses similar to allowed uses CEO CEO CEO CEO
30. Uses similar to uses requiring a CEO permit CEO CEO CEO CEO
31. Uses similar to uses requiring a PB permit PB PB PB PB
Footnotes:
1 In RP not allowed within 75 feet horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of great ponds, except to remove safety hazards.
2 Requires permit from the Code Enforcement Officer if more than 100 square feet of surface area, in total, is disturbed.
3 In RP not allowed in areas so designated because of wildlife value.
4 Provided that a variance from the setback requirement is obtained from the Board of Appeals.
5 Functionally water-dependent uses and uses accessory to such water dependent uses only (See note on previous page).
6 See further restrictions in Section 15( K)(2).
7 Except when area is zoned for resource protection due to floodplain criteria in which case a permit is required from the PB.
8 Except as provided in Section 15(G)(4).
9 Single family residential structures may be allowed by special exception only according to the provisions of Section 16(E), Special
Exceptions. Two-family residential structures are prohibited.
10 Except for commercial uses otherwise listed in this Table, such as marinas and campgrounds, that are allowed in the respective
district.
11 Excluding bridges and other crossings not involving earthwork, in which case no permit is required.
12 Permit not required, but must file a written “notice of intent to construct” with CEO.
13 All clearing activities must be supervised by a licensed forester or arborist.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 11 -
15. Land Use Standards. All land use activities within the shoreland zone must conform to the
following provisions.
A. Minimum Lot Standards
(1) Area and Shore Frontage Minimum Lot
Area (sq. ft.)
Minimum Shore
Frontage (ft.)
(a) Residential per dwelling unit:
(i) When NOT connected to both municipal
water and municipal sewer service:
(1) Adjacent to Tidal Areas 30,000 150
(2) Adjacent to Non-Tidal Areas 40,000 200
(i) When connected to both municipal water
and municipal sewer service:
(1) Adjacent to Tidal Areas 18,000 125
(2) Adjacent to Non-Tidal Areas 18,000 125
(b) Governmental, Institutional, Commercial or
Industrial per principal structure:
(i) Adjacent to Tidal Areas 40,000 200
(ii) Adjacent to Non-tidal Areas 60,000 300
(c) Public and Private Recreational Facilities:
(i) Adjacent to Tidal and Non-Tidal Areas 40,000 200
(2) Land below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and land
beneath roads serving more than two lots cannot be included toward calculating minimum lot
area.
(3) Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road are considered each a separate tract or
parcel of land unless such road was established by the owner of land on both sides thereof after
September 22, 1971.
(4) The minimum width of any portion of any lot within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland must be equal to or greater
than the shore frontage requirement for a lot with the proposed use.
(5) If more than one residential dwelling unit, principal governmental, institutional, commercial or
industrial structure or use, or combination thereof, is constructed or established on a single
parcel, all dimensional requirements must be met for each additional dwelling unit, principal
structure, or use.
B. Principal and Accessory Structures
(1) Minimum Shoreline Setback Requirements1,2:
RP District 250 feet3
GD District (includes GD1 & GD2) 25 feet
Great Ponds (GPA) (Ben Annis, Hammond, Hermon, and Patten Ponds) 100 feet
Rivers that flow to Great Ponds (GPA) (Souadabscook upstream of
Hammond Pond and West Branch Souadabscook downstream of Brown Brook)
100 feet
Rivers (Souadabscook downstream of Hammond Pond) 75 feet
Streams, including tributary streams4 75 feet
Wetland (the Penobscot River5 or a freshwater wetland as defined) 75 feet
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 12 -
Footnotes:
1. Does not apply to structures which require direct access to the waterbody or wetland as an
operational necessity, such as piers, docks, and retaining walls, nor to other functionally water
dependent uses.
2. On a nonconforming lot of record on which only a residential structure exists, and it is not possible to
place an accessory structure meeting the required water body, tributary stream or wetland setbacks,
the code enforcement officer may issue a permit to place a single accessory structure, with no utilities,
for the storage of yard tools and similar equipment. Such accessory structure must not exceed 80
square feet in area nor eight feet in height, and must be located as far from the shoreline or tributary
stream as practical and must meet all other applicable standards, including lot coverage and
vegetation clearing limitations. In no case can the structure be located closer to the shoreline or
tributary stream than the principal structure.
3. Except for structures, roads, parking spaces, or other regulated objects specifically allowed in that
district in which case the setback requirements specified below apply.
4. These setback requirements only apply where the waterbody is within the Shoreland Zone as defined
and mapped.
5. For principal structures, water and wetland setback measurements are to be taken from the top of a
coastal bluff that has been identified on Coastal Bluff maps as being “highly unstable” or “unstable”
by the Maine Geological Survey pursuant to its “Classification of Coastal Bluffs” and published on
the most recent Coastal Bluff map. If the applicant and the permitting official(s) are in disagreement
as to the specific location of a “highly unstable” or “unstable” bluff, or where the top of the bluff is
located, the applicant may at his or her expense, employ a Maine Registered Professional Engineer, a
Maine Certified Soil Scientist, a Maine State Geologist, or other qualified individual to make a
determination. If agreement is still not reached, the applicant may appeal the matter to the board of
appeals.
(2) Height. Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing structures which are
permitted in the Resource Protection, Limited Residential, and Stream Protection Districts,
must not exceed 35 feet in height. This provision does not apply to structures such as
transmission towers, windmills, antennas, and similar structures having no floor area.
(3) Floodplain. All development located in the special Flood Hazard Area as depicted on Flood
Insurance Rate Maps must comply with the Town of Hampden Floodplain Management
Ordinance.
(4) Non-vegetated Surface Coverage. With the exception of any General Development District
located adjacent to tidal waters (the Penobscot River), non-vegetated surfaces must not
exceed a total of 20% of the portion of the lot located within the shoreland zone. This
limitation does not apply to public boat launching facilities regardless of the district in which
the facility is located.
In any General Development District located adjacent to tidal waters, non-vegetated surfaces
must not exceed a total of 70% of the portion of the lot located within the shoreland zone.
For the purposes of calculating lot coverage, non-vegetated surfaces include, but are not
limited to the following: structures, driveways, parking areas, and other areas from which
vegetation has been removed. Naturally occurring ledge and rock outcroppings are not
counted as nonvegetated surfaces when calculating lot coverage for lots of record on March
24, 1990 and in continuous existence since that date.
(5) Retaining Walls. Retaining walls that are not necessary for erosion control must meet the
structure setback requirement, except for low retaining walls and associated fill provided all
of the following conditions are met. If the wall and associated soil disturbance occurs within
75 feet, horizontal distance, of a water body, tributary stream, or coastal wetland, a permit
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 13 -
pursuant to the Natural Resource Protection Act is required from the Department of
Environmental Protection.
(a) The site has been previously altered and an effective vegetated buffer does not exist;
(b) The wall(s) is(are) at least 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of
a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland;
(c) The site where the retaining wall will be constructed is legally existing lawn or is a site
eroding from lack of naturally occurring vegetation, and which cannot be stabilized with
vegetative plantings;
(d) The total height of the wall(s), in the aggregate, are no more than 24 inches;
(e) Retaining walls are located outside of the 100-year floodplain on rivers, streams, coastal
wetlands, and tributary streams, as designated on the Federal Emergency Management
Agency’s (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood
of record, or in the absence of these, by soil types identified as recent floodplain soils.
(f) The area behind the wall is revegetated with grass, shrubs, trees, or a combination
thereof, and no further structural development will occur within the setback area,
including patios and decks; and
(g) A vegetated buffer area is established within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland when a
natural buffer area does not exist. The buffer area must meet the following characteristics:
(i) The buffer must include shrubs and other woody and herbaceous vegetation. Where
natural ground cover is lacking the area must be supplemented with leaf or bark mulch;
(ii) Vegetation plantings must be in quantities sufficient to retard erosion and provide
for effective infiltration of stormwater runoff;
(iii) Only native species may be used to establish the buffer area;
(iv) A minimum buffer width of 15 feet, horizontal distance, is required, measured
perpendicularly to the normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland;
(v) A footpath not to exceed the standards in Section 15(P)(2)(a), may traverse the buffer;
(6) Structures for Shoreline Access. Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or
similar structures may be allowed with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, to provide
shoreline access in areas of steep slopes or unstable soils provided: that the structure is limited
to a maximum of four feet in width; that the structure does not extend below or over the normal
high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland, (unless permitted by the
Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, 38
M.R.S.A. section 480-C); and that the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable access
alternative exists on the property. All applications for structures for shoreline access must be
accompanied by an engineering report that contains an analysis of soil conditions, addresses
stormwater analysis for the installation area, contains installation details and necessary best
management practices to assure stable soil conditions both during construction and thereafter.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 14 -
C. Campgrounds. Campgrounds must conform to the minimum requirements imposed under State
licensing procedures and the following:
(1) Minimum Size. Campgrounds must contain a minimum of 5,000 square feet of land per campsite,
plus land area for common areas, roads, and driveways. Land supporting wetland vegetation, and
land below the normal high-water line of a water body is not to be included in calculating land
area per site.
(2) Shoreline Setback. The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or shelter,
and utility and service buildings must be located outside of the shoreline buffer.
D. Individual Private Campsites. Individual private campsites not associated with campgrounds
are allowed provided the following conditions are met:
(1) When an individual private campsite is proposed on an undeveloped lot, the lot must contain a
minimum of 30,000 square feet per campsite within the shoreland zone, unless the lot existed
prior to March 1, 2010, in which case one campsite is permitted even if the lot has less than
30,000 square feet within the shoreland zone.
(2) When an individual private campsite is proposed on a lot that contains another principal use
and/or structure, the minimum lot size must be a minimum of that required for the principal
structure (from Section 15(A)) plus that required for the campsite (30,000 sq ft).
(3) Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a recreational vehicle or tent
platform, must be outside of the shoreline buffer.
(4) Only one recreational vehicle is allowed on a campsite. The recreational vehicle must not be
located on any type of permanent foundation except for a gravel pad, and no structure except
a canopy is to be attached to the recreational vehicle.
(5) The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter in a
Resource Protection District is limited to 1,000 square feet.
(6) A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and location of sewage
disposal is required for each campsite and must be approved by the Local Plumbing
Inspector. Where disposal is off-site, written authorization from the receiving facility or land
owner is required.
(7) When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed on-site for more than 120 days per
year, all requirements for residential structures must be met, including the installation of a
subsurface sewage disposal system in compliance with the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules unless served by public sewage facilities.
E. Commercial and Industrial Uses. The following new commercial and industrial uses are
prohibited within the shoreland zone adjacent to great ponds classified GPA, and rivers and
streams which flow to great ponds classified GPA:
(1) Auto washing facilities
(2) Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations, including body shops
(3) Chemical or bacteriological laboratories
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 15 -
(4) Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers, other than amounts
normally associated with individual households or farms
(5) Commercial painting, wood preserving, and furniture stripping
(6) Dry cleaning establishments
(7) Electronic circuit assembly
(8) Laundromats, unless connected to a sanitary sewer
(9) Metal plating, finishing, or polishing
(10) Petroleum or petroleum product storage and/or sale except storage on same property as use
occurs and except for storage and sales associated with marinas
(11) Photographic processing
(12) Commercial printing
F. Parking Areas for all uses
(1) Parking areas must meet the shoreline and tributary stream setback requirements for
structures for the district in which such areas are located. The setback requirement for parking
areas serving public boat launching facilities in districts other than any General Development
District must be no less than 50 feet, horizontal distance, from the shoreline or tributary
stream if the Planning Board finds that no other reasonable alternative exists further from the
shoreline or tributary stream.
(2) Parking areas are to be adequately sized for the proposed use and must be designed to prevent
stormwater runoff from flowing directly into a water body, tributary stream, local stream or
wetland and where feasible, to retain all runoff on-site.
(3) Compliance With Zoning Ordinance. In determining the appropriate size and minimum
number of proposed parking spaces, the parking layouts and handicap parking configurations
must comply with the Town of Hampden Zoning Ordinance standards, except that parking
spaces for a vehicle with a boat trailer must be 40 feet long.
G. Roads and Driveways. The following standards apply to the construction of roads and/or
driveways and drainage systems, culverts and other related features.
(1) Except as provided in item (3) below, roads and driveways must be located outside of the
shoreline buffer unless no reasonable alternative exists as determined by the Planning Board.
If no other reasonable alternative exists, the road and/or driveway setback requirement must
be no less than 50 feet, horizontal distance, upon clear showing by the applicant that
appropriate techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the water body, tributary
stream, or wetland. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, the installation of
settling basins or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed so as
to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, local stream, or wetland.
On slopes of greater than 20% the road or driveway setback is increased by 10 feet,
horizontal distance, for each 5% increase in slope above 20%.
Section 15 (G)(1) does not apply to approaches to water crossings or to roads or driveways
that provide access to permitted structures and facilities located nearer to the shoreline or
tributary stream due to an operational necessity, excluding temporary docks for recreational
uses. Roads and driveways providing access to permitted structures within the setback area
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 16 -
must comply fully with the requirements of Section 15(G)(1) except for that portion of the
road or driveway necessary for direct access to the structure.
(2) Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right of way regardless of their
setback from a water body, tributary stream or wetland.
(3) New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection District except that the
Planning Board may grant a permit to construct a road or driveway to provide access to
permitted uses within the district. A road or driveway may also be approved by the Planning
Board in a Resource Protection District, upon a finding that no reasonable alternative route or
location is available outside the district. When a road or driveway is permitted in a Resource
Protection District the road and/or driveway must be set back as far as practicable from the
normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, local stream, or upland edge of a
wetland.
(4) Road and driveway banks must be no steeper than a slope of two horizontal to one vertical,
and must be graded and stabilized in accordance with the provisions for erosion and
sedimentation control contained in Section 15(R).
(5) Road and driveway grades must be no greater than 10% except for segments of less than 200
feet.
(6) In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from directly entering water bodies,
tributary streams or wetlands, roads and driveways must be designed, constructed, and
maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip at least 50 feet plus two times the
average slope, in width between the outflow point of the ditch or culvert and the normal highwater
line of a water body, tributary stream, local stream, or upland edge of a wetland.
Surface drainage which is directed to an unscarified buffer strip must be diffused or spread
out to promote infiltration of the runoff and to minimize channelized flow of the drainage
through the buffer strip.
(7) Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnouts must be installed in a
manner effective in directing drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before the flow gains
sufficient volume or head to erode the road, driveway, or ditch. To accomplish this, the
following provisions apply:
(a) Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water turnouts must be spaced along
the road, or driveway at intervals no greater than indicated in the following table:
Grade (%) Spacing (feet)
0-2 250
3-5 200-135
6-10 100-80
11-15 80-60
16-20 60-45
21 + 40
(b) Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only where the grade is 10
percent or less.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 17 -
(c) On sections having slopes greater than 10%, ditch relief culverts must be placed at
approximately a 30 degree angle downslope from a line perpendicular to the centerline of
the road or driveway.
(d) Ditch relief culverts must be sufficiently sized and properly installed in order to allow for
effective functioning, and their inlet and outlet ends must be stabilized with appropriate
materials.
(8) Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other storm water runoff control
installations associated with roads and driveways must be maintained on a regular basis to
assure effective functioning.
H. Signs. Sign locations, size, configuration and lighting must comply with the Town of Hampden
Zoning Ordinance, with the following exceptions:
(1) Real estate signs within the RP, LR, and SP districts for residential properties are limited to a
maximum of three square feet.
(2) Posting signs within the shoreland zone related to trespassing or hunting are limited to two
square feet in area.
(3) Signs related to public safety are allowed without restriction within the shoreland zone.
(4) Signs within the shoreland zone related to goods or services sold on the premises are limited
to six square feet in area.
(5) Unless otherwise restricted in the Zoning Ordinance, signs within the shoreland zone are
limited to 20 feet from the ground to the top of the sign.
I. Storm Water Runoff
(1) All new construction and development must be designed to minimize storm water runoff
from the site in excess of the natural predevelopment conditions. Where possible, existing
natural runoff control features, such as berms, swales, terraces and wooded areas, are to be
retained in order to reduce runoff and encourage infiltration of stormwaters.
(2) Storm water runoff control systems must be maintained as necessary to ensure proper
functioning.
J. Septic Waste Disposal
(1) All subsurface sewage disposal systems must be installed in conformance with the State of
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, and the following:
(a) clearing or removal of woody vegetation necessary to site a new system and any
associated fill extensions, must not extend closer than 75 feet, horizontal distance, from
the normal high-water line of a water body or the upland edge of a wetland; and
(b) a holding tank is not allowed for a first-time residential use in the shoreland zone.
K. Essential Services
(1) Where feasible, the installation of essential services is to be within existing public ways and
existing service corridors.
(2) The installation of essential services, other than road-side distribution lines, is not allowed in
a Resource Protection or Stream Protection District, except to provide services to a permitted
use within said district, or except where the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 18 -
alternative exists. Where allowed, such structures and facilities must be located so as to
minimize any adverse impacts on surrounding uses and resources, including visual impacts.
(3) Damaged or destroyed public utility transmission and distribution lines, towers and related
equipment may be replaced or reconstructed without a permit.
L. Mineral Exploration and Extraction. Mineral exploration to determine the nature or extent of
mineral resources is to be accomplished by hand sampling, test boring, or other methods which
create minimal disturbance of less than 100 square feet of ground surface. A permit from the
Code Enforcement Officer is required for mineral exploration which exceeds the above
limitation. All excavations, including test pits and holes, must be immediately capped, filled or
secured by other equally effective measures to restore disturbed areas and to protect the public
health and safety.
Mineral extraction may be permitted under the following conditions:
(1) A reclamation plan must be filed with and approved by the Planning Board before a permit is
granted. Such plan must describe in detail procedures to be undertaken to fulfill the
requirements of Section 15 (L)(3) below.
(2) No part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff control features, is to be
permitted within the shoreline buffer. Minimum distances from property lines for extraction
operations are established in the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Hampden Maine.
(3) Within 12 months following the completion of extraction operations at any extraction site,
which operations are to be deemed complete when less than 100 cubic yards of materials are
removed in any consecutive 12 month period, ground levels and grades must be established in
accordance with the following:
(a) All debris, stumps, and similar material must be removed for disposal in an approved
location, or may be buried on-site. Only materials generated on-site may be buried or
covered on-site.
(b) The final graded slope must be two and one-half to one (2.5:1) slope or flatter within the
shoreland zone.
(c) Top soil or loam must be retained to cover all disturbed land areas, which must be seeded
and stabilized with vegetation native to the area. Additional topsoil or loam must be
obtained from off-site sources if necessary to complete the stabilization project.
(4) In keeping with the purposes of this Ordinance, the Planning Board may impose such
conditions as are necessary to minimize the adverse impacts associated with mineral
extraction operations on surrounding uses and resources.
M. Agriculture
(1) All spreading of manure must be accomplished in conformance with the Manure Utilization
Guidelines published by the former Maine Department of Agriculture on November 1, 2001,
and the Nutrient Management Law (7 M.R.S. sections 4201-4209).
(2) Manure must not be stored or stockpiled within the shoreline buffer. All manure storage areas
within the shoreland zone must be constructed or modified such that the facility produces no
discharge of effluent or contaminated storm water.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 19 -
(3) Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than 40,000 square feet in surface area,
within the shoreland zone requires a Conservation Plan to be filed with the Planning Board.
Nonconformance with the provisions of said plan will be considered to be a violation of this
Ordinance.
(4) There is to be no new tilling of soil within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of a great pond classified GPA; within 75 feet, horizontal distance, from other
water bodies and coastal wetlands; nor within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of tributary
streams, and freshwater wetlands. Operations within these distance limits that were in
existence prior to March 1, 2010 may be maintained.
(5) Newly established livestock grazing areas are not permitted within 100 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA; within 75 feet,
horizontal distance, of other water bodies and coastal wetlands, nor within 25 feet, horizontal
distance, of tributary streams, and freshwater wetlands. Livestock grazing associated with
ongoing farm activities, and which are not in conformance with the above setback provisions
may continue, provided that such grazing is conducted in accordance with a Conservation Plan
that has been filed with the Planning Board.
N. Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting
(1) All Shoreland Districts are subject to this section N. Clearing or removal of vegetation for
activities other than timber harvesting must be supervised by a licensed forester. Supervision
must include marking of trees for cutting and written verification by the licensed forester
post-cut stating that the cutting was in keeping with the original markings.
(2) In a Resource Protection District abutting a great pond, there must be no cutting of vegetation
within the strip of land extending 75 feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal highwater
line, except to remove hazard trees as described in Section O.
Elsewhere, in any Resource Protection District the cutting or removal of vegetation must be
limited to that which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that district.
(3) Except in areas as described in Section N(2), above, in order to maintain the vegetation in the
shoreline buffer (see definitions), clearing or removal of vegetation within the shoreline
buffer for allowed activities (including associated construction and related equipment
operation within the shoreland zone) must comply with the following:
(a) There must be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet in the forest canopy (or
other existing woody vegetation if a forested canopy is not present) as measured from the
outer limits of the tree or shrub crown. However, a single footpath not to exceed six feet
in width as measured between tree trunks and/or shrub stems is allowed for accessing the
shoreline provided that a cleared line of sight to the water through the buffer strip is not
created.
(b) Selective cutting of trees is allowed provided that a well-distributed stand of trees and
other natural vegetation is maintained. For the purposes of Section 15(N)(3)(b) a "welldistributed
stand of trees" adjacent to a great pond classified GPA or a river or stream
flowing to a great pond classified GPA, is defined as maintaining a rating score of 24 or
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 20 -
more in each 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular (1250 square feet) area as determined by the
following rating system.
Diameter of Retained Tree at
4.5 feet Above Ground Level
(DBH) Points
2 to < 4 inches 1
4 to < 8 inches 2
8 to < 12 inches 4
12 inches or greater 8
Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands, a "well-distributed stand
of trees" is defined as maintaining a minimum rating score of 16 per 25-foot by 50-foot
rectangular area.
The following governs in applying this point system:
(i) The 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular plots must be established where the landowner or
lessee proposes clearing within the required buffer;
(ii) Each successive plot must be adjacent to, but not overlap a previous plot;
(iii) Any plot not containing the required points must have no vegetation removed except
as otherwise allowed by this Ordinance;
(iv) Any plot containing the required points may have vegetation removed down to the
minimum points required or as otherwise allowed by is Ordinance;
(v) Where conditions permit, no more than 50% of the points on any 25-foot by 50-foot
rectangular area may consist of trees greater than 12 inches in diameter.
For the purposes of Section 15(N)(3)(b) “other natural vegetation” is defined as retaining
existing vegetation under three feet in height and other ground cover and retaining at least
five saplings less than two inches DBH for each 25-foot by 50-foot rectangle area. If five
saplings do not exist, no woody stems less than two inches in diameter can be removed
until five saplings have been recruited into the plot.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than 40% of the total volume of trees
four inches or more DBH may be removed in any 10 year period.
(c) In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing vegetation under three feet
in height and other ground cover, including leaf litter and the forest duff layer, must not
be cut, covered, or removed, except to provide for a footpath or other permitted uses as
described in Section 15(N) paragraphs (3) and (3)(a) above.
(d) Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom one-third of the tree is allowed.
(e) When the removal of storm-damaged, dead or hazard trees results in the creation of
cleared openings, these openings must be replanted with native tree species in accordance
with Section O, below, unless existing new tree growth is present.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 21 -
(4) In the area within the shoreland zone but outside of the shoreline buffer, selective cutting of
up to 40% of the volume of trees four inches or more DBH is allowed in any 10 year period.
Tree removal in conjunction with the development of permitted uses must be included in the
40% calculation. For the purposes of these standards volume may be considered to be
equivalent to basal area.
Cleared openings for any purpose, including but not limited to, principal and accessory
structures, driveways, lawns and sewage disposal areas, must not exceed in the aggregate,
25% of the lot area within the shoreland zone or 10,000 square feet, whichever is greater,
including land previously cleared. This provision applies to the portion of a lot within the
shoreland zone, including the shoreline buffer area, but does not apply to any General
Development District.
Notwithstanding the general requirement that clearing and removal of vegetation be
supervised by a licensed forester, clearing for construction of a new single-family residence
does not require supervision by a licensed forester if the home builder adheres to a maximum
limit of 25% of the lot area in the shoreland zone or 10,000 square feet, whichever is greater.
(5) Legally existing nonconforming cleared openings may be maintained, but must not be
enlarged, except as allowed by this Ordinance.
(6) Fields and other cleared openings which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees, or other
woody vegetation are regulated under the provisions of Section 15(N).
O. Hazard Trees, Storm-Damaged Trees, and Dead Tree Removal
(1) Hazard trees in the shoreland zone may be removed without a permit after consultation with
the Code Enforcement Officer if the following requirements are met:
(a) Within the shoreline buffer, if the removal of a hazard tree results in a cleared opening in
the tree canopy greater than 250 square feet, replacement with native tree species is
required, unless there is new tree growth already present. New tree growth must be as
near as practicable to where the hazard tree was removed and be at least two inches DBH.
If new growth is not present, then replacement trees must consist of native species and be
at least four feet in height, and be no less than two inches in diameter. Stumps may not be
removed.
(b) Outside of the shoreline buffer, when the removal of hazard trees exceeds 40% of the
volume of trees four inches or more DBH in any 10 year period, and/or results in cleared
openings exceeding 25% of the lot area within the shoreland zone, or 10,000 square feet,
whichever is greater, replacement with native tree species is required, unless there is new
tree growth already present. New tree growth must be as near as practicable to where the
hazard tree was removed and be at least two inches DBH. If new growth is not present,
then replacement trees must consist of native species and be at least two inches DBH.
(c) The removal of standing dead trees, resulting from natural causes, is permissible without
the need for replanting or a permit, as long as the removal does not result in the creation
of new lawn areas, or other permanently cleared areas, and stumps are not removed. For
the purposes of this provision dead trees are those trees that contain no foliage during the
growing season.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 22 -
(d) The Code Enforcement Officer may require the property owner to submit an evaluation
from a licensed forester or arborist before any hazard tree can be removed within the
shoreland zone.
(e) The Code Enforcement Officer may require more than a one–for-one replacement for
hazard trees removed that exceed eight inches DBH.
(2) Storm-damaged trees in the shoreland zone may be removed without a permit after
consultation with the Code Enforcement Officer if the following requirements are met:
(a) Within the shoreline buffer, when the removal of storm-damaged trees results in a cleared
opening in the tree canopy greater than 250 square feet, replanting is not required, but the
area is required to naturally revegetate, and the following requirements must be met:
(i) The area from which a storm-damaged tree is removed does not result in new lawn
areas, or other permanently cleared areas;
(ii) Stumps from the storm-damaged trees may not be removed;
(iii) Limbs damaged from a storm event may be pruned even if they extend beyond the
bottom one-third of the tree; and
(iv) If after one growing season, no natural regeneration or regrowth is present, replanting
of native tree seedlings or saplings is required at a density of one seedling per every
80 square feet of lost canopy.
(b) Outside of the shoreline buffer, if the removal of storm damaged trees exceeds 40% of
the volume of trees four inches or more DBH in any 10 year period, or results, in the
aggregate, in cleared openings exceeding 25% of the lot area within the shoreland zone or
10,000 square feet, whichever is greater, and no natural regeneration occurs within one
growing season, then native tree seedlings or saplings must be replanted on a one-for-one
basis.
(c) The Code Enforcement Officer may require the property owner to submit an evaluation
from a licensed forester or arborist before any hazard tree can be removed within the
shoreland zone.
P. Exemptions to Clearing and Vegetation Removal Requirements
The following activities are exempt from the clearing and vegetation removal standards set forth
in Section 15(N), provided that all other applicable requirements of this chapter are complied
with, and the removal of vegetation is limited to that which is necessary:
(1) The removal of vegetation that occurs at least once every two years for the maintenance of
legally existing areas that do not comply with the vegetation standards in this chapter, such as
but not limited to cleared openings in the canopy or fields. Such areas must not be enlarged,
except as allowed by this section. If any of these areas, due to lack of removal of vegetation
every two years, reverts back to primarily woody vegetation, the requirements of Section
15(N) apply;
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 23 -
(2) The removal of vegetation from the location of allowed structures or allowed uses, when the
shoreline setback requirements of section 15(B) are not applicable;
(3) The removal of vegetation from the location of public swimming areas associated with an
allowed public recreational facility;
(4) The removal of vegetation associated with allowed agricultural uses, provided best
management practices are utilized, and provided all requirements of section 15(N) are
complied with;
(5) The removal of vegetation associated with brownfields or voluntary response action program
(VRAP) projects provided that the removal of vegetation is necessary for remediation
activities to clean-up contamination on a site in any General Development district or other
equivalent zoning district approved by the Commissioner that is part of a state or federal
brownfields program or a voluntary response action program pursuant 38 M.R.S. section 343-
E, and that is located along:
(a) A coastal wetland; or
(b) A river that does not flow to a great pond classified as GPA pursuant to 38 M.R.S.
section 465-A.
(6) The removal of non-native invasive vegetation species, provided the following minimum
requirements are met:
(a) If removal of vegetation occurs via wheeled or tracked motorized equipment, the wheeled
or tracked motorized equipment is operated and stored at least 25 feet, horizontal
distance, from the shoreline, except that wheeled or tracked equipment may be operated
or stored on existing structural surfaces, such as pavement or gravel;
(b) Removal of vegetation within 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the shoreline occurs via
hand tools; and
(c) If applicable clearing and vegetation removal standards are exceeded due to the removal
of non-native invasive species vegetation, the area must be revegetated with native
species to achieve compliance.
(7) The removal of vegetation associated with emergency response activities conducted by the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
the U.S. Coast Guard, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the Maine or Federal Emergency
Management Agencies, or their agents.
Q. Revegetation Requirements
When revegetation is required in response to violations of the vegetation standards set forth in
Section 15(N), to address the removal of non-native invasive species of vegetation, or as a
mechanism to allow for development that may otherwise not be permissible due to the vegetation
standards, including removal of vegetation in conjunction with a shoreline stabilization project,
the revegation must comply with the following requirements.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 24 -
(1) The property owner must submit a revegetation plan, prepared with and signed by a qualified
professional, that describes revegetation activities and maintenance. The plan must include a
scaled site plan, depicting where vegetation was or is to be removed, where existing
vegetation is to remain, and where vegetation is to be planted, including a list of all
vegetation to be planted.
(2) Revegetation must occur along the same segment of shoreline and in the same area where
vegetation was removed and at a density comparable to the pre-existing vegetation, except
where a shoreline stabilization activity does not allow revegetation to occur in the same area
and at a density comparable to the pre-existing vegetation, in which case revegetation must
occur along the same segment of shoreline and as close as possible to the area where
vegetation was removed:
(3) If part of a permitted activity, revegetation must occur before the expiration of the permit. If
the activity or revegetation is not completed before the expiration of the permit, a new
revegetation plan must be submitted with any renewal or new permit application.
(4) Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for trees and saplings:
(a) All trees and saplings removed must be replaced with native noninvasive species;
(b) Replacement vegetation must at a minimum consist of saplings;
(c) If more than three trees or saplings are planted, then at least three different species must
be used;
(d) No one species is to make up 50% or more of the number of trees and saplings planted;
(e) If revegetation is required for a shoreline stabilization project, and it is not possible to
plant trees and saplings in the same area where trees or saplings were removed, then trees
or sapling must be planted in a location that effectively reestablishes the screening
between the shoreline and structures; and
(f) A survival rate of at least 80% of planted trees or saplings is required for a minimum five
year period.
(5) Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for woody vegetation and other
vegetation under three feet in height:
(a) All woody vegetation and vegetation under three feet in height must be replaced with
native noninvasive species of woody vegetation and vegetation under three feet in height
as applicable;
(b) Woody vegetation and vegetation under three feet in height must be planted in quantities
and variety sufficient to prevent erosion and provide for effective infiltration of
stormwater;
(c) If more than three woody vegetation plants are to be planted, then at least three different
species must be planted;
(d) No one species is to make up 50% or more of the number of planted woody vegetation
plants; and
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 25 -
(e) Survival of planted woody vegetation and vegetation under three feet in height must be
sufficient to remain in compliance with the standards contained within this chapter for a
minimum five year period.
(6) Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for ground vegetation and
ground cover:
(a) All ground vegetation and ground cover removed must be replaced with native
herbaceous vegetation in quantities and variety sufficient to prevent erosion and provide
for effective infiltration of stormwater;
(b) Where necessary due to a lack of sufficient ground cover, an area must be supplemented
with a minimum four inch depth of leaf mulch and/or bark mulch to prevent erosion and
provide for effective infiltration of stormwater; and
(c) Survival and functionality of ground vegetation and ground cover must be sufficient to
remain in compliance with the standards contained within this chapter for a minimum
five year period.
R. Erosion and Sedimentation Control
(1) All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or other similar activities which result
in unstabilized soil conditions and which require a permit also require a written soil erosion
and sedimentation control plan. The plan must reference and conform to the Maine Erosion
and Sedimentation Control Best Management Practices Handbook. The plan must be
submitted to the permitting authority for approval and must include, where applicable,
provisions for:
(a) Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
(b) Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt fencing or diversion ditches.
(c) Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or rip-rap.
(2) In order to minimize the potential for erosion, development is to be designed to fit with the
topography and soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be
required must be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours are to be followed as
closely as possible.
(3) Erosion and sedimentation control measures apply to all aspects of the proposed project
involving land disturbance, and must be in operation during all stages of the activity. The
amount of exposed soil at every phase of construction must be minimized to reduce the
potential for erosion.
(4) Any exposed ground area must be temporarily or permanently stabilized within one week
from the time it was last actively worked, by use of riprap, sod, seed, and mulch, or other
effective measures. In all cases permanent stabilization must occur within nine months of the
initial date of exposure. In addition:
(a) Where mulch is used, it must be applied at a rate of at least one bale per 500 square feet
and must be maintained until a catch of vegetation is established.
(b) Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable method may be
required to maintain the mulch cover.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 26 -
(c) Additional measures must be taken where necessary in order to avoid siltation into the
water. Such measures may include the use of staked hay bales and/or silt fences.
(5) Natural and man-made drainage ways and drainage outlets must be protected from erosion
from water flowing through them. Drainageways must be designed and constructed in order
to carry water from a 25 year storm or greater, and must be stabilized with vegetation or lined
with riprap.
S. Soils. All land uses are to be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or structures can
be established or maintained without causing adverse environmental impacts, including severe
erosion, mass soil movement, improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during or after
construction. Proposed uses requiring subsurface sewage disposal, and commercial or industrial
development and other similar intensive land uses, require a soils report based on an on-site
investigation and be prepared by state-certified professionals. Certified persons may include Maine
Certified Soil Scientists, Maine Registered Professional Engineers, Maine State Certified
Geologists and other persons who have training and experience in the recognition and evaluation
of soil properties. The report is to be based upon the analysis of the characteristics of the soil and
surrounding land and water areas, maximum ground water elevation, presence of ledge, drainage
conditions, and other pertinent data which the evaluator deems appropriate. The soils report must
include recommendations for a proposed use to counteract soil limitations where they exist.
T. Water Quality. No activity is allowed to deposit on or into the ground or discharge to the waters
of the State any pollutant that, by itself or in combination with other activities or substances, will
impair designated uses or the water classification of the water body, tributary stream, local
stream, or wetland.
U. Archaeological Site. Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil
disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, as determined by the permitting authority, must be submitted by the applicant to
the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment, at least 20 days prior to
action being taken by the permitting authority. The permitting authority must consider comments
received from the Commission prior to rendering a decision on the application.
16. Administration
A. Administering Bodies and Agents
(1) Code Enforcement Officer. A Code Enforcement Officer must be appointed or reappointed
annually by July 1st.
(2) Board of Appeals. A Board of Appeals must be created in accordance with the provisions of
30-A M.R.S. section 2691.
(3) Planning Board. A Planning Board must be created in accordance with the provisions of
State law.
B. Permits Required. After the effective date of this Ordinance no person may, without first
obtaining a permit, engage in any activity or use of land or structure requiring a permit in the
district in which such activity or use would occur; or expand, change, or replace an existing use
or structure; or renew a discontinued nonconforming use. A person who is issued a permit
pursuant to this Ordinance must have a copy of the permit on site while the work authorized by
the permit is performed.
(1) A permit is not required for the replacement of an existing road culvert as long as:
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 27 -
(a) The replacement culvert is not more than 25% longer than the culvert being replaced;
(b) The replacement culvert is not longer than 75 feet; and
(c) Adequate erosion control measures are taken to prevent sedimentation of the water, and
the crossing does not block fish passage in the watercourse.
(2) A permit is not required for an archaeological excavation as long as the excavation is
conducted by an archaeologist listed on the State Historic Preservation Officer’s Level 1 or
Level 2 approved list, and unreasonable erosion and sedimentation is prevented by means of
adequate and timely temporary and permanent stabilization measures.
(3) Any permit required by this Ordinance is in addition to any other permit required by other
law or ordinance.
C. Permit Application
(1) Every applicant for a permit must submit a written application, including a scaled site plan,
on a form provided by the Town of Hampden to either the Code Enforcement Officer or the
Planning Board as stipulated in Section 14.
(2) All applications must be signed by an owner or individual who can show evidence of right,
title or interest in the property or by an agent, representative, tenant, or contractor of the
owner with authorization from the owner to apply for a permit hereunder, certifying that the
information in the application is complete and correct.
(3) All applications must be dated, and the town staff is to note upon each application the date
and time of its receipt.
(4) If the property is not served by a public sewer, a valid plumbing permit or a completed
application for a plumbing permit, including the site evaluation approved by the Local
Plumbing Inspector, must be submitted whenever the nature of the proposed structure or use
would require the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system.
(5) Other Information as Required. The Code Enforcement Officer and the Planning Board have
the authority to require additional information which may reasonably be necessary for them
to make their decision and inform the facts of the application.
D. Procedure for Administering Permits. For permits granted by the Code Enforcement Officer,
the application must be acted upon (approved, approved with conditions, or denied) within 35
days of the date of receiving a written application, unless the applicant agrees to an extension to
correct any deficiencies identified by the Code Enforcement Officer. For permits granted by the
Planning Board, the application must be acted upon within 90 days of the date of receiving a
written application, which time frame includes the holding of a public hearing in the event the
Planning Board determines the proposed activity would cause disturbances significant enough
that a public hearing is necessary.
The applicant has the burden of proving that the proposed land use activity is in conformity with
the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 28 -
For permits granted by the Planning Board, the Board may approve an application or approve it
with conditions only if it makes a positive finding based on the information presented that the
proposed use:
(1) Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
(2) Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to surface waters;
(3) Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
(4) Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird or other wildlife
habitat;
(5) Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points of access to inland and coastal
waters;
(6) Will protect archaeological and historic resources as designated in the comprehensive plan;
(7) Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development and use; and
(8) Is in conformance with the provisions of Section 15, Land Use Standards.
If a permit is either denied or approved with conditions, the reasons as well as conditions must be
stated in writing. No approval is to be granted for an application involving a structure if the
structure would be located in an unapproved subdivision or would violate any other local
ordinance, regulation or statute administered by the Town of Hampden.
E. Special Exceptions. In addition to the criteria specified in Section 16(D) above, excepting
structure setback requirements, the Planning Board may approve a permit for a single family
residential structure in a Resource Protection District provided that the applicant demonstrates
that all of the following conditions are met:
(1) There is no location on the property, other than a location within the Resource Protection
District, where the structure can be built.
(2) The lot on which the structure is proposed is undeveloped and was established and recorded
in the registry of deeds of the county in which the lot is located before the adoption of the
Resource Protection District.
(3) All proposed buildings, sewage disposal systems and other improvements are:
(a) Located on natural ground slopes of less than 20%; and
(b) Located outside the floodway along rivers and artificially formed great ponds along rivers
and outside the velocity zone in areas subject to tides, based on detailed flood insurance
studies and as delineated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's Flood
Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps; all buildings, including
basements, are elevated at least one foot above the 100-year floodplain elevation; and the
development is otherwise in compliance with the Town of Hampden, Maine Floodplain
Management Ordinance.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 29 -
If the floodway is not shown on the Federal Emergency Management Agency Maps, it is
deemed to be one-half the width of the 100-year floodplain.
(4) The total footprint, including cantilevered or similar overhanging extensions, of all principal
and accessory structures is limited to a maximum of 1,500 square feet. This limitation must
not be altered by variance.
(5) All structures, except functionally water-dependent structures, are set back from the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland to the greatest
practical extent, but not less than 75 feet, horizontal distance. In determining the greatest
practical extent, the Planning Board is to consider the depth of the lot, the slope of the land,
the potential for soil erosion, the type and amount of vegetation to be removed, the proposed
building site's elevation in regard to the floodplain, and its proximity to moderate-value and
high-value wetlands.
F. Expiration of Permit. Permits expire one year from the date of issuance if a substantial start is
not made in construction or in the use of the property during that period. If a substantial start is
made within one year of the issuance of the permit, the applicant has one additional year to
complete the project, at which time the permit expires.
G. Installation of Public Utility Service. A public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility
company of any kind may not install services to any new structure located in the shoreland zone
unless written authorization attesting to the validity and currency of all local permits required under
this or any previous Ordinance has been issued by the appropriate Town officials or other written
arrangements have been made between the Town officials and the utility.
H. Appeals
(1) Powers and Duties of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals is governed by the
provisions of the Town of Hampden Board of Appeals Ordinance including but not limited to
filing deadlines, application requirements, fees, appeal procedures, decisions of the Board of
Appeals and subsequent appeals to Superior Court. The Board of Appeals has the following
powers with regard to this Ordinance:
(a) Administrative Appeals: All administrative appeals are subject to the provisions of the
Town of Hampden Board of Appeals Ordinance including but not limited to filing
deadlines, application requirements, fees, appeal procedures, decisions of the Board of
Appeals and subsequent appeals to Superior Court. The Board of Appeals will hear and
decide administrative appeals. To hear and decide administrative appeals, on an appellate
basis, where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by, or failure to act by, the Planning Board in
the administration of this Ordinance; and to hear and decide administrative appeals on a de
novo basis where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement
Officer in his or her review of and action on a permit application under this Ordinance. Any
order, requirement, decision or determination made, or failure to act, in the enforcement of
this ordinance is not appealable to the Board of Appeals.
(b) Variance Appeals: To authorize variances upon appeal, within the limitations set forth in
this Ordinance and the Town of Hampden Board of Appeals Ordinance.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 30 -
(2) Variance Appeals. All variance appeals are subject to the provisions of the Town of Hampden
Board of Appeals Ordinance including but not limited to filing deadlines, application
requirements, fees, appeal procedures, decisions of the Board of Appeals and subsequent
appeals to Superior Court. The Board of Appeals will hear and decide variance appeals. A
variance from the provisions of the Ordinance may only be granted by the Board of Appeals in
accordance with the following conditions:
(a) Variances may be granted only from dimensional requirements including, but not limited to,
minimum lot width, maximum structure height, percent of lot coverage, shoreline
setback requirements, lot area, and shore frontage.
(b) Variances must not be granted for establishment of any uses otherwise prohibited by this
Ordinance.
(c) The Board must not grant a variance unless it finds that:
(i) The proposed structure or use would meet the provisions of Section 15 except for the
specific provision which has created the nonconformity and from which relief is
sought; and
(ii) The strict application of the terms of this Ordinance would result in undue hardship.
The term "undue hardship" means:
a. That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is
granted;
b. That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and
not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
c. That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality;
and
d. That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
(d) Notwithstanding Section 16(H)(2)(c)(ii) above, the Code Enforcement Officer may grant a
variance to an owner of a residential dwelling for the purpose of making that dwelling
accessible to a person with a disability who resides in or regularly uses the dwelling,
pursuant to Section 6.2.2.3.2 of the Hampden Zoning Ordinance. Any variance granted
under this subsection is restricted solely to the installation of equipment or the construction
of structures necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling by the person with the
disability. The CEO may impose conditions on the variance, including limiting the variance
to the duration of the disability or to the time that the person with the disability lives in the
dwelling. The term “structures necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling"
includes railing, wall or roof systems necessary for the safety or effectiveness of the
structure. Any permit issued pursuant to this subsection is subject to Sections 16(H)(2)(f)
and 16(H)(4)(b)(iv) below.
(e) The Board of Appeals must limit any variances granted as strictly as possible in order to
ensure conformance with the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance to the greatest
extent possible, and in doing so may impose such conditions to a variance as it deems
necessary. The party receiving the variance must comply with any conditions imposed.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 31 -
(f) A copy of each variance request, including the application and all supporting information
supplied by the applicant, must be forwarded by Town officials to the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection at least 20 days prior to action by the Board of
Appeals. Any comments received from the Commissioner prior to the action by the Board
of Appeals must be made part of the record and are to be taken into consideration by the
Board of Appeals.
(3) Administrative Appeals
When the Board of Appeals reviews a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer the Board of
Appeals will hold a “de novo” hearing. At this time the Board may receive and consider new
evidence and testimony, be it oral or written. When acting in a “de novo” capacity the Board of
Appeals will hear and decide the matter afresh, undertaking its own independent analysis of
evidence and the law, and reaching its own decision.
When the Board of Appeals hears a decision of the Planning Board, it will hold an appellate
hearing, and may reverse the decision of the Planning Board only upon finding that the decision
was contrary to specific provisions of the Ordinance or contrary to the facts presented to the
Planning Board. The Board of Appeals may only review the record of the proceedings before
the Planning Board. The Board of Appeals must not receive or consider any evidence which
was not presented to the Planning Board, but the Board of Appeals may receive and consider
written or oral arguments. If the Board of Appeals determines that the record of the Planning
Board proceedings are inadequate, the Board of Appeals may remand the matter to the Planning
Board for additional fact finding.
(4) Appeal Procedure
(a) Making an Appeal
(i) An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an
aggrieved party from any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning
Board, except for enforcement-related matters as described in Section 16(H)(1)(a)
above. Such an appeal must be taken within 30 days of the date of the official, written
decision appealed from, and not otherwise, except that the Board, upon a showing of
good cause, may waive the 30 day requirement.
(ii) Applications for appeals must be made by filing with the Board of Appeals a written
notice of appeal which includes:
a. A concise written statement indicating what relief is requested and why the appeal
or variance should be granted.
b. A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of existing buildings and
structures and other physical features of the lot pertinent to the relief sought.
(iii) Upon receiving an application for an administrative appeal or a variance, the Code
Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as appropriate, must transmit to the Board of
Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the decision appealed from.
(iv) The Board of Appeals must hold a public hearing on an administrative appeal or a
request for a variance within 35 days of its receipt of a complete written application,
unless this time period is extended by the parties.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 32 -
(b) Decision by Board of Appeals
(i) A majority of the full voting membership of the Board constitutes a quorum for the
purpose of deciding an appeal.
(ii) The person filing the appeal has the burden of proof.
(iii) The Board must decide all administrative appeals and variance appeals within 35 days
after the close of the hearing, and must issue a written decision on all appeals.
(iv) The Board of Appeals must state the reasons and basis for its decision, including a
statement of the facts found and conclusions reached by the Board. The Board must
cause written notice of its decision to be mailed or hand-delivered to the applicant and
to the Department of Environmental Protection within seven days of the Board’s
decision. Copies of written decisions of the Board of Appeals must be given to the
Planning Board, Code Enforcement Officer, and the municipal officers.
(5) Appeal to Superior Court. Except as provided by 30-A M.R.S. section 2691(3)(F), any
aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings before the Board of Appeals
may take an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State laws within 45 days from the
date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
(6) Reconsideration. In accordance with 30-A M.R.S. section 2691(3)(F), the Board of Appeals
may reconsider any decision within 45 days of its prior decision. A request to the Board to
reconsider a decision must be filed within 10 days of the decision that is being reconsidered. A
vote to reconsider and the action taken on that reconsideration must occur and be completed
within 45 days of the date of the vote on the original decision. Reconsideration of a decision
requires a positive vote of the majority of the Board members originally voting on the decision,
and proper notification to the landowner, petitioner, planning board, code enforcement officer,
and other parties of interest, including abutters and those who testified at the original
hearing(s). The Board may conduct additional hearings and receive additional evidence and
testimony.
Appeal of a reconsidered decision to Superior Court must be made within 15 days after the
decision on reconsideration.
I. Enforcement
(1) Nuisances. Any violation of this Ordinance is deemed to be a nuisance.
(2) Code Enforcement Officer
(a) It is the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance. If the Code Enforcement Officer finds that any provision of this Ordinance is
being violated, he or she must notify in writing the person responsible for such violation,
indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it,
including discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures, or work being
done, removal of illegal buildings or structures, and abatement of nuisance conditions. A
copy of such notices must be submitted to the municipal officers and be maintained as a
permanent record.
(b) The Code Enforcement Officer must conduct on-site inspections to ensure compliance with
all applicable laws and conditions attached to permit approvals. The Code Enforcement
Officer must also investigate all complaints of alleged violations of this Ordinance.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 33 -
(c) The Code Enforcement Officer must keep a complete record of all essential transactions of
the office, including applications submitted, permits granted or denied, variances granted or
denied, revocation actions, revocation of permits, appeals, court actions, violations
investigated, violations found, and fees collected.
(3) Legal Actions. When the above action does not result in the correction or abatement of the
violation or nuisance condition, the Municipal Officers, upon notice from the Code
Enforcement Officer, are hereby directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings, either
legal or equitable, including seeking injunctions of violations and the imposition of fines, that
may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance in the name of the
municipality. The municipal officers, or their authorized agent, are hereby authorized to enter
into administrative consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating violations of this
Ordinance and recovering fines without Court action. Such agreements must not allow an
illegal structure or use to continue unless there is clear and convincing evidence that the illegal
structure or use was constructed or conducted as a direct result of erroneous advice given by an
authorized municipal official and there is no evidence that the owner acted in bad faith, or
unless the removal of the structure or use will result in a threat or hazard to public health and
safety or will result in substantial environmental damage.
(4) Fines. Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner's agent or a
contractor, who violates any provision or requirement of this Ordinance is to be penalized in
accordance with 30-A, M.R.S. section 4452.
17. Definitions
Accessory structure or use - a use or structure which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use
or structure. Accessory uses, when aggregated, must not subordinate the principal use of the lot. A deck
or similar extension of the principal structure or a garage attached to the principal structure by a roof or
a common wall is considered part of the principal structure.
Aggrieved party - an owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly affected by the granting or
denial of a permit or variance under this Ordinance; a person whose land abuts land for which a permit
or variance has been granted; or any other person or group of persons who have suffered particularized
injury as a result of the granting or denial of such permit or variance.
Agriculture - the production, keeping or maintenance for sale or lease of plants or animals, including,
but not limited to, forages and sod crops, grains and seed crops, dairy animals and dairy products, poultry
and poultry products, livestock, fruits and vegetables and ornamental green-house products. Agriculture
does not include forest management, timber harvesting activities, or cultivation of
marijuana (medical or otherwise).
Aquaculture - the growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater, estuarine, or marine plant or
animal species.
Basal Area - the area of cross-section of a tree stem at 4.5 feet above ground level and inclusive of
bark.
Basement - any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of six feet or more and having more
than 50% of its volume below the existing ground level.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 34 -
Boat Launching Facility - a facility designed primarily for the launching and landing of watercraft,
and which may include an access ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for vehicles and trailers.
Bureau of Forestry – State of Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry, Bureau
of Forestry.
Campground - any area or tract of land to accommodate two or more parties in temporary living
quarters, including, but not limited to tents, recreational vehicles or other shelters.
Canopy – the more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a wooded area.
Coastal wetland - all tidal and subtidal lands; all lands with vegetation present that is tolerant of salt
water and occurs primarily in a salt water or estuarine habitat; and any swamp, marsh, bog, beach, flat
or other contiguous low land that is subject to tidal action during the highest tide level for the year in
which an activity is proposed as identified in tide tables published by the National Ocean Service.
Coastal wetlands may include portions of coastal sand dunes. In Hampden, this includes the Penobscot
River.
Commercial use - the use of land, buildings, or structures, other than a "home occupation" as defined
below, the intent and result of which activity is the production of income from the buying and selling
of goods and/or services except for any business related to marijuana (including medical marijuana) or
the rental of dwelling units or other residential buildings.
Conservation Plan – a plan which sets forth conservation practices to meet both natural resource
needs and the landowner’s land management goals, including methods and best practices for the
agricultural activity proposed within the shoreland zone, specifically dealing with the tillage of the soil
(refer to §15.M(3)).
DBH – Diameter at Breast Height, the diameter of a standing tree measured 4.5 feet from ground level
at the base of the tree.
Development – a change in land use involving alteration of the land, water or vegetation, or the
addition or alteration of structures or other construction not naturally occurring.
Dimensional requirements - numerical standards relating to spatial relationships including but not
limited to setback, lot area, shore frontage and height.
Disability - any disability, infirmity, malformation, disfigurement, congenital defect or mental
condition caused by bodily injury, accident, disease, birth defect, environmental conditions or illness;
and also includes the physical or mental condition of a person which constitutes a substantial
handicap as determined by a physician or in the case of mental handicap, by a psychiatrist or
psychologist, as well as any other health or sensory impairment which requires special education,
vocational rehabilitation or related services.
Driveway - a vehicular access-way less than 500 feet in length serving a maximum of two singlefamily
dwellings.
Emergency operations - operations conducted for the public health, safety or general welfare, such
as protection of resources from immediate destruction or loss, law enforcement, and operations to
rescue human beings, property and livestock from the threat of destruction or injury.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 35 -
Essential services - gas, electrical or communication facilities; steam, fuel, electric power or water
transmission or distribution lines, towers and related equipment; telephone cables or lines, poles and
related equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry or other similar pipelines; municipal sewage lines, collection
or supply systems; and associated storage tanks. Such systems may include towers, poles, wires,
mains, drains, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarms and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and
similar accessories, but does not include service drops or buildings which are necessary for the
furnishing of such services.
Expansion of a structure - an increase in the footprint of a structure, including all extensions such
as, but not limited to: attached decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
Expansion of use - the addition of one or more months to a use's operating season; or the use of more
footprint of a structure or ground area devoted to a particular use.
Family - means an individual occupying a single dwelling unit, or a group of two or more persons
occupying a single dwelling unit and living together as a single housekeeping unit, including the sharing
of common living, sleeping, cooking and eating facilities. When occupancy of a dwelling unit is by a
group of two or more persons, the group of persons occupying the dwelling must either be:
a. Related by blood, adoption, domestic partnership, or marriage; or
b. Comprised of two persons who are not related by blood, domestic partnership, adoption or
marriage, and any children related to either or both of them by blood, adoption or marriage;
c. Comprised of persons, whether or not related to each other by blood, domestic partnership,
adoption or marriage, but not to exceed four unrelated persons. Family does not include a
group of unrelated persons occupying a boarding home, rooming house, hotel/motel, tourist
home or inn.
d. A Community Living Arrangement as defined by Title 30-A, Section 4357-A.
NOTE: For the purposes hereof, the number of unrelated persons occupying a dwelling unit is
calculated as follows: Any persons related by blood, adoption or marriage plus one unrelated
person is considered to constitute a total of two unrelated persons, and each additional unrelated
person is to be added to determine the total number of unrelated persons occupying the dwelling
unit. By way of example, two or more related persons occupying a dwelling unit combined with
two unrelated persons occupying the dwelling unit yields a total of three unrelated persons
occupying the dwelling unit.
Floodway - the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved
in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than the height designated in the Hampden Floodplain Management Ordinance.
Floor area - the sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by exterior walls.
Footprint - the entire area of ground covered by the structure(s) on a lot, including but not limited to
cantilevered or similar overhanging extensions, as well as unenclosed structures, such as patios and decks.
Forested wetland - a freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six meters tall
(approximately 20 feet) or taller.
Foundation - the supporting substructure of a building or other structure, excluding wooden sills and
post supports, but including basements, slabs, frostwalls, or other base consisting of concrete, block,
brick or similar material.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 36 -
Freshwater wetland - freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, other than forested
wetlands, which:
(1) are 10 or more contiguous acres; or less than 10 contiguous acres and are adjacent to a
surface water body, excluding any river, stream or brook, such that in a natural state, the
combined surface area is in excess of 10 acres; and
(2) are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration
sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils.
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not conform to
the criteria of this definition.
Functionally water-dependent uses - those uses that require, for their primary purpose, location on
submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location in, coastal or inland waters and that
cannot be located away from these waters. The uses include, but are not limited to, commercial and
recreational fishing and boating facilities, finfish and shellfish processing, fish-related storage and
retail and wholesale fish marketing facilities, waterfront dock and port facilities, shipyards and boat
building facilities, marinas, navigation aids, basins and channels, shoreline structures necessary for
erosion control purposes, industrial uses dependent upon water-borne transportation or requiring large
volumes of cooling or processing water that cannot reasonably be located or operated at an inland
site, and uses that primarily provide general public access to coastal or inland waters. Recreational
boat storage buildings are not considered to be a functionally water-dependent use.
Great pond - any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess of 10
acres, and any inland body of water artificially formed or increased which has a surface area in excess
of 30 acres except for the purposes of this Ordinance, where the artificially formed or increased
inland body of water is completely surrounded by land held by a single owner. In Hampden, these are
Ben Annis Pond, Hammond Pond, Hermon Pond, and Patten Pond.
Great pond classified GPA - any great pond classified GPA, pursuant to 38 M.R.S. Section 465-A.
This classification includes some, but not all impoundments of rivers that are defined as great ponds.
In Hampden, these are Ben Annis Pond, Hammond Pond, Hermon Pond, and Patten Pond.
Ground cover – small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the partially decayed organic
matter of the forest floor.
Hazard tree - a tree with a structural defect, combination of defects, or disease resulting in a
structural defect that under the normal range of environmental conditions at the site exhibits a high
probability of failure and loss of a major structural component of the tree in a manner that will strike a
target. A normal range of environmental conditions does not include meteorological anomalies, such
as, but not limited to: hurricanes; hurricane-force winds; tornados; microbursts; or significant ice
storm events. Hazard trees also include those trees that pose a serious and imminent risk to bank
stability. A target is the area where personal injury or property damage could occur if the tree or a
portion of the tree fails. Targets include roads, driveways, parking areas, structures, campsites, and
any other developed area where people frequently gather and linger.
Height of a structure – the vertical distance between the mean original (prior to construction) grade
at the downhill side of the structure and the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys,
steeples, antennas, and similar appurtenances that have no floor area.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 37 -
Home occupation - The subordinate use of a dwelling unit or structure accessory to a dwelling unit
for gainful employment involving the manufacture, provision or sale of goods and/or services. See the
Town of Hampden Zoning Ordinance definition of “Use of Residence for Business Purposes” and
§4.10.
Increase in nonconformity of a structure - any change in a structure or property which causes
further deviation from the dimensional standard(s) creating the nonconformity such as, but not limited
to, reduction in water body, tributary stream or wetland setback distance, increase in lot coverage, or
increase in height of a structure. Property changes or structure expansions which either meet the
dimensional standard or which cause no further increase in the linear extent of nonconformance of the
existing structure are not be considered to increase nonconformity. For example, there is no increase
in nonconformity with the setback requirement for water bodies, wetlands, or tributary streams if the
expansion extends no further into the required setback area than does any portion of the existing
nonconforming structure. Hence, a structure may be expanded laterally provided that the expansion
extends no closer to the water body, tributary stream, or wetland than the closest portion of the
existing structure from that water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Included in this allowance are
expansions which in-fill irregularly shaped structures.
Individual private campsite - an area of land which is not associated with a campground, but which
is developed for repeated camping by only one group not to exceed 10 individuals and which involves
site improvements which may include but not be limited to a gravel pad, parking area, fire place, or
tent platform.
Industrial - The assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packaging or processing of goods,
or the extraction of minerals, excluding any business related to marijuana or medical marijuana.
Institutional - a non-profit or quasi-public use, or institution such as a church, library, public or
private school, hospital, or municipally owned or operated building, structure or land used for public
purposes.
Licensed Forester - a forester licensed under 32 M.R.S. Section 5515.
Local stream - “Local stream” means a channel between defined banks created by the action of
surface water, which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial vegetation or by the presence of a bed,
devoid of topsoil, containing waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material or bedrock. This
definition does not include the term "stream" or tributary stream as defined elsewhere in this
Ordinance, and in Hampden, Maine only applies to Baker Brook, Baker Brook Tributary 1, Baker
Brook Tributary 2, Cold Brook, Reeds Brook, Sucker Brook and Weber Brook. The only portion of
these Local streams that are regulated by this Ordinance are those portions within the shoreland zone
of a regulated waterbody or stream.
Lot area - The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, minus land below the normal
high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and areas beneath roads serving more
than two lots.
Marina - a business establishment having frontage on navigable water and, as its principal use,
providing for hire offshore moorings or docking facilities for boats, and which may also provide
accessory services such as boat and related sales, boat repair and construction, indoor and outdoor
storage of boats and marine equipment, bait and tackle shops and marine fuel service facilities.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 38 -
Market value - the estimated price a property will bring in the open market and under prevailing
market conditions in a sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer, both conversant with the
property and with prevailing general price levels.
Mineral exploration - hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of determining the nature or
extent of mineral resources which create minimal disturbance to the land and which include
reasonable measures to restore the land to its original condition.
Mineral extraction - any operation within any 12 month period which removes more than 100 cubic
yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, rock, peat, or other like material from its natural
location and to transport the product removed, away from the extraction site.
Minimum lot width - the closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot. When only two lot lines
extend into the shoreland zone, both lot lines are considered to be side lot lines.
Multi-unit residential - a residential structure containing three or more residential dwelling units.
Native – indigenous to the local forests.
Nonconforming condition – nonconforming lot, structure or use which is allowed solely because it
was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendment took effect.
Nonconforming lot - a single lot of record which, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this Ordinance, does not meet the area, frontage, or width requirements of the district in which it is
located.
Nonconforming structure - a structure which does not meet any one or more of the following
dimensional requirements; setback, height, lot coverage or footprint, but which is allowed solely
because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Nonconforming use - use of buildings, structures, premises, land or parts thereof which is not
allowed in the district in which it is situated, but which is allowed to remain solely because it was in
lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Non-native invasive species of vegetation - species of vegetation listed by the Maine Department of
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry as being invasive in Maine ecosystems and not native to
Maine ecosystems.
Normal high-water line (non-tidal waters) - that line which is apparent from visible markings,
changes in the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation, and
which distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial land. Areas
contiguous with rivers and great ponds that support non-forested wetland vegetation and hydric soils
and that are at the same or lower elevation as the water level of the river or great pond during the
period of normal high-water are considered part of the river or great pond.
Outlet stream - any perennial or intermittent stream, as shown on the most recent highest resolution
version of the national hydrography dataset available from the United States Geological Survey on
the website of the United States Geological Survey or the national map, that flows from a freshwater
wetland.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 39 -
Person - an individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality, trust, estate, partnership,
association, two or more individuals having a joint or common interest, or other legal entity.
Principal structure - a structure other than one which is used for purposes wholly incidental or
accessory to the use of another structure or use on the same lot.
Principal use - a use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory to another use on the
same lot.
Public facility - any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings, property, recreation areas, and
roads, which are owned, leased, or otherwise operated, or funded by a governmental body or public
entity.
Recent floodplain soils - the following soil series as described and identified by the National
Cooperative Soil Survey:
Alluvial Charles Cornish Fryeburg Hadley
Limerick Lovewell Medomak Ondawa Podunk
Rumney Saco Suncook Sunday Winooski
Recreational facility - a place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time
activities, and other customary and usual recreational activities, excluding boat launching facilities.
Recreational vehicle - a vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle designed to be towed, and designed for
temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons, and which may include a pick-up
camper, travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and motor home. In order to be considered as a vehicle
and not as a structure, the unit must remain with its tires on the ground, and must be registered with
the State Division of Motor Vehicles.
Replacement system - a system intended to replace: 1.) an existing system which is either
malfunctioning or being upgraded with no significant change of design flow or use of the structure, or
2.) any existing overboard wastewater discharge.
Residential dwelling unit - a room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use as
permanent, seasonal, or temporary living quarters for only one family at a time, and containing
cooking, sleeping and toilet facilities. The term includes mobile homes and rental units that contain
cooking, sleeping, and toilet facilities regardless of the time-period rented. Recreational vehicles are
not residential dwelling units.
Riprap - rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least six inches in diameter, used for erosion control and
soil stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two units horizontal to one unit vertical or less.
River - a free-flowing body of water including its associated floodplain wetlands from that point at
which it provides drainage for a watershed of 25 square miles to its mouth. In Hampden this includes
the Souadabscook Stream and the West Branch Souadabscook Stream downstream of its confluence
with Brown Brook. Note, the Penobscot River is classified as a coastal wetland under Shoreland
Zoning.
Road - a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel, asphalt, or other surfacing
material constructed for or created by the repeated passage of motorized vehicles, excluding a
driveway as defined.
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 40 -
Salt marsh - Areas of coastal wetland (most often along coastal bays) that support salt tolerant
species, and where at average high tide during the growing season, the soil is irregularly inundated by
tidal waters. The predominant species is saltmarsh cordgrass (Spartina alterniflora). More open areas
often support widgeon grass, eelgrass, and Sago pondweed.
Salt meadow - Areas of a coastal wetland that support salt tolerant plant species bordering the
landward side of salt marshes or open coastal water, where the soil is saturated during the growing
season but which is rarely inundated by tidal water. Indigenous plant species include salt meadow
cordgrass (Spartina patens) and black rush; common threesquare occurs in fresher areas.
Sapling - a tree species that is less than two inches DBH.
Seedling - a young tree species that is less than 4.5 feet in height.
Service corridor - the strip of land in which a linear utility or essential service is located.
Service drop - any utility line extension which does not cross or run beneath any portion of a water
body provided that in the case of electric service, the placement of wires and/or the installation of
utility poles is located entirely upon the premises of the customer requesting service or upon a
roadway right-of-way and the total length of the extension is less than 1,000 feet; and in the case of
telephone service, the extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation of telephone
wires to existing utility poles, or the extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or
placement underground is less than 1,000 feet in length. Utility extensions that don’t meet this
definition are considered to be “Essential Services” in Sections 14 and 15K.
Setback - the nearest horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of a water body or tributary
stream, or upland edge of a wetland, to the nearest part of a structure, road, parking space or other
regulated object or area.
Shore frontage - the length of a lot bordering on a water body or wetland measured in a straight line
between the intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline.
Shoreland zone - the land area located within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water
line of any great pond or river; within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a coastal
wetland, including all areas affected by tidal action; within 250 feet of the upland edge of a
freshwater wetland; or within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream.
Shoreline – the normal high-water line or upland edge of a freshwater or coastal wetland.
Shoreline Buffer – the strip of land extending 100 feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal
high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, or
within a strip extending 75 feet, horizontal distance, from any other water body, tributary stream, or
the upland edge of a wetland.
Significant River Segments - See 38 M.R.S. section 437. (Note, there are none in Hampden.)
Storm-damaged tree - a tree that has been uprooted, blown down, is lying on the ground, or that
remains standing and is damaged beyond the point of recovery as the result of a storm event.
Stream - a free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond or the confluence of two
perennial streams as depicted on the most recent , highest resolution version of the national
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 41 -
hydrography dataset available from the United States Geological Survey on the website of the United
States Geological Survey or the national map to the point where the stream becomes a river or where
the stream meets the shoreland zone of another water body or wetland. When a stream meets the
shoreland zone of a water body or wetland and a channel forms downstream of the water body or
wetland as an outlet, that channel is also a stream. In Hampden, this includes the West Branch of the
Souadabscook upstream of the confluence with Brown Brook, Brown Brook downstream of the
confluence with the unnamed brook located in the eastern portion of parcel 01-0-043, Patten Stream,
Shaw Brook downstream of the confluence with the unnamed brook located behind Dysarts gas
station on Coldbrook Road (parcel 09-0-041), and the unnamed stream in the southwestern corner of
Hampden from the Winterport boundary downstream to the Newburgh boundary.
Structure – anything temporarily or permanently located, built, constructed or erected for the
support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods or property of any kind or anything
constructed or erected on or in the ground. The term includes structures temporarily or permanently
located, such as decks, patios, and satellite dishes. Structure does not include fences; poles and wiring
and other aerial equipment normally associated with service drops, including guy wires and guy
anchors; subsurface wastewater (sewage) disposal systems as defined in Title 30-A, section 4201,
subsection 5; geothermal heat exchange wells as defined in Title 32, section 4700-E, subsection 3-C;
or wells or water wells as defined in Title 32, section 4700-E, subsection 8.
Substantial start - completion of 30% of a permitted structure or use measured as a percentage of
estimated total cost.
Subsurface sewage disposal system – any system designed to dispose of waste or wastewater on or
beneath the surface of the earth; includes, but is not limited to: septic tanks; disposal fields;
grandfathered cesspools; holding tanks; pretreatment filter, piping, or any other fixture, mechanism,
or apparatus used for those purposes; does not include any discharge system licensed under 38 M.R.S.
section 414, any surface wastewater disposal system, or any municipal or quasi-municipal sewer or
wastewater treatment system.
Sustained slope - a change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is substantially
maintained or exceeded throughout the measured area.
Tidal waters – all waters affected by tidal action during the highest annual tide.
Timber harvesting - the cutting and removal of timber for the primary purpose of selling or
processing forest products. “Timber harvesting” does not include the cutting or removal of vegetation
within the shoreland zone when associated with any other land use activities. The cutting or removal
of trees in the shoreland zone on a lot that has less than two acres within the shoreland zone is not be
considered timber harvesting. Such cutting or removal of trees is to be regulated pursuant to Section
15 (N), Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting.
Tree - a woody perennial plant with a well-defined trunk(s) at least two inches DBH, with a more or
less definite crown, and reaching a height of at least 10 feet at maturity.
Tributary stream – means a channel between defined banks created by the action of surface water,
which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial vegetation or by the presence of a bed, devoid of
topsoil, containing waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material or bedrock; and which is
connected hydrologically with other water bodies. “Tributary stream” does not include rills or gullies
forming because of accelerated erosion in disturbed soils where the natural vegetation cover has been
removed by human activity. This definition does not include the term "stream" as defined elsewhere
Effective Dec 4, 2019 Town of Hampden, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
- 42 -
in this Ordinance, and only applies to that portion of the tributary stream located within the shoreland
zone of the receiving water body or wetland.
Upland edge of a wetland - the boundary between upland and wetland. For purposes of a coastal
wetland, this boundary is the line formed by the landward limits of the salt tolerant vegetation and/or
the highest annual tide level, including all areas affected by tidal action. For purposes of a freshwater
wetland, the upland edge is formed where the soils are not saturated for a duration sufficient to
support wetland vegetation; or where the soils support the growth of wetland vegetation, but such
vegetation is dominated by woody stems that are six meters (approximately 20 feet) tall or taller.
Vegetation - all live trees, shrubs, and other plants including without limitation, trees both over and
under four inches DBH.
Velocity zone - an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of the
primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from
storms or seismic sources. There are no velocity zones in Hampden.
Volume of a structure - the volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by roof and fixed exterior
walls as measured from the exterior faces of these walls and roof.
Water body - any great pond, river or stream.
Water crossing - any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a river, stream,
tributary stream, or wetland whether under, through, or over the water or wetland. Such projects
include but may not be limited to roads, fords, bridges, culverts, water lines, sewer lines, and cables
as well as maintenance work on these crossings. This definition includes crossings for timber
harvesting equipment and related activities.
Wetland - a freshwater or coastal wetland.
Woody Vegetation - live trees or woody, non-herbaceous shrubs, including saplings and seedlings as
defined in this ordinance.
Orrington
Hermon
Winterport
Newburgh
Carmel
Bangor
Bucksport
Brewer
Main
Western
Kennebec
Carmel
Interstate 95
Coldbrook
US Highway 202
Old County
Mayo
Interstate 95
Penobscot River
Souadabscook
Stream
Brown Brook
Reeds
Brook
Sucker Brook
WestB ranch Souadabscook Stream
ShawBrook
Ward Stream
Hermon Pond
Hammond Pond
Patten Pond
Ben Annis Pond
Exhibit 1: Waterbodies and Streams Regulated by the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance - Hampden ME
Key
Rivers & Streams
River
Stream
Not Regulated - Perennial
Not Regulated - Intermittent
The segment Stream betw eoef nS Houearmdaonb sacnodok FHlaowmimngo ntdo Pao Gndrse aist aP o"Rndiv eGr PA"
TShtree aremm ias inad "eRri voefr "Souadabscook
TWhee sste Bgrmanecnht ooff the Sboeutwaedeanb sthcoeo cko nSftlrueeanmce Hwaithm mBroonwdn P Bornodo kis aan d "GRriveeart FPloonwdin Gg PtoA "a
Tah "eC Poeansotabls cWote Rtliavnedr "is
AHlal mfomuor npdo, nHdes r(mBoenn, Aannndis , PPoanttde nG) PaAre" "Great
Land &1 0B6ui lWdinegst eSrenr vAicvees. Hahmampdpedne,n MmEa i0ne4.4g4o4v
January 28, 2019
µ
SoRuirvceerss:, Streams, and Ponds - USGS, National Hydrography Dataset
Orrington
Orrington
Hermon
Winterport
Newburgh
Carmel
Bangor
Bucksport
Brewer
Main
Western
Kennebec
Carmel
Interstate 95
Coldbrook
US Highway 202
Old County
Mayo
Interstate 95
Penobscot River
Souadabscook
Stream
Brown Brook
Reeds
Brook
Sucker Brook
WestB ranch Souadabscook Stream
ShawBrook
Ward Stream
Hermon Pond
Hammond Pond
Patten Pond
Ben Annis Pond
Exhibit 2: Shoreland Zones - Hampden ME
Key
Shoreland Zone - Penobscot River; 250'
Shoreland Zone - Rivers; 250'
Shoreland Zone - Ponds; 250'
Shoreland Zone - Streams; 75'
µ
The segment Stream betw eoef nS Houearmdaonb sacnodok FHlaowmimngo ntdo Pao Gndrse aist aP o"Rndiv eGr PA"
TShtree aremm ias inad "eRri voefr "Souadabscook
TWhee sste Bgrmanecnht ooff the Sboeutwaedeanb sthcoeo cko nSftlrueeanmce Hwaithm mBroonwdn P Bornodo kis aan d "GRriveeart FPloonwdin Gg PtoA "a
Tah "eC Poeansotabls cWote Rtliavnedr "is
AHlal mfomuor npdo, nHdes r(mBoenn, Aannndis , PPoanttdesn )G aPrAe" "Great
Land &1 0B6ui lWdinegst eSrenr vAicvees. Hahmampdpedne,n MmEa i0ne4.4g4o4v
January 28, 2019
SoRuirvceerss:, Streams, and Ponds - USGS, National Hydrography Dataset
TMhaisp m" afopr sah odwesp itchteio snh oorfe ltahen dS zhoonreelsa. nRde fZeor ntion gth De i"sStrhicotrse. land Zoning
Main Rd South
Patterson Rd
Canaan Rd
Meadow Rd
Meadow Rd
Sawyer Rd
Pond Rd
Monroe Rd
Back Winterport Rd
Carmel Rd South
Emerson Mill Rd
Bog Rd
Papermill Rd
Western Ave
Shaw Hill Rd
Sucker Brook
Reeds Brook
Brown Brook
Brown Brook
West Branch Souadabscook Stream
West Branch Souadabscook Stream
Souadabscook
Souadabscook Stream
Stream
Souadabscook Stream
Shaw Brook
Shaw Brook
Patten Stream
Orrington
Hermon
Brewer
Winterport
Newburgh
Carmel
Bangor
Bucksport
Main Rd North
Western Ave
Kennebec Rd
Carmel Rd North
Coldbrook Rd
US Highway 202
Mayo Rd
Old County Rd
Interstate 95
Hermon Pond
Hammond Pond
Patten Pond
Ben Annis Pond
®0 0.75 1.5 3 Miles
Legend Resource Protection
Resource and Stream Protection
Limited Residential
Limited Resid and Stream Protection
Stream Protection
General Development
Rivers & Streams
River
Stream
Not Regulated - Perennial
Not Regulated - Intermittent
Nonforested Wetlands
rNeogtuel:a Ttehde aPes nao bCsocaostt aRli vWer eitsl and.
SouSrcheosr:eland Zoning Districts - Town of Hampden RNiovenfros r&e sStetrde aWmest l-a Nndast i-o nNaal tHioyndarlo Wgreatplahnyd Ds aIntvaesenttory, sCuaprplilselem eCnot.e uds iwngit h2 0d0a6ta oprrthoodpuhceodto gbyra Pprheyn.tiss &
Created - July 22, 2019
Adopted by Town Council Nov.4, 2019
Effective Dec. 4, 2019
Shoreland Zoning Map
Hampden Maine
T1o0w6n Wofe Hstaermnp Adveen Hampden Maine, 04444
www.hampdenmaine.gov

Zoning Ordinance
Hampden Maine
Effective December 4, 2019
TOWN OF HAMPDEN, MAINE
ZONING ORDINANCE
Adopted by Referendum
March 13, 1979
As Amended
Effective Date: December 4, 2019

Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
i
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Table of Contents
Article
Sec
SubSec
What it is (title or content)
Page
Article 1
General Administration
1.1
Title and Purpose
1-1
1.2
Basic Requirement
1-1
1.3
Severability
1-1
1.4
Conflict with Other Ordinances
1-1
1.5
Amendment
1-1
Article 2
Establishment of Zones
2.1
Zoning Districts
2-1
2.2
Purpose of Districts
2-1
2.3
Location of Districts
2-2
2.4
Uncertainty of Boundary Location
2-2
2.5
Parcels in More Than One District
2-3
Article 3
District Regulations
3.1
Use Designations
3-1
3.2
Specific Use Standards
3-1
3.3
Temporary Uses
3-7
3.4
Dimensional Requirements
3-8
Article 4
General Regulations
4.1
Site Plan Review
4-1
4.2
Conditional Uses
4-7
4.3
Rural Alternate Frontage Lots
4-10
4.4
Performance Standards
4-11
4.5
Nonconformities
4-11
4.6
Cluster Housing
4-14
4.7
Design Standards
4-19
4.7.1
Off-street Parking, Loading, and Drive-through Facilities
4-19
4.7.2
Buffers and Landscaping
4-23
4.7.3
Lighting
4-25
4.7.4
Architectural Design
4-25
4.7.5
Signs
4-26
4.7.6
Stormwater Management
4-33
4.7.7
Flexibility in Design Standards
4-33
4.8
[Signs moved to 4.7.5]
4.9
Filling and Grading of Land and Stockpiling of Materials
4-33
4.10
Use of Residence for Business Purposes
4-38
4.11
Sanitary Provisions
4-41
4.12
Temporary Structures
4-41
4.13
Mobile Homes
4-41
4.14
[Shoreland Regs – repealed]
4.15
Swimming Pools
4-45
4.16
Easements
4-45
4.17
[Lots and Planned Group Development – repealed]
4.18
Essential Service
4-45
4.19
Day Care Provisions
4-45
4.20
[Customary Rural Business – repealed]
4.21
[Structures Necessary For Access For Person With Disabilities – repealed]
4.22
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
4-46 Use
Table
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
ii
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.23
Excavation, Gravel Pit, and Quarry
4-51
4.24
Medical Marijuana – Performance Standards
4-62
4.25
Accessory Apartments
4-64
4.26
Private Event Venue
4-65
Article 5
Enforcement
5.1
Administrative Officer
5-1
5.2
Duties
5-1
5.3
Permits
5-1
5.4
Legal Action and Violations
5-3
Article 6
Appeals
6.1
Creation and Appointment of the Board of Appeals
6-1
6.2
Jurisdiction
6-1
6.3
Appeal Procedure
6-3
Article 7
Definitions
7.1
Construction Language
7-1
7.2
Definitions
7-1
Appendices
1
Detailed Table of Contents
A1-1
2
Zoning Amendment History
A2-1
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
1-1
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
ARTICLE 1 - GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
1.1. Title and Purpose
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Hampden, Maine" and will be referred to herein as this "Ordinance". It is enacted by the inhabitants by dividing the Town into zones and regulating the use and construction of buildings and premises with a view to encourage the most appropriate use of land in the Town of Hampden, Maine.
1.2. Basic Requirement
All buildings or structures hereinafter erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, or moved, and all uses of premises in the Town of Hampden shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. No building, structure, land or water area shall be used for any purpose or in any manner except as permitted within the district in which such building, structure, land, or water area is located.
1.3. Severability
Should any section of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
1.4. Conflict with Other Ordinances
This Ordinance shall in no way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other rule, regulation, by-law, permit or provision of law. Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of the land, buildings, or structures, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail.
1.5. Amendment
1.5.1. Initiation of Amendment - An amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by:
1.5.1.1. The planning board, provided a majority of the board has so voted;
1.5.1.2. Request of the town council to the planning board;
1.5.1.3. Written petition of one hundred (100) registered voters of the town; or
1.5.1.4. Written application from the property owner seeking a change of the zoning classification for the owner's property, or any portion thereof (i.e. a map amendment). Any person or entity with a legally binding interest in or to said property may make such an application, provided such person or entity submits satisfactory evidence of such interest and written documentation from the property owner authorizing such person or entity to make application for the change of zoning classification.
1.5.2. Text Amendments - Any proposed amendment to the text of this Ordinance that has not been initiated by the planning board shall be referred to the planning board for its review and recommendation.
1.5.3 Zoning District Amendments (Map Amendments)
1.5.3.1. Owner Initiated: The owner of a property seeking a change in the zoning classification of his/her property (see §1.5.1.4) shall file a zoning map amendment application, together with payment in accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance, with the planning office.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
1-2
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
1.5.3.2. Petition Initiated: The person or entity who initiated a petition to amend the zoning classification of any property or group of properties shall be responsible for filing a zoning map amendment application, together with payment in accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance, with the planning office.
1.5.3.3. Town Initiated: When a map amendment is initiated by the planning board, the board shall forward a memorandum fully describing the proposed amendment to the town council for information purposes only, prior to holding the public hearing. When a map amendment is initiated by the town council, the council shall refer the proposed amendment to the planning board for a public hearing as required by statute.
1.5.4 Process:
1.5.4.1. Public Hearing: Upon receipt of an application, memorandum, or referral, the planning office shall schedule a public hearing to be conducted by the Planning Board on the proposed amendment within sixty (60) days of receipt.
1.5.4.2. Notice Requirements: Prior to said public hearing, and in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance and the laws of the State of Maine, notice of said hearing shall be given. The notice shall include, but not be limited to, the date, time and place of the hearing, a short description and, for proposed map amendments, a map showing the boundaries of the current and proposed zoning districts, and the location where the proposed amendment can be viewed.
1. Publishing Requirements: Said notice shall be published twice in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Hampden, the first at least twelve (12) days and the second at least seven (7) days in advance of said hearing.
2. Posting Requirements: Said notice shall be posted in the Town Offices at least thirteen (13) days prior to the hearing.
3. Abutter Notification Requirements: For proposed map amendments, said notice shall be sent by U.S. Mail to all persons initiating the proposed map amendment, to all persons owning property within the boundaries of the proposed map amendment, and to all persons owning property within three hundred (300') feet of the exterior boundaries of the area affected by the proposed change. For purposes of the notices required under this section, the owners of property shall be considered to be those against whom taxes were assessed on the prior April 1. Failure of any person owning property within said three hundred (300') feet to receive notices provided herein shall not necessitate another hearing or invalidate any action by the planning board or the town council.
1.5.4.3. Planning Board Recommendation: The planning board shall make a recommendation of approval or denial for any proposed amendment, and may make a recommendation of approval with modifications for any proposed amendment. To constitute planning board approval the amendment and any proposed modifications thereto must receive at least four (4) affirmative votes from the board. In all cases, the planning board shall forward their recommendation to the town council; this shall be done within 14 days of the completion of the public hearing and, when the proposed amendment was referred to the planning board from town council, within ninety (90) days of the date of said referral. Failure of the board to make a recommendation within the allotted time shall constitute a recommendation of denial for the purposes of this Ordinance.
1.5.5 Adoption of Amendment
1.5.5.1. Text amendments not involving the zoning classification of property may be adopted by a majority vote of the town council members present and voting, if the amendment is
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
1-3
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
recommended by the planning board, or by a two-thirds majority vote of the town council members present and voting, if the amendment is not recommended by the planning board.
1.5.5.2. Map amendments may be adopted by a vote of five (5) town council members present and voting, if the amendment is recommended by the Planning Board, or by a vote of six (6) town council members present and voting, if the amendment is not recommended by the planning board.
1.5.5.3. Amendments adopted by the town council shall become effective thirty (30) days after the date of adoption.
1.5.5.4. The Department of Environmental Protection shall be notified by the municipal clerk of zone changes (map amendments) in areas impacted by the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance within thirty (30) days of the effective date of such amendments.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
1-4
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
2-1
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
ARTICLE 2 - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
2.1. Zoning Districts
To implement the provisions of this Ordinance, the Town of Hampden is hereby divided into the following districts:
1. Rural District (R)
2. Residential A District (RA)
3. Residential B District (RB)
4. Seasonal District (S)
5. Rural Business District (BR)
6. Business District (B)
7. Business B District (BB)
8. Town Center District (TC)
9. Commercial Service District (CS)
10. Waterfront District (W)
11. Interchange District (INT)
12. Industrial Park District (IA)
13. Industrial District (IB)
14. Industrial 2 District (I2)
2.2. Purpose of Districts
2.2.1. Rural District - The intent of this district is to protect and promote the rural use and character of the area, to provide for traditional agricultural and open space uses, and to provide for low density residential development where appropriate. It is intended that much of the residential development occurring in this district will be either dispersed in nature or, where the developer chooses, will be clustered with extensive open space surrounding the development.
2.2.2. Residential A District - This district is intended for the development of low density single family housing types. While this district is predominately intended for detached housing the district may allow certain low impact civic and institutional uses.
2.2.3. Residential B District - These areas are designated for a mixture of residential uses: single family, multi-family, and mobile home parks, developed as either individual lots, conventional subdivisions or cluster subdivisions. In addition, the RB District shall allow certain low impact nonresidential uses.
2.2.4. Seasonal District - This district is designed to provide for seasonal residential use of waterfront areas so that the process of accelerated nutrient enrichment of water bodies, which almost always accompanies shoreland development, will be kept to a minimum. This district additionally allows for traditional recreational uses associated with waterfront areas, as well as for forest and agricultural uses.
2.2.5. Rural Business District - These areas are designed to provide a location for commercial facilities designed to serve the needs of rural residents. Large commercial enterprises, designed to serve the needs of the whole community, should not be encouraged in these areas.
2.2.6. Business District - These areas are intended to provide a location for commercial enterprises. The focus of commercial development in these areas should be retail sales and service businesses designed to meet the needs of the community.
2.2.7. Business B District - This district is intended to provide a location for larger commercial developments (in excess of 10,000 sq. ft. of floor area) in central locations of Hampden.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
2-2
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
2.2.8. Town Center District - The Town Center District is established to accommodate the daily or frequent shopping needs of the Hampden consumer. The style, appearance, and placement of buildings, parking and landscaping will be regulated to promote consistency with existing buildings and residential uses. The Town Center District shall encourage pedestrian circulation and face to face retail sales.
2.2.9. Commercial Service District – This district is intended for the location of heavy commercial uses, wholesale uses, office buildings, automotive type of uses such as sales and service, convenience stores and commercial service type of uses. In general this area is devoted to service or wholesale uses.
2.2.10. Waterfront District - This district is intended for the location of a wide variety of water dependent and water related uses as well as commercial retail and service uses. In general this area is devoted to uses that are consistent with the Shoreland Zoning General Development uses. Furthermore it is recognized that limited land area is available for such uses thus innovative development standards are required.
2.2.11. Interchange District - This district is intended to provide areas for motels, restaurants, service stations and similar uses that provide accommodations for tourists and other travelers using Interstate 95. Residential structures in existence prior to January 1, 1979 may be repaired or modified and accessory structures may be added, provided minimum setback requirements are met.
2.2.12. Industrial Park District - This district is established to provide a location for fully serviced industrial development. It is intended that land within this district will be protected from encroachment of non-industrial uses, however, the district also contemplates planned business parks with a more diverse mixture of uses and development standards implemented in a closely managed context.
2.2.13. Industrial District - These areas are set aside for non-service intensive industrial uses which do not require the amenities of an industrial park and which would fit into the surrounding rural area with ease. Industries needing public sewer or water are not expected to locate in these areas.
2.2.14. Industrial 2 District - The Industrial 2 District is established to accommodate all types of industrial and commercial uses. No recreational use shall be allowed in this district. As used in this section, recreational uses include but are not limited to campgrounds; facilities for amusement or entertainment; and facilities for the operation of recreational vehicles.
2.3. Location of Districts
Districts are located and bounded as shown on the Official Zoning Map which is adopted by reference. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the town manager and attested by the signature of the town clerk. The aforesaid signatures shall be affixed and dated at the time of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. Additional copies of the Official Zoning Map shall be available at the town office.
2.4. Uncertainty of Boundary Location
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
2.4.1. Centerlines - Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways, alleys, railroads, or other rights-of-way shall be construed to follow such center lines;
2.4.2. Lot Lines - Boundaries indicated as approximately following well established lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines;
2.4.3. Water Boundaries - Boundaries indicated as approximately following shoreline shall be construed as following the mean high tide line if such exists; otherwise it shall be construed as following the shoreline. In the event of natural change in the shoreline, the boundary shall follow the change in the shoreline. Boundaries indicated as following the center line of a body of water shall be construed as following such center line;
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
2-3
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
2.4.4. Features - Boundaries indicated as being parallel to features, natural or man-made, shall be so construed;
2.4.5. Determination of Distances - Distance not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by scale of map;
2.4.6. Existing Structures - Existing structures located in more than one zoning district shall be subject to the provisions of the zoning district in which the majority of the structure is located, provided no portion of the structure is located in a shoreland area or in another municipality.
2.4.7. Questions of Interpretation - Where question of interpretation of the Official Zoning Map arises, the Board of Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. All appeals for interpretation of the Official Zoning Map shall be subject to the provisions Article 6 of this Ordinance and of the Town of Hampden Board of Appeals Ordinance including but not limited to filing deadlines, application requirements, fees, appeal procedures, decisions of the Board of Appeals and subsequent appeals to Superior Court.
2.5 Parcels In More Than One Zoning District
The intent of this ordinance is to allow full utilization of a parcel of land that is divided by a zoning district boundary line as depicted on the Official Zoning Map. Although the use of any portion of such a parcel of land shall be governed by the permitted and conditional uses allowed in the zoning district in which said use is located, the remaining portion of such a parcel of land shall be counted for the purposes of satisfying lot area, road frontage, setback, lot/ground coverage, and density requirements of the zoning district in which the principal use is located.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
2-4
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
3-1
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
ARTICLE 3 – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
3.1 Use Designations
3.1.1 Principal Uses – The principal use is the primary use on a parcel or site, and are allowed in each zoning district as specified in the Use Table. Designations in the Table are as follows:
3.1.1.1. Uses Permitted By Right: “P” indicates that a use is allowed by right in the district.
3.1.1.2. Conditional Uses: “C” indicates that a use is allowed only if approved by the Planning Board, in accordance with the conditional use permit procedures of § 4.2. All conditions listed in the applicable sub-section of §3.2 must be met for a permit to be granted. The proposal must comply with the performance standards in §4.4 for a permit to be granted.
3.1.1.3. Uses Not Permitted: “N” indicates that a use is not allowed in the district. Any use not specifically or generically listed in the Use Table is deemed as prohibited. However, the Board of Appeals may determine, upon an application for appeal, that a specific use that is not listed in the Use Table is allowed due to similarity to one or more other uses that are allowed, and the unlisted use must be the same as the listed use (by right or conditional).
Refer to §4.1, Site Plan Review, to determine if a particular project requires review and approval; the Use Table deals with uses and not with design issues.
3.1.2 Accessory Uses – An accessory use is one that is subordinate to the principal use.
3.1.3 Use Table – See on next page.
3.2 Specific use standards.
The following standards must be met for the particular use to be approved by the permitting authority (Planning Board, Staff Review Committee, or Code Enforcement Officer). Note, the numbers in parenthesis refer to the item numbers in the Table of Uses.
3.2.1 Multi-family development (B-3) and cluster developments (B-5) that include multi-family buildings:
3.2.1.1 All multi-family dwellings must be connected to public water and sewer service if available within 500’ of the parcel. In cases where connection to either service cannot be made, the applicant must submit data to prove that water supply and on-site sewage disposal systems can be installed in compliance with the applicable regulations. When on-site sewage disposal is used, a survey plan must be submitted for review and recorded at the registry of deeds showing the location of the on-site sewage disposal system and any required replacement system area. When the service line is within 500’ but the cost to connect, due to physical conditions on or in the ground, render the project financially unfeasible, the permit granting authority may approve a project with on-site water supply or sewage disposal instead of requiring connection to the public system.
3.2.1.2 No multi-family building may contain more than ten dwelling units, except in the Rural district where the limit is four dwelling units in a single building.
3.2.1.3 Multi-family developments must provide a minimum of 40% of the parcel as permanent open space except in cluster developments where the provisions of §4.6.2 apply.
3.2.1.4 The minimum distance between multi-family buildings is 20’, except when the facing wall in one building has a window into a dwelling unit, in which case the distance is increased to 35’, or when the facing walls in both buildings have a window into a dwelling unit, in which case the distance is increased to 50’.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
3-2
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
3.2.1.5 All parking areas for multi-family dwellings must be located to the side or rear of the building unless the Planning Board makes a finding that a different location would be beneficial to the abutters.
3.2.2 Lodging or rooming house (B-4): Limited to a maximum of ten residents in addition to the property owner or resident manager’s family, and all required parking shall be provided on-site.
3.2.3 Animals as usual pets (B-ACC-6): In all districts, no more than five animals of one species and no more than ten animals overall may be kept on a property, with two exceptions: there is no limitation on the number of fish, and the limit on hen chickens is increased to six. Notwithstanding these limits, properties in the Rural district which are at least 5 acres may have an unlimited number of animals.
3.2.4 Animals other than usual pets (B-ACC-7): In any district where allowed by conditional use, the property must be a minimum of 2.5 acres and there must be a 50 foot minimum setback from the property lines to any structure, pen, pasture, or other open area where the animals are kept or allowed to roam. Notwithstanding these limits, properties in the Rural district which are at least 5 acres may have an unlimited number of animals, provided the minimum setback is increased to at least 100 feet.
3.2.5 Schools, K-12 and post-secondary (C-4 and C-5): Must be connected to public water and sewer facilities and have direct access to an arterial street. Where abutting a residential use or district, the required other yard(s) setback must be increased by 50% along the applicable lot lines.
3.2.6 School, commercial (C-6): Any school facility that requires the operation of large vehicles or equipment (e.g. tractor-trailer trucks, earth-moving equipment) must be located in the Industrial or Industrial 2 district.
3.2.7 Nursing home (D-1): Must be connected to public water and sewer facilities and have direct access to an arterial street. Limited to a density of 25 beds per acre. Where abutting a residential use or district, the required other yard(s) setback must be increased by 50% along the applicable lot lines.
3.2.8 Congregate Care facility (D-2): Must be connected to public water and sewer facilities and have direct access to an arterial street. In the Residential A or B districts, limited to a density of 5 units per acre unless located within a cluster development in which case the density may be increased to a maximum of 10 units per acre. Where abutting a residential use or district, the required other yard(s) setback must be increased by 50% along the applicable lot lines.
3.2.9 Public or private utility that is not essential service (E-2): In the Residential A or B districts, a Class I Buffer must be installed around any portion of the utility that sits above ground. Any lighting must be downcast and designed to prevent glare or light trespass onto any abutting property.
3.2.10 Municipal solid waste facility (E-4): In the Rural district, only facilities owned by the Town of Hampden are allowed.
3.2.11 Community facility (E-5): In the Residential A district, storage and maintenance facilities are not allowed as the principal use of a site.
3.2.12 Community building (E-6): Must be connected to the public water and sewer facilities and have direct access to an arterial street. Where abutting a residential use or district, the required other yard(s) setback must be increased by 50% along the applicable lot lines, except for community buildings existing on July 1, 2018. In the Residential A or B districts, a Class III Buffer must be installed along all lot lines abutting a residential use.
Community buildings in the Residential A or Residential B districts of which portions are occupied by qualified community educational, fraternal, cultural and recreational activities such as an auditorium, library, historical building, lodge, indoor swimming, performing arts, etc. may also infill their vacant space with low traffic uses such as a single residential apartment unit, business or professional office, a single storage space consisting of records management and other similar uses as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer. Nonresidential infill uses may not be open between the hours of 9:00 pm
Section 3.1.3 - Use Table
Key: P = Permitted by Right, C = Conditional Use, and N = Not Permitted
Rural Res ARes BSeasonalRural BusBusBus B
Town
Center
Comm
Service
Waterfront
1
Interchange
Ind ParkIndInd 2
? A-1 agriculture P NNNNNNNNNNNNN
A-2
agric product processing when not accessory to
agric use
C NNNNNNNNNNPNN
A-3 forestry P P P NPPPNPNNNPP
? A-4 commercial nursery C NNNNPNNPNNNNN
? A-5 park or playground P P P P P P P P P P P NNN
? A-6 indoor recreational facility C NNNCPPCPPPNNN
? A-7 outdoor recreation P NNNNCNCPPCNNN
A-8 golf course P NNNNNNNNNNNNN
? A-9 campground C NNCNNNNNCNNNN
? A-10 individual private campsite P CCPNNNNNNNNNN
? A-11 water recreational facility, low intensity P CCPNNNPPPNNNN
? A-12 water recreational facility, high intensity C NNCNNNCCCNNNN
? A-13 private event venue C NNNNCCCPPNNNN
? A-ACC-1 agricultural diversity uses C NCNNNNNNNNNNN
? B-1 single family dwelling P P P P P P P P NNNNNN
? B-2 two-family dwelling P NPNCPNPNNNNNN
? B-3 multi-family development P N PNNPNCNPNNNN
? B-4 lodging or rooming house C NCNNPNNNNNNNN
? B-5 cluster housing (see §4.6) P PPNNNNPNNNNNN
? B-6 mobile home park (see §4.13) C NCNNNNNNNNNNN
? B-ACC-1 home day care (see § 4.19) P P P P P P P P P NNNNN
? B-ACC-2
use of residence for business purposes, home
business (see §4.10)
P P P P P P P P P NPNPN
? B-ACC-3
use of residence for business purposes,
customary home occupation (see §4.10)
C C C C C C C C C NCNCN
? B-ACC-4
use of residence for business purposes, home
based contractor (see §4.10)
C NNNCCCNCNCNCN
B-ACC-5 accessory apartment (see §4.25) C C C C C C C C C NCNCN
? B-ACC-6 animals as usual pets P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
? B-ACC-7 animals other than usual pets P CCNCNNCNNNNNN
? C-1 daycare facility (see §4.19) C N CNNPCCCNNNNN
? C-2 child care center (see §4.19) C N CNNPCPPNNPNN
? C-3 preschool C NNNNPCPPNNPNN
? C-4 school, K-12 C C C NNCCCNNNNNN
? C-5 school, post-secondary C NNNNCCCPNNPNN
? C-6 school, commercial C NNNN C C C C C NPPP
? D-1 nursing home C C C NNPPCPNNNNN
? D-2 congregate care facility C CPNNPPCPNNNNN
D-3 hospital C NNNNCCNCNNCNN
? D-4 medical office or clinic N NNNNPPPPPNPNN
? D-5
medical marijuana registered dispensary (see
§4.24)
N N N N N N N N CNNCCC
? D-6
medical marijuana cultivation facility (see §
4.24)
N N N N N N N N CNNCCC
? D-7 methadone clinic (see §4.24) N N N N N N N N CNNCCC
? E-1 essential service (see §4.18) P P P P P P P CPPPPPP
E-2
public or private utility that is not essential
service
C C C C C C C C C C C PPP
? E-3
wireless telecommunications facilities (see
§4.22)
P NNNPNNNNNPPPP
? E-4 municipal solid waste facility C NNNNNNNNNNNCN
? E-5 community facility C C C NCPCCPNNPPP
? E-6 community building C CCNCPCPPPNPPP
? F-1 place of worship C CCNNPPPPNNNNN
? F-2 non-profit club C CCNCPPPPPNNNN
F-3 cemetery C CCNN C C C C NNNNN
? G-1 retail sales N NNNCPPPPPPNNN
? G-2 antique dealership C NNNPPPCPNNNNN
? G-3 adult use marijuana social club N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
? G-4 adult use marijuana store N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
? G-5 office, business or professional N NNNNPPPPPPPPP
? G-6 kennel C N NNNCNNCNNCNC
? G-7 veterinary hospital C NNNPPCCPNNPNP
? G-8 automotive fuel station N N N N CPNCPNPNNN
? G-9 automotive sales N N N N CCCNPNNNNN
? G-10 automotive service N NNNCCCCPNPNCN
G-11 boat sales, service, and storage N N N N N N N N PPNNNN
? G-12 inn C N CNCPPCNPPNNN
? G-13 hotel or motel N NNNCCCCPPPNNN
? G-14 conference center N N N N N N N N CPPPNN
? G-15 restaurant, low turnover C NNNCPPPPPPPNN
? G-16 restaurant, high turnover N N N N CPCPPPPCNN
? G-17 restaurant, drive-in or drive-through N NNNNCCCCNCNNN
? G-18 bar, pub, tavern N N N N N CNCCCNNNN
? G-19 place of assembly N N N N N CCCPPNNNN
G-20 funeral home N N N N N PCCPNNNNN
G-21 self-service laundromat N N N N PPPCPNNNNN
? G-22 drive-through business N NNNCCCCCNCNNN
G-23 mixed residential/commercial use N N N N CCCPPPNNNN
? G-24 business park N N N N N N N N CNNPNC
? G-25 self-service storage facility N N N N CPNNPNNPPP
? G-26 outdoor storage C N NNCNNNCCNCPP
? H-1 research and development N N N N N N N N N N N PPP
? H-2 warehousing N N N N N N N N N N N PPP
? H-3 wholesale N N N N N N N N CNNPPP
? H-4 manufacturing N N N N N N N N CNNPPP
? H-5 processing N N N N N N N N N N N CCC
H-6 adult use marijuana cultivation N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
H-7 adult use marijuana product manufacture N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
H-8 adult use marijuana testing N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
? H-9 light industry1 N N N N N N N N CNNPPP
? H-10 river-dependent uses N N N N N N N N CCNNNN
H-11 truck terminal N N N N N N N N N N PCPP
? H-12
processing & excavation, gravel pit, quarry
activities (see §4.23)
C NNNNNNNNNNNCC
H-13
stockpiles not accessory to excavation, gravel
pit, or quarrying (see §4.9)
C NNNCCNNCCNCCC
? H-14 heavy industry2 N N N N N N N N N N N CCC
? H-15 automobile graveyard N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
H-16 petroleum extraction or refining N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
I-1 outdoor storage C NNNNCCNPPPPPP
? I-2 living quarters for personnel P NNNPPPPPPPPPP
I-3 outdoor dining C NNNCCCCCCCCNN
I-4 retail sales C NNNCCCCCCCCNC
Footnotes:
G - Commercial/Office Uses:
Defined
Residential Districts Business Districts Industrial Districts
A - Agricultural/Recreational Uses:
B - Residential Uses:
B-ACC - Uses Accessory to Residential Uses:
C - Educational Uses:
D - Medical Uses:
E - Utility/Government Uses:
F - Institutional Uses:
see
provisions in
sec. 3.2
A-ACC - Uses Accessory to Agricultural/Recreational Uses:
H - Industrial Uses:
I - Accessory Uses to Non-Residential Uses:
1. Specific uses listed in the Table of Uses that could also be categorized as light industry shall be regulated under the specific use.
2. Specific uses listed in the Table of Uses that could also be categorized as heavy industry shall be regulated under the specific use.
3-3
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
3-4
This page left blank intentionally.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
3-5
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
and 8:00 am, except for special events upon a prior determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that the proposed event will not be unreasonably disruptive to other occupied buildings in the vicinity. The Planning Board review of the infill use must determine that the existing site development can either function properly with no changes or the Planning Board must be provided with a revised site plan that details the changes to the building and site development that will function properly and with minimal disruption to the neighborhood and limited modifications to the existing site development and building.
3.2.13 Place of worship (F-1): Facilities must be connected to the public water and sewer facilities and have direct access to a major collector or an arterial street. Where abutting a residential use or district, the required other yard(s) setback must be increased by 50% along the applicable lot lines.
3.2.14 Non-profit club (F-2): In the Residential A district, must be located within an existing building, although additions and alterations are allowed. In all districts where allowed, facilities for more than 49 occupants must be connected to the public water and sewer facilities and have direct access to a major collector or an arterial street. Where abutting a residential use or district, the required other yard(s) setback must be increased by 50% along the applicable lot lines.
3.2.15 Retail sales (G-1): In the Rural Business district, only small scale retail sales that are meant to serve the needs of the rural residents are allowed (e.g. convenience store). In the Town Center district, outdoor display of goods is limited to seasonal items and is limited to an area no larger than 5% of the gross floor area of the retail portion of the building. In the Business or Business B districts, shopping centers must provide accommodations for pedestrians, bicyclists, handicap accessibility, and public transportation.
3.2.16 Antique dealership (G-2): In the Rural district, antique dealership is an allowed use on a property that has a residential use without the necessity to meet the requirements of §4.10, Use of Residence for Business Purposes. Proposals must comply with §4.7, Design Standards.
3.2.17 Kennel (G-6): All buildings and enclosures where animals are kept must be located at least 50 feet from any lot line, and where abutting a residential use there must be a Class I Buffer established within that setback area unless the area has existing vegetation that meets the intent of the Class I Buffer.
3.2.18 Veterinary hospital (G-7): Any outdoor enclosure where animals are kept must be located at least 50 feet from any lot line abutting a residential use or district, and there must be a Class I Buffer established within that setback area unless the area has existing vegetation that meets the intent of the Class I Buffer.
3.2.19 Automotive fuel station (G-8): The site design must accommodate vehicle queing for a minimum of the same number of vehicles as there are dispensing stations (pumps, electrical outlets, and the like). There must also be space available for vehicles to bypass the dispensing stations.
3.2.20 Automotive service (G-10): In the Rural Business and Town Center districts, repair activities must be conducted entirely within a building, and disassembled vehicles may not be stored outdoors. For proposals within those two districts, in consideration of nearby uses the Planning Board may require such buildings to be sound-insulated and designed to protect the neighborhood from vehicle exhaust and other by-products of vehicle servicing.
3.2.21 Inn (G-12): No more than ten guest rooms may be included in an Inn, and all required parking must be located on the site. Facilities with more than ten guest rooms are classified as a hotel.
3.2.22 Restaurant, low turnover (G-15): See §3.2.37, Outdoor dining.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
3-6
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
3.2.23 Restaurant, high turnover (G-16): The sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited. See also §3.2.37, Outdoor dining.
3.2.24 Restaurant, drive-in or drive-through (G-17): Must be located on a lot having a minimum lot size of 1.5 acres, minimum frontage of 200 feet and no part of the vehicle queue may be located within 100 feet of a residential dwelling. The sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited. See also §3.2.37, Outdoor dining.
In the Town Center district, the drive-through window and vehicle queue lanes must be screened from view of adjacent residential dwellings through the use of plantings, fences, or walls. Sidewalks must be built along the public right-of-way as well as into the site, and must be designed with a minimum four inch vertical separation from the driveway level, and where feasible, a landscaped strip should be provided between the driveway and sidewalk.
3.2.25 Bar, pub, tavern (G-18): Must be located a minimum of 500 feet from any residential dwelling except in the Town Center District where that distance is reduced to 100 feet from any residential dwelling within the Town Center district and 200 feet from any residential dwelling within any other district; this measurement is made from building to building. In the Town Center district, limited to a maximum gross floor area of 2,000 square feet.
3.2.26 Funeral home (G-20): Must be connected to the public water and sewer facilities and have direct access to an arterial street. Where abutting a residential use or district, the required other yard(s) setback must be increased by 50% along the applicable lot lines.
3.2.27 Drive-through business (G-22): In the Town Center district, no part of the vehicle queue may be located within 50 feet of a residential property. The drive-through window and vehicle queue lanes must be screened from view of adjacent residential dwellings through the use of plantings, fences, or walls. Sidewalks must be built along the public right-of-way as well as into the site, and must be designed with a minimum four inch vertical separation from the driveway level, and where feasible, a landscaped strip should be provided between the driveway and sidewalk.
3.2.28 Mixed residential/commercial use (G-23): In the Business district, limited to a maximum of four dwelling units per building. In the Rural Business and Business B districts, limited to a maximum of four dwelling units per site.
3.2.29 Business park (G-24): A master plan prepared by a State of Maine registered engineer, landscape architect, or architect, must be submitted to the Planning Board as part of the subdivision review and approval process. The master plan shall indicate the full build-out of the park including parcel lines, potential curb cuts, building footprints, impervious surfaces, stormwater management, and common open spaces. The submittal must include proposed covenants and any architectural guidelines.
3.2.30 Outdoor storage (G-26): In the Rural district, limited to storage of materials, products, or equipment associated with forestry, logging, lumber operations, wood processing, or similar activities involving wood. In all districts where allowed, outdoor storage areas must be screened from view from public roads and from residential uses.
3.2.31 Industrial uses (H): All industrial uses, whether allowed by right or by conditional use, must comply with the performance standards in §4.4.
3.2.32 Processing (H-5): In the Industrial Park district, rendering plants are prohibited.
3.2.33 Light industrial operations (H-9): In the Commercial Service district, limited to a maximum of 10,000 square feet.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
3-7
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
3.2.34 River-dependent uses (H-10): For lots with a minimum of five acres, there is no maximum building height requirement.
3.2.35 Outdoor storage as an accessory use to non-residential uses (I-1): In the Rural, Business, and Business B districts, the area used for outdoor storage must be screened from view from public roads and from residential uses. In the Industrial Park district, the area used for outdoor storage must be on the rear two-thirds of the property and screened from public roads and residential uses, except in circumstances where the Planning Board determines that a different location will result in safer on-site circulation, a more efficient use of the land, or will be better for the environment, and will not have an adverse impact on any abutting property or the appearance from public roads or residential uses. In all other districts where allowed, outdoor storage areas in excess of 5,000 square feet must be screened from public roads and from residential uses.
3.2.36 Living quarters for personnel (I-2): No more than one dwelling unit is allowed on a site.
3.2.37 Outdoor dining (I-3): Areas proposed for outdoor dining must be clearly delineated on a site plan, and when consumption of alcoholic beverages is proposed, must be controlled by barriers and by signs prohibiting consumption of alcoholic beverages beyond the barriers, per M.R.S.A. Title 28-A. On lots abutting residential uses, the outdoor dining area must be screened from residential uses with a Class I Buffer, unless located where there will be minimal impact on the residential use.
3.2.38 Retail sales as an accessory use to non-residential uses (I-4): In the Rural district, limited to no more than 3,000 square feet including both indoor and outdoor space. In all districts where allowed, limited to no more than 49% of the gross floor area of the building(s) plus outdoor display or storage areas.
3.3 Temporary Uses.
3.3.1 Temporary Event. Any use associated with a temporary event, such as a fair, shall not be subject to the restrictions of this Zoning Ordinance provided the use has been duly permitted by the appropriate authority.
3.3.2 Temporary housing unit on parcel with a damaged home or on a vacant parcel. The Code Enforcement Officer may approve the placement of a manufactured home (including a mobile home) on the same parcel as a residence which has been rendered uninhabitable, for the occupancy of the property owner during construction of a new or reconstruction of a damaged home or on a vacant parcel when a new home is to be constructed. The manufactured home shall not be occupied or left on site for a period greater than 12 months, with no option for renewal or extension. The manufactured home may be placed within required setback areas but not closer than five feet from the property line if absolutely necessary to avoid conflict with the construction or reconstruction of the permanent residence. The manufactured home shall be in compliance with all applicable regulations for water supply and sewage disposal. The manufactured home shall be removed from the property within 30 days of the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy for the permanent residence, or at the end of the abovementioned 12 month period, whichever comes first.
3.3.3 Occupancy of an existing single family dwelling during construction of a new single family dwelling on the same parcel is allowed for a period to be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer based on a construction schedule to be submitted with the application for the building permit. The permit shall specify the timeframe within which the existing single-family dwelling shall be removed.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
3-8
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Zoning DistrictMin Lot AreaMax Gross Density (du/a)1Min Road FrontageMin Setback, Street YardMin Setback, Other YardsMax Building CoverageMax Impervious SurfaceMax Building HeightRural2 ac0.50200'30'30'15%25%35'Residential A:Public Sewer18,000 sf2.42125'25'20'20%40%35'On-site Waste Disposal30,000 sf1.45150'30'30'20%40%35'Residential B:Public Sewer 16, 500 sf2.64100'25'20'25%40%35'On-site Waste Disposal25,000 sf1.74125'30'30'25%40%35'Seasonal20,000 sf2.18100'25'25'20%20%35'Rural Bus2 ac200'30'30'25%50%35'Town Center10,000 sf4.0050'0'0'50%75%35'Bus12,500 sf75'35'20'20%40%35'Bus B1 ac100'30'15'20%40%35'Comm Service20,000 sf100'40'30'25%50%35'Waterfront 120,000 sfNone10'10'50%75%35'Interchange1 ac200'30'20'40%60%50'Ind Park1 ac50'20'20'30%70%45'Ind2 ac150'50'35'25%50%45'Ind 2None50'10'10'30%70%45'1. For single family and two-family structures, which are to be treated as a single unit; for multi-family development refer to §3.4.2.2.Residential DistrictsBusiness DistrictsIndustrial Districts
3.4 Dimensional Requirements
3.4.1 Table of dimensional requirements
3.4.2 Special Provisions:
3.4.2.1 Detached Accessory Structures:
1. In the Rural, Residential A, or Residential B districts, a detached accessory structure up to 250 square feet may be located no closer than 5’ to a side or rear property line and is limited to 16’ in height.
2. In the Rural district, a detached accessory structure that is greater than 250 and less than or equal to 650 square feet may be located no closer than 15’ to a side or rear property line and is limited to 24’ in height. (Larger detached accessory structures must meet the standards in the dimensional table.)
3. In the Rural district, detached accessory structures may be larger than the house, up to a maximum of 5,000 sf, provided it is on a lot of a minimum of 3 acres. Such structures do not require site plan approval.
4. In the Commercial Service district, a detached accessory structure on a residential property up to 150 square feet may be located no closer than 5’ to a side or rear property line and is limited to 16’ in height.
5. In any district, a detached accessory structure cannot be attached to a principal building unless it meets the standard setback for other yards.
6. In any district, an amateur radio antenna may be permitted to exceed the maximum height for accessory structures upon the granting of a conditional use approval, provided the applicant is licensed by the Federal Communication Commission (FCC), and provided the tower is set back from all property lines of abutting properties at least the distance of the fall zone.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
3-9
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
3.4.2.2 Multi-family developments:
1. May have a maximum gross density of 8 dwelling units per acre except in the Rural district where the density is limited to 2 dwelling units per acre.
2. The minimum lot size is increased over the base requirement by 7,500 square feet per unit for projects in the Business district, and by 5,000 square feet per unit in the Town Center district.
3. In the Residential B district, the other yard setback requirement is increased by 2 feet per unit over 4 units, counted and measured by each building.
3.4.2.3 In subdivisions in the Rural district, the required frontage for lots fronting on a cul-de-sac may be reduced to 100 feet provided the front setback is increased to 60 feet.
3.4.2.4 In the Residential B district, existing lots of record as of July 1, 1991 with less than 100' of frontage may be developed for a single family dwelling and accessory structures with minimum side yard setbacks of 10'. Lots with between 100' and 120' frontage must have side setbacks of 10'+ 0.5' for each foot of frontage over 100'.
3.4.2.5 In the Seasonal district, the minimum setback from the high water mark is 75 feet, which supersedes the other yard setback.
3.4.2.6 In the Business B district:
1. Existing lots of record as of July 1, 2014 with less than 100' of frontage with existing structures served by public sewer may have a minimum other yard setback of 10'.
2. For lots abutting a Residential A or Residential B district, the setback requirement from that boundary is a minimum of 30'.
3.4.2.7 In the Town Center district, the minimum other yard setback is increased to 20’ where abutting a residential district.
3.4.2.8 In the Town Center district, the minimum other yard setback is increased to 30’ where a proposal abuts a residential use or district and involves a building with a footprint greater than 10,000 square feet or an automobile service use regardless of building size.
3.4.2.9 In the Waterfront district, since there is no frontage requirement all new lots must have access to a paved right-of-way wide enough to accommodate two-way traffic plus utility services, which connects to a public way.
3.4.2.10 In the Industrial 2 district:
1. In lieu of frontage on a public street, an unobstructed access easement or private right-of-way which is a minimum of 50' in width the entire length may be used for access to a public street.
2. No buildings may be constructed within 300’ of the Route 202 right-of-way.
3.4.2.11 In any district, any structure which requires access to rail service is not required to be set back from the railroad siding (applicable where the rail siding is on a separate parcel of land).
3.4.2.12 In any district, where a parcel of land is to be occupied by more than one building for a principal use (e.g. two detatched single family houses or two commercial buildings), each such building must be treated as though on a separate lot and must meet all applicable dimensional requirements for the district in which it lies, as if an imaginary boundary line has been drawn between the buildings to create new parcels. The intention of this requirement is to ensure that a future split of the parcel will not create a nonconforming lot. However, for non-residential or multi-family residential developments, the Planning Board may authorize building locations that do not comply with this provision in order to achieve a site design that provides safer pedestrian
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
3-10
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
and vehicular circulation into and within the site, or to protect natural resources on or off the site.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-1
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
ARTICLE 4 - GENERAL REGULATIONS
The following regulations pertain to all districts unless otherwise indicated.
4.1. Site Plan Review
4.1.1 Purpose. This section is to protect the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town by providing for a review of plans for uses and structures which do not require subdivision review and may have significant impacts both within the site and in relation to adjacent properties and streets on pedestrian and vehicular traffic, public services and infrastructure, environmental, unique and historic resources, or on abutting properties or community needs, and to minimize potential adverse impacts of such development.
4.1.2 Multi-level review. There are three levels of review for site plans: minor revision, for modifications to approved site plans; minor site plan, for alterations to existing developments that meet certain thresholds; and major site plans for all new development and alterations to existing developments that exceed those thresholds. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to act upon Minor Revision applications, the Staff Review Committee is hereby authorized to act upon minor site plans, and the Planning Board is hereby authorized to act upon major site plans and any applications referred or appealed from the Code Enforcement Officer or the Staff Review Committee.
4.1.3 Applicability. The following activities for all uses except single family detached or two family residential dwellings require site plan review. Site plan review is not required for agricultural uses or structures which do not involve customers or the general public visiting the site on a regular basis, nor for accessory agricultural structures such as farm stands which do involve customers. The Planning Board may waive the requirement for site plan review for essential services if they are owned and maintained by the Town of Hampden or the Hampden Water District. No building permit, certificate of occupancy, or certificate of compliance can be issued until a site plan has received approval under this §4.1.
4.1.3.1 Minor revision to approved site plan. For the purposes of computing the total increase in the footprint of the structure, the aggregate area of all such applications made within the five previous calendar years will be used. Minor revisions include:
1. Expansions which increase the footprint of the structure by 500 square feet or less, and exceed 50% of the footprint of the existing structure, provided additional parking spaces beyond what is provided on the approved site plan are not required. (Those that do not exceed 50% of the footprint of the existing structure only require a building permit.)
2. Alteration of utility service by elevation changes, changes in pipe size, or relocation.
3. Re-grading which does not adversely impact adjacent properties or the public stormwater management system.
4. Adding landscaping, plantings, or fences.
5. Rearranging parking spaces in compliance with applicable design requirements.
6. Expansion of an existing paved area not associated with increases in building size where the paved area will be enlarged by less than 2,000 square feet, whether used for access, parking, loading, or storage purposes.
7. Change of use from one use category to another (e.g. residential to commercial), where in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer the change will not alter the use of the site to the extent that minor site plan review is necessary to further the purposes set forth in §4.1.1.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-2
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.1.3.2 The following require Minor Site Plan Review. For the purposes of computing the total increase in the footprint of the structure, the aggregate area of all such applications made within the five previous calendar years will be used.
1. Expansions which increase the footprint size of the structure by more than 500 square feet but less than 2,000 square feet.
2. Construction of new accessory structures that have a footprint of more than 500 square feet but less than 2,000 square feet. (Those that have a footprint of 500 square feet or less only require a building permit.)
3. Expansions which increase the footprint size of the structure, or construction of new accessory structures, where the total additional area is less than 10,000 square feet, where the property is within an approved subdivision (e.g. Hampden Business Park).
4. Construction of a new access way, parking lot, loading area, or outdoor paved storage area up to 4,000 square feet.
5. Expansion of an existing paved area not associated with increases in building size where the paved area will be enlarged by more than 2,000 but less than 4,000 square feet, whether used for access, parking, loading, or storage purposes.
6. Change of use from one use category to another (e.g. residential to commercial), where in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer the change will alter the use of the site to the extent that site plan review is necessary to further the purposes set forth in §4.1.1.
7. The establishment of a new nonresidential use that does not involve any structures, where the disturbed area is less than 15,000 square feet.
4.1.3.3 The following require Major Site Plan Review:
1. Construction of new structures except as provided above.
2. Expansions which increase the footprint size of the structure by 2,000 square feet or more.
3. Expansions which increase the footprint size of the structure by 10,000 square feet or more, where the property is within an approved subdivision (e.g. Hampden Business Park).
4. Construction of a new access way, parking lot, loading area, or outdoor paved storage area over 4,000 square feet.
5. Expansion of an existing paved area not associated with increases in building size where the paved area will be enlarged by 4,000 square feet or more, whether used for access, parking, loading, or storage purposes.
6. The establishment of a new nonresidential use that does not involve any structures, where the disturbed area is 15,000 square feet or more.
7. Any new development for a use that requires a Conditional Use permit. Once approved and established, modifications to a site plan for such a use will be categorized as minor revision, minor site plan, or major site plan, as appropriate.
4.1.4 Procedure
4.1.4.1 Staff Review Committee
1. Establishment. A staff review committee is hereby established, which consists of the Town Planner, Code Enforcement Officer, Director of Public Works, and Director of Public Safety, or their designees. In the event any of these positions is vacant, the Town Manager will name an interim committee member with appropriate expertise from the respective department.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-3
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
2. Operation.
1. Chair. The Town Planner will serve as the chair of the committee, or in his/her absence the Code Enforcement Officer will serve as chair pro tem. The chair is responsible for calling meetings, presiding over meetings, and maintaining the records of the committee including a record of the proceedings (minutes).
2. Attendance. If any member of the committee is unable to attend a meeting, either a detailed written report setting forth their comments and concerns with the application(s) is to be submitted to the chair prior to the meeting, or a designee may be assigned by the member to attend in his/her place, with the same authority to take actions as the regular member.
3. Meetings. The committee will meet monthly on a set schedule, and may meet more often as needed with additional meetings called by the chair.
4. Posting. Meeting agendas will be posted in the same manner as for other Town committees, and all meetings are open to the public. These meetings are not public hearings and public comments will be taken at the discretion of the chair.
5. Quorum. A quorum consisting of at least three members is required to conduct any official meeting of the committee.
6. Voting. A majority vote of the quorum is required to constitute an action (passage or denial) on any motion before the committee. Should a committee member need to be recused due to a conflict once a quorum is established and a meeting is in session, the meeting may proceed and the committee may take action on any motion before the committee with less than three voting members present. In this event, the applicant has the right to have a vote postponed to the next committee meeting. Should a tie vote occur, the application will automatically be referred to the Planning Board for review and action at their next available meeting, which is not to be a public hearing, and no additional fees or information from the applicant are required.
4.1.4.2 Application
1. At the applicant’s discretion, a pre-application meeting may be held with staff to discuss a project prior to the submission of an application. These discussions are non-binding on both parties.
2. When an application in compliance with the requirements in §4.1.5 is submitted, the Town Planner will review it to confirm its categorization as minor revision, minor site plan, or major site plan.
3. If a minor revision, the Town Planner will forward the application to the Code Enforcement Officer for review and action. The Code Enforcement Officer may request any member of the Staff Review Committee to review and comment on an application prior to rendering a decision.
4. If a minor site plan, the Town Planner will distribute the application to the members of the Staff Review Committee, each member of which will review the application in preparation for the committee meeting.
5. Minor site plan applications will be scheduled for the next available meeting of the Staff Review Committee in accordance with the set schedule. At the committee chair’s discretion, a special meeting may be called to handle an application if the project warrants such action (e.g. minimal alteration, unnecessary hardship if delayed to scheduled meeting, etc.)
6. Major site plan applications will be scheduled for public hearing with the Planning Board according to the published application deadline schedule.
7. For minor site plans and major site plans, the application will be distributed to the members of the staff review committee and, if a major site plan, to the Town’s engineer or consulting
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-4
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
engineer for peer review. Unless the reviewer will be present at the meeting when the application is considered, a written report should be submitted to the Town Planner prior to the meeting (Staff Review Committee for minor site plans or Planning Board for major site plans).
8. All decisions must be documented in writing and final approved plans must be endorsed as approved by the Code Enforcement Officer for minor revisions, the Staff Review Committee Chair for minor site plans, or the Planning Board Chair for major site plans. When approval is granted conditional upon modifications to the site plan presented at the meeting, said modifications must be made to the site plan prior to endorsement, and a copy of the endorsed plan must be submitted to the Town Planner for the town’s files.
9. Upon completion of construction and prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance, an as-built plan in both full size paper and digital format (as specified by the Code Enforcement Officer) must be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer.
4.1.5 Submission Requirements.
4.1.5.1 Major Site Plans. All major site plans must be prepared by a design professional registered in the state of Maine and must contain the following information, which may be on multiple sheets at a scale sufficient to ensure legibility. A complete submission consists of an original plus 15 copies of the plans, three sets of which must be full size and the remaining may be no smaller than 11”x17” provided they are legible at that size and the proposed site layout is provided in full size, the application form, a narrative, any supplemental reports or information (e.g. stormwater drainage, light fixture cut sheets), an electronic copy of the entire package (in one or more files in a format specified by the Town Planner), and the fees paid in full.
1. Locus plan showing the site in relation to the surrounding area.
2. Title block including at minimum: name of applicant, name of preparer, date of plan, revision dates with notation of what the revisions were, scale of the plan, and north arrow.
3. Site layout, showing the boundaries of the parcel(s) in the proposed development, proposed structures, driveways, parking spaces, loading facilities, outdoor storage areas, required setbacks and buffers, fences, walls, walkways, crosswalks, outdoor lighting, and areas for snow storage after plowing.
4. Grading and drainage plan, showing the existing and proposed topography at two foot intervals, plans for handling stormwater drainage, and all wetlands and floodplain areas on the site and within 100 feet of the site. Drainage calculations prepared by a registered professional engineer shall be submitted with the drainage plan. Any development required to obtain approval under site plan review that proposes a cumulative land disturbance of greater than one acre must provide a copy of the submission documents made to Maine DEP for Chapter 500 compliance and if already approved, a copy of the DEP approval.
5. Utility and open space plan, showing all facilities for refuse and sewerage disposal and storage of all wastes, the location of all hydrants, fire alarm and firefighting facilities (including fire lanes) on and adjacent to the site, proposed recreational facilities, and open space areas including archeological or historical features on the site.
6. Landscaping plan, showing the limits of work, existing trees and tree lines, and all proposed landscape features and improvements including screening, planting areas with size and type of stock for each shrub or tree, and proposed erosion control measures (including dust control during construction).
7. Lighting plan, showing the location of all lighting fixtures, the illumination data to show compliance with §4.7.3, Lighting, and detail drawings of the fixtures to be used, including heights.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-5
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
8. Floor plan, showing the basic layout of various spaces on each floor (office space, retail space, manufacturing space, warehouse space, etc.).
9. Details as needed to show specific information such as but not limited to cross sections of driveways, roads, parking areas, and sidewalks; lighting fixtures; signage; and drainage facilities.
10. Location and size of signs and all permanent outdoor fixtures.
11. Existing zoning.
12. A narrative describing the project and indicating the number of dwelling units and/or square footage of non-residential buildings categorized by general use (retail, office, warehouse, etc.); the percentage of building coverage and impervious surfaces on the site; the acreage of the site in general categories (residential, commercial, open space, road and utility rights-of-way, etc.); the forms of ownership contemplated for the project and a summary of the provisions for the maintenance of commonly held areas; and an indication of the estimated time required to complete the proposed project and any and all phases thereof.
13. For projects that generate more than 100 peak hour trips, a copy of the traffic impact analysis submitted to Maine DOT, and if already approved, a copy of DOT’s approval.
4.1.5.2 Minor Site Plans. Minor site plans shall include all of the information required by §4.1.4.1 with the following exceptions, and waivers may be granted as provided in §4.1.5.4. A complete submission consists of an original plus 5 copies of the plans, two of which must be full size and the remaining may be no smaller than 11”x17” provided they are legible at that size, the application form, a narrative, any supplemental reports or information (e.g. stormwater drainage, light fixture cut sheets), an electronic copy of the entire package (in one or more pdf files), and the fees paid in full.
1. The plan may depict topographical contours at intervals available on maps provided by the United States Geological Survey;
2. A utility and open space plan is not required unless new utility service lines are proposed, in which case those shall be shown on the site plan;
3. A landscaping plan is not required unless new or additional landscaping is proposed or is required by the Staff Review Committee or the Planning Board to screen the proposed development from public ways and/or abutting properties;
4. A floor plan is not required; and
5. A drainage plan and calculations are only needed when changes to existing systems are proposed.
4.1.5.3 Minor Revisions. Two copies of the approved site plan with proposed modification clearly indicated on the plan. Only the sheets with proposed changes need be submitted (i.e. if sheets 2 and 3 of a 6 sheet set include modifications, only sheets 2 and 3 need to be submitted).
4.1.5.4 Waivers. The permit granting authority may, upon written request from the applicant, waive or modify any of the submission requirements listed in §4.1.5.1 or §4.1.5.2 provided such waiver or modification will not negatively impact the permit granting authority’s ability to make an informed decision on the application, and the permit granting authority must state their reasons for granting any waiver in writing as part of their decision.
4.1.6 Approval Standards.
4.1.6.1 Minor Revisions. To be approved, the application must:
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-6
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
1. Comply with the original approval and any approved revisions.
2. Comply with the dimensional requirements for the district in which it lies, or with any variances or waivers granted prior to or as part of the previous approval.
3. Comply with all buffering and screening requirements on the previous approval.
4. Not alter roadway access points.
5. Decrease the number or size of parking spaces or loading areas.
6. Not violate any conditions of previous approvals.
4.1.6.2 Minor or Major Site Plan approval will be granted upon determination by the Staff Review Committee or the Planning Board that the plan is in compliance with the applicable requirements for the zoning district and all other applicable requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, and that it meets the following objectives. The Committee or Board may impose reasonable conditions at the expense of the applicant, including performance guarantees, limiting hours of operation, and other reasonable conditions to promote these objectives.
1. Minimize the volume of cut and fill, the number of removed trees 6" caliper or larger, the area of wetland vegetation displaced, the extent of stormwater flow increase from the site, soil erosion, and threat of air and water pollution;
2. Maximize pedestrian and vehicular safety both on the site and entering and exiting the site;
3. Minimize obstruction of scenic views from publicly accessible locations;
4. Minimize visual intrusion by controlling the visibility of parking, storage, or other outdoor service areas viewed from public ways or premises residentially used or zoned;
5. Minimize glare and light trespass from headlights, outdoor lighting, or signage lighting;
6. Minimize unreasonable departure from the character, materials, and scale of buildings in the vicinity, as viewed from public ways and places;
7. Prevent contamination of groundwater from operations on the premises involving the use, storage, handling, or containment of hazardous substances;
8. Ensure adequate access to each structure for fire and service equipment and adequate provision for utilities and stormwater drainage; and
9. Ensure that no project will exceed the capacity of any public utility (e.g. sewage disposal, water supply, stormwater management system, solid waste disposal, roads, etc.) or will overburden any public service (e.g. public safety, schools, municipal recreation, etc).
4.1.7 Denial. In the event the application does not meet the requirements of this Ordinance or the objectives in §4.1.6 and the applicant refuses to modify the application so it will comply, the permit granting authority may deny the application. The decision shall be in writing and shall clearly state the reasons for denial with sufficient detail to enable the applicant to revise the site revision or site plan to meet the requirements and objectives. There shall be no time penalties against the applicant to file a new site plan application, but said application shall require payment of a new fee.
4.1.8 Appeal. A decision of the Code Enforcement Officer, Staff Review Committee, or the Planning Board may be appealed to the Board of Appeals, pursuant to §6.2.1.
4.1.9 Lapse. Site plan approval shall lapse after two years from the date of approval if construction has not yet begun. Site plan approval may, for good cause, be extended in writing by the permit granting authority upon the written request of the applicant.
4.1.10 Fees. The Town may adopt administrative fees and technical review fees for site plan review.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-7
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.2. Conditional Uses
4.2.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for a review of uses which while ordinarily not injurious to the public health, safety, and welfare or detrimental to the neighborhood, may be injurious or detrimental under certain circumstances if restrictions are not placed on how those uses are conducted.
4.2.2 Applicability. All uses specified in §3.1.3, Use Table, as Conditional Uses must receive approval under this section prior to the issuance of a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or certificate of compliance.
4.2.3 Procedure. An application for Conditional Use review must be submitted to the Planning Board in accordance with their published meeting schedule. In cases where site plan review is also required, the two applications may be submitted concurrently and both may be taken up in a single public hearing, however both fees must be paid and the Board must issue separate decisions. All conditional use applications require a public hearing.
4.2.4 Submission Requirements.
4.2.4.1 When an application also requires site plan review, the information required under §4.1 will be sufficient for review for the conditional use application.
4.2.4.2 When an application does not require site plan review, the following information is required to be shown on a sketch plan:
1. Names of the applicant and preparer of the plan.
2. Scale of the drawing and north arrow.
3. Depiction of the property boundaries including their dimensions based on tax map data, the property deed, or a survey.
4. Depiction of existing buildings on the property including their location, approximate shape and size, floor area and number of stories.
5. Distance from the closest point of each building to the closest property boundary; in cases where the distance is within ten feet of the required setback this must be measured accurately and in cases where the distance is greater, an approximation may be used.
6. Approximate distance from each building to buildings on abutting properties, if they are within 300 feet, including a notation as to the use of the building (e.g. house, garage, barn).
7. Features such as fences, sidewalks, driveways, parking areas (existing and proposed), septic systems, wells, wooded areas, and garden areas.
8. Location and frontage on public or private streets, including the name of the street.
9. Additional information that may be pertinent to the specific application may be submitted along with the sketch plan (e.g. a copy of an aerial image of the site, the flood plain as depicted on FEMA maps, or photographs of existing buildings).
4.2.5 Approval Standards. Conditional Use approval shall be granted upon determination by the Planning Board that the application is in compliance with the applicable requirements for the zoning district and all other applicable requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, and that it meets the following objectives.
4.2.5.1 The proposal is consistent with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance and it will not be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the neighborhood or the Town.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-8
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.2.5.2 The proposal is compatible with existing uses and development patterns in the neighborhood.
4.2.5.3 The proposal will not create a nuisance to the neighborhood due to impacts such as noise, odors, dust, gas, fumes, smoke, light or other emissions, and the proposed use will be operated in compliance with the performance standards set forth in §4.4 of this Ordinance.
4.2.5.4 The proposal will not create undue traffic congestion nor unduly impair pedestrian safety, and provides safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation within the site.
4.2.5.5 The proposal ensures adequate space onsite for loading and unloading of goods, products, materials, and equipment incidental to the normal operation of the establishment or use.
4.2.5.6 The proposed use will provide adequate and safe provision for the collection, storage, and disposal of all wastes generated or stored on the site.
4.2.5.7 The proposal will not exceed the capacity of any public utility (e.g. sewage disposal, water supply, stormwater management system, solid waste disposal, roads, etc.) to such an extent that the proposed use or any existing use will be unduly subjected to hazards affecting health, safety, or the general welfare.
4.2.5.8 The proposed use will not deny light and air to surrounding properties.
4.2.5.9 The proposal minimizes environmental impacts including erosion, siltation, changes to ground and/or surface water levels (quantity), or changes to ground or surface water quality.
4.2.5.10 The proposed use will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird or other wildlife habitat.
4.2.5.11 The applicant has adequate financial and technical capacity to meet the requirements of this Ordinance and any conditions imposed by the planning board.
4.2.5.12 For Multi-Family development, the following findings must also be made:
1. The proposed project is not out of character with the area in which it is located;
2. The parking facilities are located away from the areas along the public street(s), or are integral to the buildings (i.e. garages); and
3. The proposed project does not increase the Average Daily Traffic (ADT) of roads within the general area by more than 10 percent in any given year, nor reduce the Level of Service at intersections within the same area to less than a “C” standard as determined by a professional traffic engineer registered in the state of Maine.
4.2.6 Conditions. The Planning Board may impose reasonable conditions to minimize impacts on abutters, safeguard the neighborhood, or otherwise serve the purposes of this Ordinance at the expense of the applicant, including performance guarantees, limiting hours of operation, increased setbacks or more stringent buffer requirements, deed restrictions or restrictive covenants, or other reasonable conditions to promote the objectives listed above. Violation of any of these conditions shall be a violation of this Ordinance.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-9
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Sample Sketch Plan for conditional uses that do not also need a site plan (see §4.2.4.2)
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-10
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.3. Rural Alternate Frontage Lots
4.3.1 Purpose - It is the purpose of this section of the Ordinance to establish a procedure which would allow for residential development on certain lots which, because of inadequate road frontage, would not otherwise be usable for residential purposes. The lots must meet certain requirements as established in this section of the Ordinance and the development of the lots must be consistent with wise land use planning. This section applies to both existing lots and newly created lots.
4.3.2 Application Procedure - Application for the development of lots under this section shall be made by filing the required building permit application with the Code Enforcement Officer. The application must include plans, drawn to scale, containing the following information:
4.3.2.1 Scale of map.
4.3.2.2 Name of applicant.
4.3.2.3 Boundaries of tract of land.
4.3.2.4 Location of existing and proposed buildings and other structures, including use and proposed use thereof.
4.3.2.5 Location of buildings on abutting properties or within 500 feet of the property line of the proposed development.
4.3.2.6 Location of existing public streets.
4.3.2.7 Location of all curb cuts within 500 feet of the curb cut which will result from the development of the lot.
4.3.2.8 Location of existing and proposed rights of way, utilities and easements therefor; including sanitary sewerage, water and all electricity.
4.3.3. Approval Standards - A building permit may only be issued if the following conditions are met:
4.3.3.1 The lot and access way must be located in the Rural District.
4.3.3.2 The lot is of such dimensions that an imaginary square with minimum side dimensions of 200 feet can be accommodated within its borders. Any building that is located on the lot shall be located within the perimeter of such a square.
4.3.3.3 No building shall be placed closer to any lot line or right of way boundary than 30 feet. No primary building shall be less than 100 feet from existing dwellings.
4.3.3.4 The development of the lot shall cause no unsafe or unhealthful condition. Of particular concern in this regard should be traffic safety.
4.3.3.5 The lot shall conform to all dimensional requirements of this Ordinance except road frontage.
4.3.3.6 Only single family residential uses shall be allowed on these lots.
4.3.3.7 The development of the lot shall not preclude the orderly development of the neighborhood and the community.
4.3.3.8 The lot must have at least 66 feet of road frontage.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-11
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.3.3.9 Building permits can be issued for existing lots fronting on the cul-de-sac portion of a subdivision provided the standards in this §4.3.3 are met. Proposed subdivisions in the Rural district must meet the frontage requirements of §3.4.1 or §3.4.2.3.
4.3.3.10 No more than one dwelling unit may be placed on the lot.
4.4. Performance Standards
4.4.1. Odorous Matter - The emission of odorous or toxic matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at any point along lot lines so as to produce a public nuisance or hazard is prohibited. Such activities as might produce such emission, or which might produce smoke, dust, or other particulate matter, shall comply with applicable minimum Federal, State and local requirements and detailed plans for abatement shall be submitted to the code enforcement officer for approval before a building permit is granted. Violations of this standard shall be considered a public nuisance.
4.4.2. Electromagnetic Interference - No use, activity, or process shall be conducted which produces electromagnetic interference in the transmission or reception of electrical impulses beyond the lot line, including radio and television. Provided that wireless telecommunications facilities as defined in §7.2 shall be subject to Federal Communications Commission (FCC) requirements, not to provisions of this section with respect to the environmental or health effects of electromagnetic or radio frequency emissions.
4.4.3. Fire Safety - All uses, activities, structures, and processes shall comply with applicable Federal, State and local fire safety standards. Upon request of the code enforcement officer, detailed plans for fire safety shall be submitted for approval before a building permit is granted.
4.5. Nonconformities
4.5.1. General
4.5.1.1 Intent - It is the intent of this Ordinance to promote land use conformities, except that nonconforming conditions that were created by the adoption of this Ordinance or amendments thereto, and which were legal at the time of creation, are allowed to continue subject to the provisions of this §4.5.
4.5.1.2 Transfer of Ownership – A change in ownership of a property has no bearing on the legality of a nonconforming condition to continue, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
4.5.1.3 Repair and Maintenance - This Ordinance allows the normal upkeep and maintenance of properties with nonconforming conditions, including repairs or renovations, provided that any expansion of the nonconforming condition complies with the provisions of this §4.5.
4.5.1.4 When a nonconformity is created by action of a public body for a taking by eminent domain or a conveyance in lieu thereof, the nonconformity is considered to be legal and is allowed to continue subject to the provisions of this §4.5.
4.5.2. Nonconforming Structures
4.5.2.1 Expansions - A nonconforming structure may be expanded upon the issuance of a building permit provided such expansion itself is in compliance with the required setbacks and building height and it does not increase the building coverage or impervious surface amounts on the site to the extent that they exceed the requirements. A nonconforming structure may be expanded upon the granting of a conditional use approval when the expansion will encroach into the
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-12
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
required setback no more than the existing structure and on the same side of the building where the existing encroachment is located, provided the building height, building coverage, and impervious surface requirements are met. All other expansions of nonconforming structures require the granting of a variance under the provisions of Article 6.
4.5.2.2 Relocation – A nonconforming structure may be relocated to a different parcel provided it will comply with the dimensional requirements for the district at the new location, thus becoming a conforming structure. A nonconforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries of the parcel on which the structure is located provided that the site of the relocation conforms to the setback requirements to the greatest practical extent as determined by the CEO. In no case shall a structure be relocated in a manner that causes the structure to be more non-conforming.
In determining whether a building relocation meets the setback to the greatest practical extent, the CEO shall review the size of the lot, slope of the land, the location of other structures on the property and adjacent properties, the existence and location of a septic system and soils suitable for septic systems.
4.5.2.3 Reconstruction or Replacement - Any non-conforming structure which is removed, or damaged or destroyed by more than fifty percent of the market value of the structure before such damage, destruction or removal, may be reconstructed or replaced with a structure that is comparable to the removed, damaged, or destroyed structure, provided that a building permit is obtained within one year of the date of said removal, damage, or destruction . In no case shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase the nonconforming condition(s).
Any non-conforming structure which is damaged by fifty percent or less of the market value of the structure, excluding normal maintenance and repair, may be reconstructed in place, provided that a building permit is obtained within three years of the date of damage.
4.5.3. Nonconforming Site Developments
4.5.3.1 All site developments legally established prior to the adoption of this Ordinance or subsequent amendment which does not conform to the applicable dimensional requirements, design standards, or any special provisions (e.g. §3.2, specific use standards, or particular sections of Article 4) is allowed to continue.
4.5.3.2 Any nonconforming site development may expand provided that all new development (including buildings, parking area, etc.) must meet the applicable dimensional requirements, design standards, and any special provisions (e.g. §3.2, specific use standards, or particular sections of Article 4).
4.5.3.3 Any modifications to nonconforming site development must meet the applicable design standards to the greatest extent practicable.
4.5.4. Nonconforming Uses
4.5.4.1 Continuance - The use of land or structures which lawfully existed prior to the adoption or subsequent amendment of this Ordinance, may continue although such use is not in conformance with the use provisions of this Ordinance.
4.5.4.2 Expansions - Expansions of nonconforming uses are prohibited, except nonconforming residential uses in all districts may be expanded in that accessory structures such as sheds and decks may be added, provided that all dimensional provisions of this ordinance are met.
4.5.4.3 Resumption Prohibited - A nonconforming use that has been discontinued for a period exceeding two years, or which is superseded by a conforming use, cannot be re-established. A
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-13
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
single family or two family dwelling in a district where it is nonconforming that is vacant and for sale for more than a year is not considered to be a discontinued use.
4.5.4.4 Reconstruction - A nonconforming use which is housed in a structure that has been destroyed by fire or other hazard may be re-established provided a building permit is issued within one year of the destruction. Time incurred in resolving an appeal or other court action or insurance claim shall not be counted as part of the one year limit. Owner Occupied residential structures are exempt from §4.5.4.4.
4.5.4.5 Changes of Use - A legally existing nonconforming use may be converted to another nonconforming use upon approval as a conditional use by the Planning Board, provided the Board determines that such change in use will not be substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing nonconforming use. No use which is more intense in terms of density or type of use than the nonconforming use in existence at the time of application can be approved. The Board may consider issues such as but not limited to traffic, noise, odors, lights, and hours of operation in determining whether the proposed use is more detrimental than the existing use.
4.5.4.6 Expansion of Nonconforming Use Mobile Home Parks. Notwithstanding the provisions of §4.5.4 Nonconforming Uses, in order to comply with Title 30-A, §4358 the following provision shall apply to existing mobile home parks located in districts where that use is not permitted. It is not the intent of this ordinance to expressly prohibit existing nonconforming use mobile home parks from expanding in their existing location. Such expansions are subject to the following regulations.
1. Such expansion shall be limited to environmentally suitable locations.
2. Such expansion shall only be permitted in the context of a total redevelopment of the entire existing mobile home park meeting the requirements found in §4.13 of this ordinance and those found in the Mobile Home Park Ordinance.
3. Such expansion shall be limited to a one time 50 percent expansion of the existing number of mobile homes located in the mobile home park.
4.5.5. Non-conforming Lots
4.5.5.1 A lawfully existing nonconforming lot of record as of the effective date of this Ordinance or an amendment that created the nonconformity, vacant or otherwise, may be built upon, without the need for a variance, provided that all provisions of this Ordinance, except for lot size and frontage, can be met. Variances relating to setback or other dimensional requirements not involving lot size or frontage may be obtained by action of the Board of Appeals. All appeals and variance requests are subject to the provisions of Article 6 of this Ordinance and the Town of Hampden Board of Appeals Ordinance including but not limited to filing deadlines, application requirements, fees, appeal procedures, decisions of the Board of Appeals and subsequent appeals to Superior Court.
4.5.5.2 If two or more principal structures or uses existed on a single lot of record on the effective date of the adoption of this Ordinance, each may be sold on a separate lot provided the lots are either served by public sewer or can accommodate a subsurface sewage disposal system in conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules. When such lots are divided, each new lot must comply with the dimensional requirements in §3.4 to the greatest extent practicable.
4.5.5.3 Contiguous lots in common ownership.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-14
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
1. Principal structure on each lot: If two or more contiguous lots are in a single or joint ownership of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance or an amendment that created the nonconformity, if any of the lots do not meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, and if a principal use or structure exists on each lot, the nonconforming lots may be conveyed separately or together, provided the lots are served by public sewer or can accommodate a subsurface sewage disposal system in conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
2. Principal structure on at least one lot but not all lots: If two or more contiguous lots are in common ownership of record and if any of these lots contain a principal structure and at least one lot is undeveloped, and at least one of the lots does not meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, the lots must be combined to the extent necessary to meet the dimensional requirements.
3. Undeveloped lots: If two or more contiguous undeveloped lots are in common ownership of record and if any of these lots do not individually meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, the lots must be combined to the extent necessary to meet the dimensional requirements.
4.5.5.4 Reduction in Lot Size. Except as expressly provided in this ordinance, no lot shall be reduced in size by conveyance of a portion thereof unless (1) the remaining land meets the minimum dimensional standards required for the zoning district or districts in which that land is located, and (2) the land to be conveyed either meets the minimum dimensional standards requirement or will be conveyed to the owner of abutting property, the Town, or to a conservation organization in conjunction with covenants or similar restrictions that prohibit its development.
4.5.5.5 Division or Alteration of Nonconforming Lots. The boundaries of a lawfully existing nonconforming lot of record (as of the effective date of this Ordinance or amendment hereto) shall not be changed unless the Code Enforcement Officer makes a written determination that the extent of the nonconformity will remain unchanged or will be reduced and that the remainder of the nonconforming parcel otherwise meets the minimum dimensional standards of the zoning district or districts in which that land is located. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to require whatever information deemed necessary to make such a determination. The determination must be recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds within 120 days after its issuance or the determination becomes null and void.
4.6. Cluster Housing - In order to promote the health and general welfare of the community and to preserve and make available open space for recreation, agriculture, and conservation, the Planning Board may grant a developer permission to vary the dimensional requirements of §3.4 in districts in which cluster development is allowed, thus leaving a substantial area free of building sites to become permanent open space. To promote creative designs that will enhance the natural features of the site, individual building lots are not permitted except for single family developments when such lots are optional.
4.6.1. Uses Allowed
4.6.1.1 Residential uses as allowed in the Table of Uses for the district in which it is being proposed and subject to §3.2.1 for cluster projects that include multi-family;
4.6.1.2 Uses accessory to residential uses as allowed in the Table of Uses;
4.6.1.3 Ancillary recreational uses and recreational facilities;
4.6.1.4 Agriculture, conservation, and wildlife uses;
4.6.1.5 Infrastructure elements such as stormwater or wastewater management facilities that require location within the open space area due to site and engineering considerations; and
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-15
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.6.1.6 Ancillary maintenance facilities for the overall development (e.g. garage for groundskeeping equipment).
4.6.2 Dimensional Requirements
Rural
Res A
Res B
Town Center
Tract requirements:
min size (acre)
20
5
5
2
min frontage (feet)
100
50
50
50
min setbacks & buffers (feet):
setback (front/all others)1
100/75
50/50
50/40
100/40
buffer (front/all others)
85/60
40/40
40/30
80/30
max density (dwelling units/acre):
single or two family
1.5
3
4
4
multi-family
2
NA
8
8
Individual lot requirements2:
lot size (sq ft)
8,000
8,000
7,000
5,000
frontage (feet)
50
50
40
35
front setback (feet)
20
20
15
15
other setbacks (feet)
10
10
8
5
Footnotes:
1. Accessory structures must be set back from the tract boundary a minimum of 30 feet in all cases.
2. Only applicable in developments where there are individual lots proposed for each residential structure, restricted to single family developments.
3. The frontage for lots on a cul-de-sac where the roads are proposed to be publicly owned must be a minimum of 75 feet unless there are designated areas reserved for snow storage within the cul-de-sac area.
4.6.3. Maximum Number of Dwelling Units Allowed - The maximum number of dwelling units permitted within a cluster development shall be determined as follows:
4.6.3.1 Base units: Using the maximum density from §4.6.2 and the acreage of the tract, calculate the base number of dwelling units. For proposals with both single/two family and multi-family unit types, first calculate the percentage of the acreage used for each type of development of the total developed acreage, then apply those percentages to the total tract acreage, then apply the densities from §4.6.2 to those acreage figures, then add the resulting number of units together to arrive at the base number of units for the entire development.
4.6.3.2 Bonus Units:
1. For dedication of more than 30% of the tract in permanent open space: 5% or
2. For dedication of more than 50% of the tract in permanent open space: 10%; and
3. For provision of public access to trails in the open space that connect to existing trails on abutting properties: 5%; and
4. For provision of at least 10% of the dwelling units reserved for households with 80% or less of the median household income for the most recent period for the town of Hampden as reported by the US Census Bureau: 5%. When this bonus is used, the developer is required to create a homeowner’s association or similar permanent organization that is charged with the responsibility of enforcing the income limits on these units, which can be done “in-
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-16
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
house” or contracted out. For developments where the uinits will be sold to the occupants (as opposed too leasing or renting), the income limits apply at the time of purchase of the unit and not to future income of the property owner. The homeowner’s association is required to submit a report showing proof of compliance with the income limits for affected units on an annual basis.
4.6.4. Common Open Space
4.6.4.1 Every cluster development must provide open space for the explicit purpose of providing recreational amenities and undeveloped land for permanent protection and the use and enjoyment of the residents now and in the future. This open space is exclusive of the tract buffer.
4.6.4.2 The amount of open space required is based on the number of dwelling units in the project and the zoning district in which it is located, as provided below.
Open Space Acreage Required Per Unit
SF individual lots
SF without lots
Multi-family
Rural
0.2
0.3
0.25
Residential A
0.08
0.1
NA
Residential B
0.045
0.07
0.05
Town Center
0.08
0.09
0.05
4.6.4.3 A maximum of 50% of the common open space acreage may be wetlands. Additional wetlands may be included in the open space area to ensure permanent protection of these important resource areas, but they will not be counted toward the open space requirement for the development.
4.6.4.4 A maximum of 30% of the required open space area may be occupied by water supply, sewage disposal, or stormwater management facilities. Linear elements are to be measured as follows: if it is within an easement, the entire area of the easement is counted, and if it is not within an easement, a corridor ten feet wide centered on the linear element (pipe) is counted. For non-linear elements (e.g. stormwater pond or septic system including leach field), the area measured by the outermost boundary of the element is counted (e.g. the toe of a slope for a stormwater pond surrounded by a berm). If needed, easements must be established to ensure maintenance of the utility.
4.6.4.5 Amenities: Every cluster development must include at least one recreational amenity within the open space area, such as but not limited to a walking trail, playground, picnic area, ballfield, court, or gazebo. Amenities may be open to the general public and should serve the needs of the residents of the development (e.g. it is more sensible for a cluster development marketed toward older residents to have walking trails as opposed to ball fields).
4.6.4.6 Ownership and restriction of future development: common open space areas must be owned by the homeowners association for the development, the Town of Hampden, a land trust, or another similar organization that will provide permanent protection. In all cases, such protection must be enhanced by either a permanent deed restriction which includes language to require Planning Board approval for alteration or removal of the deed restriction or a conservation easement must be recorded and referenced on the plans and applicable deeds to prohibit future subdivision of the common open space and to prohibit any development other than accessory structures for permitted recreational uses, infrastructure elements, or maintenance facilities.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-17
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.6.4.7 Location: in so far as possible, the common open space areas should be contiguous within the development and should connect to open space on adjacent parcels. Small areas of fragmented open space will not be counted toward the open space requirement.
4.6.4.8 Maintenance: the developer is responsible for the maintenance of the common open space and any amenities or utilities within the open space until such time as a homeowners association or other entity is established and the maintenance responsibility is transferred to them.
4.6.4.9 Rules Governing Home-Owners Associations or Open Space Trusts - If a homeowners association or open space trust specifically and only for the development is formed, it shall be governed according to the following regulations:
1. The organization shall be formed by the developer and be operating, with financial subsidization by the developer if necessary, before the sale of any lots within the development.
2. Membership in the organization is mandatory for all purchasers of homes therein and their successors.
3. The organization shall be responsible for maintenance, insurance, and taxes for common open space and any improvements within the open space.
4. The members of the organization shall share equitably the cost of maintaining and developing common open space and property in accordance with procedures established by them.
5. The organization shall have or hire adequate staff to administer common facilities and maintain the common open space.
4.6.5. Tract Buffers
4.6.5.1 All cluster housing developments are required to provide a buffer along all tract boundaries per the table in §4.6.2.
4.6.5.2 Any existing vegetation which provides a dense buffer must be retained.
4.6.5.3 Any area of the required buffer area which has no existing buffering vegetation must be planted with trees or shrubs to provide a dense buffer, per the standards in §4.7.2.4.2.
4.6.5.4 Notwithstanding the above, roads and associated utilities (water or sewer lines, electric or communications cables, or other linear utilities) may be located within the tract buffer provided no portion of the physical improvement, easement, or right-of-way is located within 25 feet of the tract boundary and the encroachment area is minimized. The remaining buffer in these locations must have permanent dense vegetation, whether existing or planted or both. However, an entrance road may be located in any portion of the tract buffer when either the Hampden DPW or Maine DOT requires such a location for the intersection with the existing public road, from the intersection into the site to the shortest distance necessary to move the road out of the buffer. The intent of this provision is to allow flexibility to account for tract configuration and the location of natural features on the site.
4.6.5.5 The required buffer area must be protected from development and from removal of vegetation by deed restrictions covering the entire buffer area. For cluster developments with individual lots for single family homes, the deed for each lot that has buffer located on the lot must include such a restriction to prevent the property owner from removing buffer vegetation. In such cases, the required minimum lot size for individual lots per §4.6.2 must be outside of the buffer area. The Homeowner’s Association or equivalent is responsible for enforcement of these deed restrictions. The Town’s Code Enforcement Officer has the authority to enforce this requirement.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-18
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.6.5.6 Notwithstanding the above requirements, the Planning Board has the option, upon the written request of the applicant, to approve an alternative method (e.g. fence vs. dense vegetation) or to reduce the depth of the buffer up to a maximum of 50 percent of the requirement for a distance along the boundary up to a maximum of 20 percent of the total length of the perimeter buffer (i.e. the entire perimeter of the tract, not just the boundary line in question). The Board must make a finding that such a change in method or reduction in depth would result in a design that would provide some public benefit, such as but not limited to additional housing units targeted for moderate income households, or more land included in the common open space and specifically designated for trails within the buffer that will be built by the developer prior to issuance of the Certificate of Compliance, or an increase in the buffer depth in other locations of the proposed development adjacent to existing developed areas.
4.6.6. Private Road Cluster Housing Development When an applicant proposes a single family cluster housing development with individual lots that will have all roads and infrastructure privately owned and maintained, the following provisions apply.
4.6.6.1 The development must comply with the minimum Tract Requirements in §4.6.2 and no reductions to the buffer requirements per §4.6.5.6 are allowed.
4.6.6.2 The development must provide a minimum number of housing units of no less than 1 dwelling unit per acre in the Rural district, 2 dwelling units per acre in the Residential A district, and 3 dwelling units per acre in the Residential B and Town Center districts.
4.6.6.3 The following open space provisions are not applicable: §4.6.4.2, 4.6.4.3, and 4.6.4.4.
4.6.6.4 All roads, stormwater management facilities, sewer infrastructure, water supply infrastructure for both potable and fire suppression purposes, recreational amenities, and any other similar infrastructure must be owned and maintained in perpetuity by the developer, property owner, homeowners association, or their successors.
4.6.6.5 The development may be designed with individual lots that are less than required in §4.6.2 under Individual Lot Requirements, and with any amount of open space provided a minimum of 10% of the tract is designated as open space exclusive of the tract buffer.
4.6.6.6 Language stating the roads and other infrastructure within the cluster subdivision are to remain private in perpetuity must appear on the final subdivision plan to be recorded at the Registry of Deeds, in the deeds to parcels containing the infrastructure, and in the homeowners association documents.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-19
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.7 Design Standards
4.7.1 Off-street Parking, Loading, and Drive-through facilities
4.7.1.1 Number of parking spaces: No land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected, enlarged or used unless the requirements specified in the table below are met. Where the computation of required parking or loading spaces results in a fractional number, the result is to be rounded up when the fraction exceeds one-half. No required parking space shall serve more than one use, unless approved under §4.7.1.5.
Table of Parking Requirements
Use
Number of Required Spaces
Comments
Residential uses
2 per dwelling unit
accessory apartments are required to have 1 space.
Multi-family development may add a maximum of 0.25 space per unit for guest parking
Congregate care facility
1 per dwelling unit
Lodging or rooming house, hotel, motel, or inn
1 per room for let
any facility that includes a permanent residence for the owner or operator must also provide 2 spaces for that residence
Hospital or nursing home
.33 per bed
Medical office or clinic
1 per 200 sq. ft. GFA
Medical marijuana dispensary or methadone clinic
1 per 200 sq. ft. GFA plus .5 per employee
Daycare
.25 per child plus 1 per employee who does not reside on the premises
includes all types of day care establishments
Preschool
.33 per student
School, post-secondary or commercial
.5 per student
Place of worship
.33 per seat, or 1 per 150 sq. ft. GFA if no seats
for bench seating, 2 linear feet of bench equals 1 seat
Private Event Venue
.5 per person plus 1 per worker (direct employee or outside employee e.g. caterer, band) at maximum capacity of the venue as approved by the Planning Board
Retail sales
1 per 200 sq. ft. GFA
minimum 5 spaces
Office
1 per 250 sq. ft. GFA
Auto service
4 per service bay
for drive-through service, 2 spaces per service bay
Restaurant, bar, pub, or tavern
1 per 100 sq. ft. GFA plus 1 per 100 sq. ft. gross area used for outdoor dining
applies to all types of restaurants
Place of assembly
.33 per seat, or 1 per 150 sq. ft. GFA if no seats
for bench seating, 2 linear feet of bench equals 1 seat
Industrial
1 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
minimum 5 spaces
Warehouse
1 per 2,500 sq. ft. GFA
All other uses
To be determined by the permit granting authority based on similar uses or on applicant submitted data.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-20
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.7.1.2 Maximum number of spaces: The maximum number of spaces shall not exceed 110% of the number of spaces required by §4.7.1.1.
4.7.1.3 Where multiple uses exist on a single lot or within a single building, the parking requirement shall be computed for each use separately and added together. (For example, a motel with a restaurant would be required to provide parking for both the motel units and for seating capacity of the restaurant.)
4.7.1.4 A minimum of 50% of the required parking must be located on the same lot as the use which it serves, and any remaining required parking may be located on another lot provided the parking is within 500 feet of the use and a permanent parking easement is provided in favor of the use/building which requires said parking. For developments within the Town Center district, off-site parking may be public parking located either on-street or off-street.
4.7.1.5 Shared parking:
1. Within a single development: Within the Town Center district, developments with multiple uses may share spaces among the uses to the extent reasonable (e.g. parking demand times differ between uses), provided the permit granting authority finds there will be no detrimental impact on abutting properties and no projected increase in on-street parking in the immediate area of the subject development.
2. Between developments. Within the Town Center district, abutting properties (separate developments) may share off-street parking spaces, provided both property owners sign a cross-access/shared parking agreement and the permit granting authority finds there will be no detrimental impact on abutting properties not involved in the shared parking, and no projected increase in on-street parking in the immediate area of the subject properties will occur.
4.7.1.6 Parking area design and location.
1. Parking lot buffer area: All parking lots with five or more spaces must provide a class 1 buffer per §4.7.2 within a strip of land of a minimum width in accordance with the following:
Zone
Street
Side/Rear
Principal Building
BB, IA, I, I2
20’
10’ *
5’
B, BR, CS, INT, TC
10’
5’ *
3’
RA, R, S
10’
5’
NA
RB
10’
10’
5’
* Where abutting a residential district or use, double the distance.
2. Parking space size. Each parking space shall measure a minimum of 9 feet wide by 20 feet long exclusive of drives and maneuvering space. For angled parking, the length may be reduced according to industry standards.
3. Parking areas for five (5) or more cars shall be designed with enough maneuvering space so that vehicles need not back into a public way.
4. Width of Drive Aisles. For parking lots designed with 90 degree stalls (perpendicular parking), minimum of 24 feet. For parking lots designed with 60 degree stalls, minimum 16 feet, with one-way traffic flow. For parking lots designed with 45 degree stalls, minimum 12 feet, with one-way traffic flow. For parking lots designed with angle parking differing from these, the aisle width shall be the same as that for the next higher angle design.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-21
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
5. Parking lots should be designed with the drive aisles perpendicular to the building to enhance pedestrian access and safety.
6. Parking lots to serve newly constructed structures or additions shall be a level, uniform, dust free surface constructed of concrete, bituminous asphalt, brick or pavers, or other similar material. Parking lots to serve pre-existing (as of May 1, 2017) structures, including new or expanded uses within said structures, may be constructed of alternate materials such as hard packed dirt or gravel upon a finding by the Code Enforcement Officer that this method of construction will not affect public safety and is otherwise in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
7. Parking lots serving uses in the Rural district that will be used on an intermittent or seasonal basis may be laid out to utilize field areas without need to comply with the design requirements above, if the permit granting authority finds the proposal will serve the use without creating any negative impacts on abutting properties or public roads or stormwater management systems.
8. No parking area shall be illuminated in such a way that it causes glare for motorists, pedestrians, or neighboring premises, as specified in §4.7.3.
9. Parking Area Access. All parking areas shall have access to the street in conformance with the following design standards, and shall require approval from the Department of Public Works:
1. Width of the driveway shall be a minimum of 15 feet and a maximum of 24 feet;
2. Maximum grade of 12 percent, with the exception that within 40 feet of the intersection with the public way the grade shall not exceed 5 percent;
3. The apron area between the front property line and the public way must be paved with 3 inches of bituminous concrete (in two layers of 1 ½ inches each) over a minimum of 12 inches of compacted gravel, except when the permit granting authority approves a parking lot in the Rural district under item 7 above; and
4. Culverts or other drainage facilities to control storm water run-off within the public right-of-way shall be installed by the property owner at his/her own expense, after review and approval by the Director of the Department of Public Works.
10. Handicapped Parking. Any building or facility constructed as a place of public accommodation, a place of assembly, a place of employment or a dwelling unit which is designed to be handicapped accessible shall provide handicapped parking in accordance with the following standards:
1. Minimum number: one off-street handicapped parking space must be provided for every 25 off-street parking spaces required under §4.7.1.1.
2. Access aisle: a minimum five foot wide access aisle adjacent to the space, which may be shared by two handicapped parking spaces.
3. Location: All handicapped parking spaces must be located within the shortest barrier free accessible route to a handicapped accessible entrance to the building or facility.
11. Landscaping. Parking lots with 50 or more spaces must provide landscaped traffic islands to control traffic flow and define parking space rows, and must contain a minimum of one tree at least two-inch diameter at breast height per ten parking spaces, to be planted in landscaped islands of a minimum of 40 square feet per tree, or within 5 feet of the edge of the parking area.
4.7.1.7 Pre-existing parking lots. Notwithstanding the requirements above, a site development established prior to the adoption of this ordinance for which a change of use is proposed must meet the parking space requirements of §4.7.1.1 for the new use to the maximum practical extent as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, provided that at least 75 percent of the
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-22
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
required parking spaces are provided, either on-site and off-site. Determination of the number of parking spaces in parking lots where spaces are not delineated shall be based on the traditional usage of the parking lot.
4.7.1.8 Off-street Loading. Adequate loading facilities must be provided for all business, commercial, and industrial uses. Since there is significant variability among uses, the size and number of spaces should be proposed by the applicant but the permit granting authority reserves the right to require more if there is evidence to indicate the proposed facilities are inadequate. Not all businesses are required to provide loading facilities; those without specific need for shipping/receiving areas are not required to provide them. No loading space may be located within any setback or buffer area, and loading spaces must not be located where trucks will be required to back up in a public street.
4.7.1.9 Drive-through facilities. All businesses and restaurants with drive-through facilities are subject to the following standards.
1. Drive-through windows, ATMs, or other devices by which a customer may conduct business shall not be located in the street yard space or in front of the principal use building.
2. Drive-through businesses shall have direct access to principal arterials, minor arterials or major collectors as identified in the Federal Highway Functional Classification Map. Notwithstanding this requirement drive-through businesses may be an element of a group development which has direct access to said street types.
3. Drive-through business shall not be located within any building located in a Historic District that the Historic Preservation Commission determines is a “contributing structure”, nor shall they be located on a “historic landmark” or within a “historic site” as defined in the Hampden Historic Preservation Ordinance.
4. Extent. That portion of a site development that is solely related or dedicated to the drive-through lanes, windows, and roof structures covering the drive-through area shall not cover more than ten percent of the lot.
5. Driveway Curb Cuts. A drive-through business shall not be designed with multiple driveway curb cuts except as authorized by the Planning Board through site plan review. Two curb cuts may be considered where one serves as an entrance to the site development and one serves as an exit. Curb cuts shall be located such that neither the vehicles entering or exiting the site nor vehicles standing in a related off-site center turn lane would create conflicts with vehicles utilizing neighboring curb cuts.
6. Site to Accommodate Larger Vehicles. A drive-through business shall be designed to accommodate class A commercial delivery vehicles. The purpose of this provision is to provide adequate radius, lane widths and other design considerations so delivery vehicles entering the site can circle and leave the site without backup. This provision does not require drive through queues, windows and overhangs to be designed to accommodate class A vehicles for service direct to the vehicle.
7. Maneuvering space shall be provided in the rear or side yard.
8. The radius of drive through lanes shall be a minimum of forty-five (45) feet.
9. Drive-through vehicular queue requirements:
1. Each service window or ATM shall be considered as a separate activity which must meet the queue requirements of this section. However, where two or more windows are used in tandem, they shall be treated as one.
2. The design standard for a single space in a queue shall be 9 feet in width and 18 feet in length.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-23
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
3. Queue lanes shall be designed with a tandem bypass lane to allow vehicles to exit the queue and leave the site.
4. Queue lanes shall be designed to not interfere with ingress and egress to the site, vehicle maneuvering areas, or customer parking.
5. ATMs shall require five queueing spaces. Service windows and remote tellers shall require a minimum of eight queueing spaces.
6. A minimum of 180 feet total driveway stacking area must be provided between the entrance curb of the site development and any drive-through window or speaker device for fast-food establishments and other intensive uses as may be determined by the Planning Board.
7. Both the queuing lane and the drive-through window shall be at least 50 feet from any residentially zoned property, and for fast-food establishments, at least 100 feet from any residential dwelling (see §3.2.24).
8. The queue lane shall provide an area for two vehicles to wait just beyond the drive-through service window for services or products not immediately available. This area shall not be considered parking spaces but rather part of the drive-through queue. Notwithstanding this regulation if the location of this waiting area conflicts with Zoning District regulations or the Historic Preservation Ordinance the Planning Board may approve alternative locations for such spaces.
10. Site design and layout shall minimize impacts to traffic circulation on adjacent public streets; where impacts cannot be avoided, the applicant shall be required to mitigate such impacts by making improvements to public roadways, including but not limited to the addition of center/ turn lanes, breakdown lanes, widening, or other measures to mitigate unavoidable impacts to adjacent roadways. If an MDOT Traffic Permit is required for the drive-through use, the Town shall coordinate its traffic mitigation recommendations for the site development with MDOT at the MDOT Traffic Permit scoping meeting. However, securing an MDOT Traffic Permit shall not relieve applicants from demonstrating that the traffic and safety considerations found in this Ordinance are met.
11. Landscaping. Drive-through facilities shall be buffered with landscaping pursuant to §4.7.2, Buffers and Landscaping. Where abutting residential districts, such buffer must include a solid wall or fence of at least six feet in height.
12. Signs associated with a drive-through facility must comply with the provisions of §4.7.5, Signs.
13. All utilities associated with a drive-through facility must be entirely enclosed or buried.
4.7.2 Buffers and Landscaping
4.7.2.1 Purpose. The purpose of a buffer is to provide aesthetically acceptable visual and spatial separation between adjacent land uses, thereby enabling the juxtaposition of land uses of different types by minimizing negative impacts that a land use will impose on its neighbors. Landscaping on a site is meant to minimize the visual effect of the bulk and height of buildings, structures, parking areas, lights, and signs, as well as to minimize the impact of the use on natural resources.
4.7.2.2 Applicability. Whenever a non-residential or multi-family residential building is constructed or enlarged or such use is authorized or extended, a buffer designed to mitigate the impact of the more intense use on the abutting properties shall be provided in accordance with this §4.7.2. Where two or more classes of buffers are required, the stricter requirement shall apply.
4.7.2.3 Existing vegetation. When a property line where a buffer is required is wooded or has significant existing vegetation that will not be removed for the development, the permit granting authority may waive the buffer requirements. Where existing vegetation is located on the
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-24
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
abutting property, the permit granting authority may waive the requirement only upon receipt of a written statement from the abutting property owner waiving his/her right to have the required buffer installed as part of the development.
4.7.2.4 Classification of buffers.
1. Class I Buffer is either: 1) a hedge or buffer at least five feet wide consisting of densely planted shrubs or trees, at least four feet in height at the time of planting, and eventually reaching a mature height of at least six feet; or, 2) a wall or fence at least six feet in height, but not exceeding eight feet, which provides an effective visual barrier.
2. Class II Buffer is a buffer at least 25 feet wide of which a 10 foot width shall be vegetated with trees and/or shrubs (existing or planted) at least four feet in height at the time of planting, and eventually reaching a mature height of at least six feet.
3. Class III Buffer is a buffer at least 50 feet wide of which a 25 foot width shall be vegetated with trees and/or shrubs (existing or planted) at least four feet in height at the time of planting, and eventually reaching a mature height of at least six feet.
4.7.2.5 Location of Class I Buffers.
1. All off-street parking areas containing five or more spaces and all outdoor off-street loading areas must provide a buffer on each property line abutting any residential district or any public or private street or way.
2. Any non-residential use in a residential district must provide a buffer along each property line abutting a residential use.
3. Any commercial or industrial use must provide a buffer along each property line abutting a residential use or district.
4. Any drive-through facility must provide a buffer along any property line adjacent to any part of the drive-through portion of the site.
4.7.2.6 Location of Class II Buffers
1. Any use in a commercial or industrial district in excess of 5,000 square feet in floor area, or one acre in land development, must provide a buffer along each property line abutting a residential use or district, unless located in an industrial or business park where a perimeter buffer exists.
2. A buffer must be provided along the perimeter of an industrial or business park (front, side, and rear boundaries of the tract).
3. Any multi-family development of 50 units or more must provide a buffer along each property line abutting a residential use or district.
4.7.2.7 Location of Class III Buffers
1. Any multi-family development of 100 or more units must provide a buffer along each property line abutting a residential use or district.
2. Any non-residential or multi-family residential development in the Business B district must provide a buffer along any boundary line adjacent to a residential district.
4.7.2.8 Installation of buffer. An occupancy permit or certificate of compliance shall not be issued for the project until the required landscaping is complete or until a certified check for the amount of one hundred twenty-five (125%) percent of any unfinished work is accepted by the Town Manager.
4.7.2.9 Maintenance of buffers. All buffers required by this section or by condition of approval must be maintained to ensure the purpose of the buffer is sustained. If buffer vegetation dies off or is
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-25
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
otherwise removed to the extent where the buffer is no longer serving its intended function, the Code Enforcement Officer may find a violation of the approval exists.
4.7.3 Lighting
4.7.3.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide standards for the lighting of non-residential and multi-family residential developments so as to reduce traffic safety hazards and protect property values and the aesthetic appearance of the town.
4.7.3.2 Applicability and Standards. All non-residential and multi-family residential developments which are required to obtain site plan approval shall meet the following outdoor lighting standards:
1. The luminaries/lighting fixtures shall be a shoe box type or decorative in nature (with interior directional shields), with the architectural theme of the development. All luminaries/lighting fixtures must provide a total cutoff of all light at less than 76 degrees from vertical, except as provided below. The lighting source (lamp) must only be visible from below.
2. Reflectors of proper distribution shall be selected for maximum efficiency. Reflectors and shielding must minimize to the greatest extent practicable light spilling over to adjacent properties.
3. The luminaries/lighting fixtures must not exceed 35 feet in height, unless a greater height is shown by the applicant to result in a lesser impact on surrounding properties, roads, and sky glow. The luminaries/lighting fixtures for sidewalks or paths must not exceed 12 feet in height.
4. Where wall-pack type luminaries/lighting fixtures are utilized, the fixture must be equipped with a prismatic lens to reduce glare. Wall-pack lighting must be designed to a maximum cutoff of 70 degrees from vertical. The location of the wall-pack on the structure must not exceed 20 feet from the ground directly below the fixture.
5. All luminaries/lighting fixtures are restricted to a maximum footcandle level of 8.0 (initial), as measured directly below the fixture at grade.
6. Lighting fixture wiring must be installed underground.
7. All lighting on a non-residential site must be reduced in intensity by a minimum of 50% within one hour of closing, and remain at such reduced intensity until within one hour of opening.
4.7.4 Architectural design: In the Business B and Town Center districts, non-residential or multi-family residential buildings that are constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered must comply with the following standards:
4.7.4.1 Roof pitch: minimum pitch of 6 in 12, or a pitch consistent with adjacent structures, or for buildings with a footprint larger than 10,000 square feet the rooflines of the street façade(s) must have an appearance similar to that of a pitched roof.
4.7.4.2 Exterior siding: brick, masonry veneers, wood siding, wood shingles, aluminum or vinyl siding simulating a clapboard pattern, or hardboard siding. Where adjacent buildings are within 100 feet, siding material should be consistent with those existing buildings. Inconsistent architectural elements created by illumination, form or color are not permitted. For buildings with a footprint larger than 10,000 square feet, the street façade(s) must comply with this standard while other façades may use other siding materials.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-26
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.7.4.3 In order to evaluate consistency with these requirements, the site plan submission must include elevation drawings and illustrations to show how the above standards are met.
4.7.5 Signs. Signs provide vital information to the public, assist in the response and rescue of public safety and engender a sense of place. The following provisions shall apply to signs and billboards in all districts where permitted.
4.7.5.1 Off-Premises Signs - No off-premises signs shall be erected or maintained in the Town of Hampden except in conformity with 23 MRSA section. 1901-1925 the Maine Traveler Information Services Law. Off-premises official business directional signs may be located in the Town of Hampden in such locations and in such a manner as allowed under 23 MRSA sections 1901-1925 and under the rules and regulations of the State of Maine Department of Transportation. Provided, however, that off-premises official business directional signs for Use of a Residence for Business Purposes are prohibited. Authorization for official business directional signs shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer.
1. Exception for property identification numbers - Each residential premises is allowed a mailbox with the identification number of the property clearly marked on it. If the mail box is on the opposite side of the street of the house or if there is no mailbox, the premises is also allowed an MDOT approved sign post, or similar structure, with numbers that meet the standards of subparagraph a below. Such signs are also allowed on an adjacent parcel with written permission of the landowner.
1. All non residential uses must display the identification number of the property. The area required by the number is not included in the calculation of the total square footage of the sign.
2. Approved address numbers shall be placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm).
2. Exception for industrial subdivision entrance sign - In Planning Board approved Industrial Subdivisions a sign marking each public street entrance shall be permitted. Such signs shall be limited to 70 square feet per face and shall only contain the name of the subdivision, the name of the public subdivision’s street, and owner identification information. The sign may be located in the raised median of the entrance street provided that it is at least 20 feet from the nearest perpendicular traveled way and the sign itself creates no visual barrier from the ground up to a height of 6 feet.
3. Exception for industrial subdivision directory sign - In Planning Board approved Industrial Subdivisions a directory sign marking tenants in the subdivision located near each public street entrance shall be permitted. Such signs shall: be unlighted, be limited to 50 square feet per face, not exceed five feet in height, and shall only contain the name of subdivision, information about the subdivision’s management, and the name and address of each subdivision’s tenant. The sign may be located in the public right of way provided that it is at least 100 feet from the entrance and does not create a visual barrier to individual lot entrances.
4. In order to promote the use and enjoyment of the Waterfront Park and uses within the Waterfront district, such uses and businesses within said district shall be permitted to have signage located on Main Road North (Route 1A) in the vicinity of Marina Road subject to the following conditions:
1. One freestanding sign structure is permitted, on which all signage for the Waterfront district shall be installed.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-27
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
2. The signage may be double-faced, and the cumulative area shall not exceed 50 square feet per side, exclusive of the sign structure.
3. Each individual sign for a non-municipal entity shall not exceed 15 square feet in area (per side for a double faced sign).
4. The maximum height of the sign shall not exceed 15 feet in height from the ground level under the sign.
5. Lighting of the sign shall only be by an externally located steady stationary white light source, shielded and directed solely at the sign.
6. If located on private property, the owner of the property must have given permission in writing to allow the installation of the sign.
7. Authorization for placement of a sign under this section shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer.
4.7.5.2 On-Premises Signs - All on-premises signs shall be located and erected in conformity with State Law (23 MRSA sections 1901-1925). In addition the following regulations apply:
1. Visual obstruction - No sign shall be erected adjacent to any public way in such a manner as to obstruct clear and free vision or where, by reason of its position, shape, color, illumination, or wording, the sign may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, or device or otherwise constitute a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
2. Sign Illumination – Sign illumination is permitted in all districts, except on properties used for residential purposes, as long as it conforms to 4.7.5.2.1.
3. Visual distraction - Flashing, moving, or animated signs are prohibited.
4. Height limit - No sign shall exceed twenty-five (25') feet in height.
5. Size limit - No sign shall exceed the maximum sign size for the district in which the sign is placed. Freestanding signs are sized of the basis of one sign face. Except that signs located on-premises but greater than fifty (50') feet from a building and visible from Interstate 95 shall be limited to one sign and shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area or the maximum sign size allowed in the district, whichever is less. Such signs, visible from Interstate 95, shall have no panel dimension greater than twenty (20') feet.
6. Neighborhood nuisance - No sign shall be maintained in a manner in which the operation or illumination thereof may cause nuisance or undue distraction to nearby residents or occupants.
7. Roof signs - Roof signs shall not extend more than ten (10') feet above the roofline.
8. Changeable Signs – Are Permitted in all districts, except on properties used for residential purposes.
1. “Changeable Sign” means an on-premises sign created, designed, manufactured or modified in such a way that its message may be electronically, digitally, or mechanically altered by the complete substitution or replacement of one display by another on each side.
2. “Display” means that portion of the surface area of a changeable sign that is or is designed to be or is capable of being periodically altered for the purpose of conveying a message.
3. “Message” means a communication conveyed by means of a visual display of text, a graphic element or pictorial or photographic image.
4. “Sign Assembly” means the display, border, trim and all supporting apparatus including posts, columns, pedestals and foundation.
5. “Time and Temperature Sign” mean a changeable sign that electronically or mechanically displays the time and temperature by the complete substitution or replacement of a display showing the time with a display showing the temperature.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-28
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
6. The display on each side of a changeable sign:
a. May be changed no more than once every 10 seconds;
b. Must change as rapidly as technologically practicable, with no phasing, rolling, scrolling, flashing, display continuous streaming of information, video animation or blending;
c. May consist of alphabetic or numeric text on a plain or colored background and may include graphic, pictorial or photographic images.
4.7.5.3 Permitted Signs Not Requiring a Permit – The following on-premises signs shall be permitted in all districts without a permit:
1. Real estate signs - The following signs relating to the sale, rental or lease of a premises may be displayed on the premises of a premises which is available for sale, rent or lease.
1. A single freestanding sign, not over five (5) square feet in area.
2. A single wall sign not over three (3) square feet in area.
3. All such signs shall be removed when PURPOSE IS FULFILLED.
2. Posting signs - Signs relating to trespassing and hunting.
3. Residential identification signs - A single sign denoting the name and/or address of the occupants of residential premises, such sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area. Or one sign naming the premises where located. Such sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet if it is a wall sign, or four (4) square feet if it is a freestanding sign. (Examples: Twin Oaks, Fox Fire, Kinsley House, etc.).
4. Tradesman signs - A single sign, placed on the premises where construction, repair, or renovation is in progress, which denotes the architect, engineer, contractor, and/or funding source for the work in progress. Such sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) sq.ft. in area and shall be removed when the work is completed. Federal and state government-mandated signs are exempt.
5. Traffic signs - Signs providing traffic and directional information to the public.
6. Customary Home Occupation or Home Based Contractor sign - In place of the sign allowed in §4.7.5.3.3 above, approved customary home occupations or home based contractors may display a single sign, not over four (4) sq.ft. in area, relating to the business.
7. For sale signs - In addition to the sign allowed in §4.7.5.3.3 above, residential users may display a single temporary sign, not over four (4) sq.ft. in area, relating to goods or services for sale on the premises, if such sale does not constitute either a business, a customary home occupation, a home based contractor, or a yard sale. Examples of sales falling under this provision are the sale of a used vehicle, the sale of a used appliance, or other occasional sales.
8. Temporary event signs - Temporary signs announcing public and semi-public occasional events, etc. Such signs shall be displayed not more than two (2) weeks before the event and shall be removed within one (1) week after the event. Signs established more than two weeks prior to the announced event shall be deemed unlawful and are subject to removal under §4.7.5.10.2.
9. Political Signs – Signs bearing political messages relating to an election, primary or referendum may be placed per 23 MRSA §1913-A and Maine DOT Department Regulations.
10. Personal Sign – Signs bearing political, religious, ideological or personal messages by the owner(s) or occupant(s) of a property, limited in size to a maximum surface area of 50 square feet.
11. Prohibited Practices – Signs allowed by this §4.7.5.3 shall be subject to the following:
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-29
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
1. Shall not be erected or maintained on any traffic control signs or devices, public utility poles or fixtures, upon any trees or painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural features;
2. No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device, such as a stop sign;
3. Political signs may be displayed to view to all public ways except that such signs may not be erected within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the Interstate Highway System in such a manner that the message may be read from the Interstate Highway. No political sign may be located at the interstate interchanges.
4.7.5.4 Permitted Signs With a Permit - The following on-premises signs shall be permitted in all districts with a permit:
1. Housing project sign - A single sign not over thirty-two (32) sq.ft. describing a multi-family housing project or a subdivision.
2. Subdivision sign - A single sign not over thirty-two (32) sq.ft. describing a subdivision.
3. Non-residential principal building or use sign - A single sign not over sixteen (16) sq. ft. describing a non-residential principal building or use on the premises.
4.7.5.5 Signs in the Rural District - In the Rural District the following on-premises signs shall be considered accessory to the principal use of the premises on which they are located:
1. Farm product signs - A maximum of two (2) signs describing farm products raised or produced on the premises. The maximum sign size shall not exceed sixteen (16) sq.ft.
2. Customary home occupation – A maximum of one sign of a maximum size of 12 square feet. The sign may be illuminated by external source only. The sign must be freestanding, pole mounted, or mounted on the wall of a building.
4.7.5.6 Signs In Residential Districts - In the Residential A and Residential B Districts the following on-premises signs shall be considered accessory to the principal use of the premises on which they are located:
1. Housing project or subdivision sign - A maximum of two (2) signs whose combined area shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet, describing a multi-family housing project or a subdivision on the premises.
2. Non-residential sign - A maximum of two (2) signs whose combined area shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet, describing a non-residential principal building of less than 5,000 square feet gross floor area or use on the premises.
3. Non-residential sign for larger site developments - A maximum of one sign located at each street entrance whose area shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet and describing a non-residential principal building or buildings in excess of 5,000 square feet gross floor area or use. Additional signage shall be permitted on the interior of such site developments provided that each individual sign has a maximum size of sixteen (16) square feet and is set back a minimum of 30 feet from all property lines.
4. Prohibited signs - Notwithstanding the provisions of this section roof signs and internally illuminated signs are prohibited in the residential districts.
5. Scoreboards - Notwithstanding the provisions of this section scoreboards are permitted in the residential districts and are not subject to the preceding regulations including size. The content of a scoreboard shall be generally limited to the score, period, time, and other information pertinent to the sporting activity, the name of the school and team. Scoreboards may contain limited product advertising provided it is not back-lighted and is limited to 10 sq. ft.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-30
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
6. Use of Residence for Business Purposes: Signs for Customary Home Occupations or Home Based Contractors are permitted under §4.7.5.3.6. Signs are not permitted for Home Businesses.
4.7.5.7 Signs in the Commercial Districts
1. Signs in the Business District and Rural Business District - Two (2) of the following on-premises sign options identifying on-premises business names, uses or goods sold or services rendered shall be allowed for uses in the Business District and the Rural Business District:
1. One (1) freestanding sign, not to exceed thirty-six (36) square feet.
2. Wall signs not to exceed one and one-half (1-1/2) square feet of area for every running foot of building frontage. The aggregate area of all wall signs on the premises shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
3. One (1) projecting or roof sign not to exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in area.
2. Signs in the Business B District - Two (2) of the following on-premises sign options identifying on-premises business names, uses or goods sold or services rendered shall be allowed for uses in the Business B District provided total signage does not exceed 250 square feet in area.
1. One (1) freestanding sign, not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in area.
2. Wall signs not to exceed two square feet of area for every running foot of building frontage. The aggregate area of all wall signs on the premises shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
3. Projecting signs not to exceed (25) square feet in area.
3. Signs in the Commercial Service District - The following on-premises signs, identifying on-premises business names, uses or goods sold or services rendered shall be allowed for uses in the Commercial-Service District:
1. One (1) freestanding sign, not to exceed thirty-six (36) square feet.
2. Wall signs not to exceed two (2) square feet of area for every running foot of building frontage. The aggregate area of all wall signs on the premises shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
3. One (1) projecting, or roof sign not to exceed seventy-two (72) square feet in area.
4. Industrial Parks, as defined, may erect one industrial park sign per entrance. Such sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet.
4. Signs in the Interchange District - The following on-premises signs, identifying on-premises business names, uses or goods sold or services rendered, shall be allowed for uses in the Interchange District:
1. One (1) freestanding, projecting, or roof sign not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area.
2. Wall signs not to exceed four (4) square feet of area for every running foot of building frontage. The aggregate area of all wall signs on the premises shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet.
3. Industrial parks, as defined, may erect one (1) industrial park sign per entrance. Such sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet.
5. Signs in the Town Center District - Two (2) of the following on-premises sign options identifying on-premises business names, uses or goods sold or services rendered shall be allowed for uses in the Town Center District provided total signage does not exceed 30 square feet in area.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-31
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
1. One (1) freestanding sign not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area and fifteen (15') feet in height.
2. Wall signs not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in area.
3. Projecting signs not to exceed (12) square feet in area.
4. Prohibited signs - No roof signs shall be permitted in the Town Center District.
5. Shopping center signs - Shopping Center Signs shall be allowed in conformance with §4.7.5.7.7, provided the sign does not exceeds twenty (20’) feet in height.
6. Fuel sales - In addition to signs allowed under §4.7.5.7 of the Ordinance, uses selling gasoline or diesel fuel may display one on-premises sign not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area, advertising the price of said gasoline or diesel fuel.
7. Signs in shopping centers – In lieu of signs allowed under §4.7.5.7 of the Ordinance, Shopping centers, as defined, each tenant within the shopping center may have a projecting or roof sign (where permitted) not to exceed thirty-six (36) square feet. Additionally each tenant within the shopping center shall be allowed wall signs not to exceed thirty (30) square feet. Notwithstanding the foregoing limitation on wall signage the wall signs may be increased to fifty (50) sq. ft. if both the exterior wall of the tenant space is 50 feet or more from the street frontage and if that tenant has a floor area of at least 10,000 sq. ft. Shopping centers shall not have individual freestanding signs for each tenant, but instead shall have one common freestanding sign identifying the shopping center and the tenants therein. The overall size of the freestanding shopping center sign shall not exceed sixty (60) sq. ft. The shopping center freestanding sign may include a place name for the shopping center located at the top of the sign not to exceed twelve (12) sq. ft. in area and shall include tenant identification not to exceed forty-eight (48) sq. ft. in area. No one tenant’s sign content shall exceed twenty-four (24) sq. ft. of the shopping center sign’s area and shall not be less than six (6) sq. ft. unless the space demands on the sign requires it. The tenant area of the shopping center sign may either be utilized by identifying the name of the tenant’s premises (such as Smith’s Pet Shop) or by categorically identifying what the tenant’s use is (such as bakery or florist). Additional signage shall be permitted on the interior of such shopping centers to provide building identification and serve on- site pedestrian and vehicular movements provided that each individual sign has a maximum size of sixteen (16) square feet and is set back a minimum of 20 feet from all property lines.
4.7.5.8 Signs in the Industrial Districts – The following on-premises signs, identifying on-premises business or industrial uses, shall be allowed on conforming uses in the Industrial District, the Industrial Park District, and the Industrial 2 District:
1. One freestanding, projecting or roof sign not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area;
2. Wall signs, not to exceed four (4) square feet of area for every running foot of building frontage. The aggregate area of all wall signs on the premises shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet;
3. Industrial Parks, as defined, may erect one Industrial Park sign per entrance. Such sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet.
4.7.5.9 Maintenance of Signs - All signs shall be properly maintained and kept. Any sign which advertises a business, product, activity, or campaign which is no longer operative or extant shall be removed by the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the structure or lot upon which such sign may be found, within ten (10) days after written notification from the town manager or Code Enforcement Officer. Upon failure to comply with such notice, the Code Enforcement Officer or Town Manager is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building or lot to which the sign is attached.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-32
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.7.5.10 Removal of Unlawful Signs
1. Removal of Unlawful On-premise Signs.
1. Notice to remove - The owner of a sign which was or is unlawfully erected or maintained either prior to or after the effective date of this ordinance shall be in violation of this ordinance until the sign is removed. The owner of the sign shall remove the sign within 30 days of receipt of a notice to remove, sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, by the Code Enforcement Officer. If the identity of such owner is not known or reasonably ascertainable by the Code Enforcement Officer, such notice may instead be sent to the owner of the land on which the sign is placed.
2. Code Enforcement Officer to remove sign - If the owner fails to remove the sign as required, the Code Enforcement Officer shall remove the sign at the expense of the owner without any further notice or proceeding and may recover the expense of this removal from the owner. All removed signs shall be held at the Transfer Station for a period of 30 days before they are disposed of.
3. Procedure for notice, hearing, appeal. The procedure for notice, hearing and appeal is as follows.
a. The Code Enforcement Officer shall send to the sign owner notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, that a sign is to be removed. Such notice shall be a final order if not appealed under §4.7.5.10.1.3.b. If the identity of such owner is not known or reasonably ascertainable by the Code Enforcement Officer, such notice may instead be sent to the owner of the land on which the sign is placed.
b. The person owning or controlling the sign may, within 30 days of his receipt of the notice to remove, appeal the order of removal to the Board of Appeals pursuant to Article 6 of this ordinance. All appeals shall be subject to the provisions of the Town of Hampden Board of Appeals Ordinance including but not limited to filing deadlines, application requirements, fees, appeal procedures, decisions of the Board of Appeals and subsequent appeals to Superior Court.
2. Removal of Unlawful Off-premise Signs.
1. Notice to remove- Because of the difficulty to identify those individuals that own, erect or established off-premise signs the Code Enforcement Officer shall contact the subject of the sign or their local representatives. The subject of the sign or their local representative shall remove the sign within 48 hours of receipt of a notice to remove, sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, by the Code Enforcement Officer. If the identity of such owner is not known or reasonably ascertainable by the Code Enforcement Officer, such notice may instead be sent to the owner of the land on which the sign is placed.
2. Code Enforcement Officer to remove sign - If the owner fails to remove the sign as required, the Code Enforcement Officer shall remove the sign at the expense of the owner without any further notice or proceeding and may recover the expense of this removal from the owner. All removed signs shall be held at the Transfer Station for a period of 30 days before they are disposed of.
3. Removal of signs from Right of Ways. Notwithstanding the notice to remove provisions of this Article the Code Enforcement Officer, Public Works Director and Public Safety Director shall have the authority to immediately remove signs located in public right-of-ways that are deemed to constitute a traffic hazard or impede snow removal. In such cases notification of the removal of the sign may be after the fact. Notice of removal shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, by the Code Enforcement Officer. All removed
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-33
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
signs shall be held at the Transfer Station for a period of 30 days before they are disposed of.
4.7.6 Stormwater Management. Any development required to obtain approval under site plan review that proposes a cumulative land disturbance of greater than 20,000 square feet and less than one acre (43,560 square feet) must comply with the DEP Chapter 500 water quality requirements and provide post-development runoff locations and types that result in the same or less of an impact as those existing in the predevelopment condition. Post-development discharge points from a property shall be in the same general location and be of the same type (e.g. sheet flow, shallow concentrated flow) as the pre-development discharge locations and types or create an improvement to existing conditions. The applicant shall provide the analysis, certified by a Maine registered professional engineer, necessary to document compliance. The permitting authority may authorize the use of stormwater drainage facilities located off site on privately owned land provided the applicant has obtained the right to use them and the powers necessary to ensure they will be properly maintained in good working order.
4.7.7 Flexibility in design standards. Any of the requirements set forth in any of the sections in section 4.7 (except §4.7.1.6.10, Handicapped Parking which cannot be waived), may be eased upon the granting of a waiver by the permit granting authority. To grant a waiver, the permit granting authority must find that the applicant has submitted sufficient evidence to show that the granting of the waiver will not produce an unreasonably detrimental change in the character of the neighborhood, will not unreasonably detrimentally affect the use of surrounding properties, and that the requested waiver is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner. The permit granting authority will consider the impact of the requested waiver(s) on public safety, public health, and the minimization of nuisances in making its decision.
4.8 Signs – Section renumbered to 4.7.5 effective July 18, 2018
4.9 Filling and Grading of Land and Stockpiling of Materials These provisions shall apply retroactively to all applications received after May 14, 2007.
4.9.1 Purpose This section is intended to apply to two general categories of earth moving activities: 1) the preparation of land for development and construction activities through filling and grading and 2) stock piles of materials for use in construction and site development activities or for use in industrial activities. These activities, if not properly engineered and constructed can result in uncontrolled erosion and sedimentation and in land unstable for development. These provisions shall apply to filling, grading, lagooning, dredging, excavation, processing and storage of soil, earth, loam, sand, gravel, rock and other mineral deposits. Filling, grading, lagooning, dredging and other earth-moving activity which would result in erosion, sedimentation, or impairment of water quality or fish and aquatic life is prohibited. These provisions are not intended to supersede any review of earth-moving activity conducted by state or federal agencies. Activities such as excavation, gravel pit and quarry are governed in §4.23 Excavations, Pits And Quarries.
4.9.2 Earth Moving Permit Required - All earth moving activities, processing and storage within the Town of Hampden shall require an earth moving permit in accordance with this section.
EXCEPTIONS: The following earthmoving activities do not require an earth moving permit:
1. Earth-moving activity conducted during construction of Planning Board approved subdivisions, or site plans,
2. Earth moving activity conducted during the construction of structures authorized by a building permit or subsurface wastewater disposal permit.
3. The removal or filling of less than two hundred (200) cubic yards of material from or onto any lot in any one year provided such removal or fill does not:
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-34
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
a. Disturb more than 10,000 sq. ft. of land area,
b. Change the existing topography by more than three feet,
c. Redirect the natural flow of stormwater toward or impound stormwater upon a neighboring property,
d. Place fill in wetlands or
e. Place fill in FEMA mapped 100 year flood plain.
4. Earthmoving associated with construction of public utilities projects and street and highway projects except for placement of excess fill related to the project.
4.9.2.1 Erosion and Sedimentation Control. All earth moving activities, including filling and grading activities and stockpiling activities shall utilize erosion and sedimentation control measures in accordance with Maine Department of Environmental Protection’s publication entitled “Erosion and Sediment Control Best Management Practices”. (This document is available online at www.hampdenmaine.gov and a printed copy is available for purchase from the Code Enforcement Office).
4.9.3 Earth Moving Permit Issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. Earth moving permits for activity in the Rural District may be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with this section. (Note: Urbanized areas such Hampden’s Residential and Commercial Districts are subject to state and federal regulations which require additional stormwater considerations that require Planning Board review and approval.)
4.9.3.1 Erosion and Sedimentation Control. All earth moving activities, including filling and grading activities and stockpiling activities shall utilize erosion and sedimentation control measures in accordance with Maine Department of Environmental Protection’s publication entitled “Erosion and Sediment Control Best Management Practices”. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be notified that erosion and sedimentation control devices are in place prior to commencing work authorized by any earth moving permit.
4.9.3.2 Earth Moving Permit Jurisdictional Review. Prior to issuing the required earth moving permit the Code Enforcement Officer must find that the activity does not: 1) remove or fill more than one thousand (1000) cubic yards of material from or onto any lot, 2) disturb more than 20,000 sq. ft. of land, 3) change existing topography by more than ten feet, 4) create side slopes in excess of 2:1, 5) redirect the natural flow of stormwater toward or impound stormwater upon a neighboring property, or 6) disturb or in any way impact wetlands. If the Code Enforcement Officer finds that the application exceeds his/her authority he/she shall refer the matter to the Planning Board for consideration in accordance with section 4.9.4. The Code Enforcement Officer also hereby has the authority to refer applications over which he/she has jurisdictional authority to the Planning Board if in his/her judgment the proposal represents a potential neighborhood concern.
4.9.3.3 Earth Moving Permit Application Requirements All applications for earth moving permits issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall include applicable fees in accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance and be accompanied by a plan, drawn to scale which shall show:
1. The name and current address of the owner of the property involved;
2. The location and boundaries of the lot or lots for which the permit is requested;
3. The location of all proposed access roads and, staging areas, disturbed areas topographic details and physical features such as streets and rock walls;
4. The proposed provisions for drainage and erosion control including a plan that shows the location of sediment barriers, water diversions, temporary stockpiles, constructed ditches and swales and culverts.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-35
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
5. The plan for stabilizing all disturbed soil following the earth-moving activity including details on loam and seed and other ground cover treatments;
6. Any other information the Code Enforcement Officer may deem necessary to carry out the intent of this section.
7. Copy of deed and subdivision plat plan if applicable (Note: This requirement is to determine if and where deeded drainage easements may be located on a land parcel).
4.9.3.4 Earth-Moving Permit Review Procedure - The code enforcement officer shall review the application and issue an earth-moving permit if the proposal will result in no erosion, sedimentation, drainage problems, or impairment of water quality or fish or aquatic life or habitat. In issuing such a permit he may impose any conditions as outlined in §4.9.5 or 4.9.6 which may be reasonably assumed to be necessary to prevent erosion, sedimentation, drainage problems, or impairment of water quality or fish or aquatic life or habitat. If the code enforcement officer denies a permit, the applicant may apply to the planning board under the provisions of §4.9.4 of this Ordinance.
4.9.4. Earth Moving Activity Requiring a Permit from the Planning Board – All earthmoving activities other than those addressed under §4.9.2, exceptions to a permit, and §4.9.3 Earthmoving Permit Issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall require approval from the Planning Board under these provisions. Application for an earth-moving permit from the planning board for excavation, processing and storage of soil, loam, sand, gravel rock and other mineral deposits shall include site plan review application fees and other applicable fees paid in accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance and be accompanied by a plan prepared by a registered professional engineer which shall show:
4.9.4.1 The name and current address of the owner of the property involved;
4.9.4.2 The location and boundaries of the lot or lots for which the permit is requested;
4.9.4.3 The existing contours of the land within and extending beyond the above boundaries for two hundred (200') feet of intervals not to exceed five (5') feet referred to mean sea level or, if the five (5') foot interval is inappropriate to the site, at intervals approved by the planning board;
4.9.4.4 The contours as proposed following completion of the operation at intervals not to exceed five (5') feet referred to mean sea level;
4.9.4.5 The location of all proposed access roads and temporary structures;
4.9.4.6 The proposed provisions for drainage and erosion control, including drainage plan prepared by a professional engineer; and
4.9.4.7 Other information necessary to indicate the physical characteristics of the proposed operation.
4.9.5. Conditions of an Earth-Moving Permit from the Planning Board - The planning board may approve an earth moving permit providing the following conditions shall be met:
4.9.5.1 The smallest amount of bare ground shall be exposed for the shortest time feasible. The planning board shall set a specific date after which bare ground shall not be exposed.
4.9.5.2 Temporary ground cover such as mulch shall be used. The planning board shall set a specific date by which permanent ground cover shall be planted.
4.9.5.3 Diversions, silting basins, terraces and other methods to trap sediment shall be used.
4.9.5.4 Lagooning shall be conducted in such a manner as to avoid creation of fish trap conditions. The applicant shall submit written approval from the Department of Marine Resources and Fisheries or Inland Fisheries and Game, as applicable, prior to consideration by the planning board.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-36
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.9.5.5 The extent and type of fill shall be appropriate to the use intended. The applicant shall specify the type and amount of fill to be used.
4.9.5.6 Fill shall not restrict a floodway, channel or natural drainage-way.
4.9.5.7 The sides and bottom of cuts, fills, channels, and artificial watercourses shall be constructed and stabilized to prevent erosion or failure. Such structures are to be designed and built according to the Maine Soil and Water Conservation Commission; "Technical Guide, Standards and Specifications."
4.9.5.8 Topsoil or loam shall be restored to a depth of not less than three (3") inches and seeded.
4.9.6. Optional Conditions of an Earth-Moving Permit from the Planning Board - The planning board may impose other reasonable conditions to safeguard the neighborhood and the Town of Hampden which may include those relating to:
4.9.6.1 Methods of removal or processing
4.9.6.2 Hours of operations
4.9.6.3 Type and location of temporary structures
4.9.6.4 Routes of transporting material
4.9.6.5 Area and depth of excavations
4.9.6.6 Provision of temporary or permanent drainage
4.9.6.7 Disposition of stumps, brush and boulders, and
4.9.6.8 Cleaning, repair and/or resurfacing of streets used in earth-moving activity which have been adversely affected by said activity.
4.9.7. Performance Guarantees. The Planning Board may require a bond payable to the Town with sureties satisfactory to the Town Manager or such other security as the Town Manager may determine adequately secures compliance with this ordinance, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the requirements set forth in this ordinance. In determining if a bond is necessary the Planning Board shall review the magnitude of the proposed activity to determine: what level of effort necessary to either complete or remove an unfinished project, what environmental impact would the proposed disturbed earth pose, and consider what is the financial capacity of the applicant to complete the project. Other security may include a security deposit with the Town, an escrow account and agreement, insurance or an irrevocable trust. In determining the amount of the bond or the security, the Town Manager shall take into consideration the character and nature of the overburden, the future suitable use of the land involved and the cost of grading and reclamation required. All proceeds of forfeited bonds or other security must be expended by the Town for the reclamation of the area for which the bond was posted and any remainder returned to the operator. Assurance may include the following:
4.9.7.1 Performance standards relating to operation or maintenance plans;
4.9.7.2 Performance standards for determining the reclamation period including annual revisions of those plans;
4.9.7.3 Limits, terms and conditions on bonds or other security;
4.9.7.4 Proof of financial responsibility of a person engaged in excavation activity or the affiliated person who guarantees performance;
4.9.7.5 Estimation of reclamation costs; and
4.9.7.6 Reports on reclamation activities; or the manner of determining when the bond or other security may be discharged.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-37
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.9.7.7 The applicant shall grant and record a limited easement to provide the Town and/or a third party the right to enter the subject property and engage in construction activities therein for the purpose of completing reclamation of the property in the event that the performance guarantee must be utilized.
4.9.8. Existing Operations - Any existing earth moving operation subject to this section in lawful operation on January 16, 2008 (the effective date of this amendment) may operate for a period of one year from the effective date. Continuance of any existing operation for more than one year shall require a permit from the planning board.
Exceptions: Notwithstanding the one year regulation any currently permitted excavation, pit or quarry approved under (former) §4.9.4 Application for an Earth-moving Permit from the Planning Board approved prior to the effective date of this amendment (1-16-2008) may operate for the period established in the Planning Board approval. Also notwithstanding the one year regulation existing, lawfully established stockpile operations as of the effective date of this amendment (1-16-2008) may continue to operate and do not require site plan review or an earthmoving permit from the Planning Board. However expansion or relocation of the stockpile operation to a new area would require an earthmoving permit and site plan review.
4.9.9. Stockpiles - Any stockpile not accessory to excavation, gravel pit and quarry operation, and not associated with construction activities otherwise approved by the Planning Board and/or permitted by building permit shall be regulated under the following standards:
4.9.9.1 Earthmoving Permit Required. All proposed stockpiles shall require an earthmoving permit. The Planning Board may authorize a permanent earthmoving permit for a proposed permanent stockpile operation.
4.9.9.2 Site Plan Review Required. All stockpiles must be shown on a site plan approved by the Planning Board.
4.9.9.3 Limits of the Stockpile to be Marked. The limits of the stockpile must be clearly marked in a manner acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer including but not limited to bollards or offsets from buildings or other structures on the property to establish the maximum extent of the pile.
4.9.9.4 Best Management Practices to be Adhered To. All stockpiles must comply with Best Management Practices. Cleaning, repair and/or resurfacing of streets shall be required for any street upon which stockpile activity has been found by the Public Works Director to adversely impacted a street in the Town of Hampden.
4.9.9.5 Total Stockpile Size. Total gross stockpile footprint shall be less than 1 acre unless otherwise authorized in §4.9.10.
4.9.9.6 Maximum Extent. Total gross stockpile footprint must not exceed 20 percent of the lot area of the subject parcel unless otherwise authorized in §4.9.10.
4.9.9.7 Setbacks. No portion of the stockpile or any drainage device related to the stockpile shall be placed in a building setback required for front, side or rear yard setback within the zoning district where the stockpile is proposed to be located.
4.9.9.8 Shielding is Required. Appropriate shielding of the stockpile activity from roads and neighboring properties shall be required.
4.9.9.9 Approved Materials for Stockpiles. All applications for stockpiles shall include information on the materials proposed to be stockpiled. Stockpiles shall be comprised of materials that are earth, stone, sand, inert fill, grindings or other materials approved by the Planning Board after finding that storage of such materials poses no unreasonable environmental threat.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-38
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.9.9.10 Reclamation of Stockpile Area. All operators and or owners of existing and proposed stockpile areas upon discontinuation and removal of the stockpile shall be required to restore affected areas to a condition that is environmentally sound and sustainable in accordance with Best Management Practices.
4.9.9.11 The Planning Board shall consider the proposed duration of a proposed stockpile and its visual impact on neighboring properties when determining how such a stockpile is to be sited and shielded. The Board shall have the authority to require additional setbacks and natural buffer strips for operations that shall be conducted for more than one year.
4.9.10 Stockpiles in Excess of One Acre. In addition to the foregoing requirements stockpiles in excess of one acre or in excess of 20 percent extent shall also be regulated by the following provisions.
4.9.10.1 Existing Stockpile Operations in Old Pits and Excavations. Operators and owners of existing stockpile operations currently located within otherwise inactive existing old pits or excavations shall be required to comply with the applicable provisions of §4.23 which require excavations to be reclaimed. Nothing within §4.9 shall relieve the owner of an excavation from restoring affected areas to a condition that is environmentally sound and sustainable in significant un-reclaimed, un-used, inactive areas of the existing old pits or excavations.
4.9.10.2 Landscaping. All proposed stockpiles in excess of one acre or 20 percent extent shall be screened with native plants from view of abutting properties, to the maximum extent practicable. The intent is to site such facilities in an existing stand of mature wooded land. This wooded area must surround the stockpile in all directions for a radius of at least 50 feet from the edge of the proposed development. The site shall be preserved as follows: Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is permitted provided that a well distributed stand of trees and other vegetation is maintained. Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than forty (40%) percent of the total volume of trees four (4") inches or more diameter, DBH may be removed in any ten (10) year period.
4.10 Use of Residence for Business Purposes. There are three categories of businesses (including professions and trades) that may be conducted in or at a residence (dwelling) as an accessory use: a home business, a customary home occupation, and a home based contractor.
4.10.1 Home Business — A business, profession, or trade which is conducted by a resident of the premises entirely within the residence or an accessory building, and does not involve more than occasional business vehicular traffic to the property. Examples include but are not limited to artists, desktop publishers, software developers, craftsmen, contractors who only operate an office at the home, and people who work at home and conduct business by mail or electronic communication (including employees who telecommute). Home businesses are subject to the provisions of §4.10.4 and §4.10.5 below.
4.10.2 Customary Home Occupation — A business, profession, or trade which is conducted by a resident of the premises entirely within the residence or an accessory building, and involves an increase in traffic for clients, customers, patients, associates, or employees. Examples include but are not limited to lawyers, accountants, beauticians, professional consultants (such as mental health, design, and real estate), and small retail businesses not exceeding 300 square feet GFA. Customary Home Occupations are subject to the provisions of sections 4.10.4 and 4.10.6 below.
4.10.3 Home Based Contractor — A business which is conducted by a resident of the premises accessory to a residential use, but not entirely enclosed within the residence or one or more accessory buildings. Examples include but are not limited to building, plumbing, electrical, cabinetry, landscaping, and other similar contractors who perform their work off-site but use the residence as a base of operations including an office and small scale storage of equipment and materials. This category is meant to serve the needs of small businesses with limited space needs, with the expectation that once the business has
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-39
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
grown to a larger size (e.g. increase in vehicles above that allowed in §4.10.23) it will be moved to a more appropriate location in a commercial or industrial district. Home Based Contractors are subject to the provisions of sections 4.10.4 and 4.10.7 below.
4.10.4 General Requirements.
4.10.4.1 The activity must be operated by residents of the dwelling unit.
4.10.4.2 The activity must be clearly incidental and secondary to the primary use of the premises as a residence.
4.10.4.3 There shall be no window displays or other features not normally associated with residential use.
4.10.4.4 If carried on within the principal residential structure, the activity shall not occupy more than thirty (30%) percent of the floor area. If carried on within an accessory structure the total floor area dedicated to the business use shall not exceed fifty (50%) percent of the total finished floor area of the principal residential structure. Notwithstanding these limits, for properties in the Rural district the activity may occupy up to 2,000 square feet of the dwelling unit and any accessory structure combined.
4.10.4.5 The activity shall not cause sound, noise, odors, dust, gas, fumes, smoke, light or other dangerous emissions discernable or detectable from beyond the property line of the subject property, beyond that which is normally associated with residential use. In addition, no business activity shall be allowed which creates a fire hazard to the premises or neighboring premises or which creates electrical interference such that it causes visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed business activity will not interfere with the peaceful use and enjoyment of residential properties located in the area of the proposed use.
4.10.4.6 A permit shall be granted to the property owner or applicant; however in cases where a Customary Home Occupation or a Home Based Contractor business is the subject of the application, the Planning Board shall have the option to set a condition allowing the permit to be granted to the property (i.e. “run with the land”) when the Planning Board finds that the continuation of the use after the transfer of property ownership, and without further permitting, will comply with the requirements in Sec. 4.10.4 of this ordinance.
4.10.4.7 Approved permits shall be recorded at the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds within 30 days of issuance or prior to any related building permit being issued.
4.10.5 Home businesses are permitted in all zoning districts without need for a conditional use permit, but must conform to the following provisions in addition to those listed in section 4.10.4 above:
4.10.5.1 The business must be conducted entirely within the residence or an accessory building.
4.10.5.2 The activity must not change the character of the premises or surrounding neighborhood.
4.10.5.3 No non-resident employees are permitted on site.
4.10.5.4 There shall be no exterior display of products, no exterior storage of materials or equipment used solely for the business, no exterior parking of business vehicles or equipment, and no other variation from the residential character of the premises. This section shall not prohibit the exterior parking of personal vehicles or equipment (not used for the business).
4.10.5.5 The business shall not generate traffic that is inconsistent with the traffic associated with a residential use, either in quantity or type.
4.10.6 Customary Home Occupations are permitted in all zoning districts by conditional use permit, if in compliance with the following provisions in addition to those listed in section 4.10.4 above:
4.10.6.1 The business must be conducted entirely within the residence or an accessory building.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-40
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.10.6.2 Not more than one non-resident person shall be employed in the business at the site.
4.10.6.3 There shall be no exterior display of products except in the Rural district where up to 500 square feet may be used to display products for sale, no exterior storage of materials or equipment used solely for the business, no exterior parking of business vehicles or equipment, and no other variation from the residential character of the premises other than a sign in conformance with §4.8, Signs. This section shall not prohibit the exterior parking of personal vehicles or equipment (not used for the business).
4.10.6.4 No home occupation shall be approved or allowed to operate if it generates more than ten (10) customers/clients in any one day.
4.10.6.5 The business shall not necessitate more than three parking spaces for clients, customers, patients, non-resident employees, or other business related demands. Required parking must be accommodated off-street, and new parking areas must be screened from the view of abutters and from public ways (streets or pedestrian ways) utilizing vegetation, fencing, and/or topography. To the extent practical, parking areas should be located at the side or rear of the residence or accessory buildings.
4.10.6.6 No commercial vehicles in excess of 34,000 pounds gross vehicle weight (GVW) shall be used for the delivery of products, foods, or materials to and from the premises.
4.10.7 Home Based Contractors are permitted by conditional use permit, if in compliance with the following provisions in addition to those listed in section 4.10.4 above:
4.10.7.1 The parcel on which the business is operated is within one of the following districts: Rural, Rural Business, Business, Business B, Commercial Service, Interchange, or Industrial.
4.10.7.2 The parcel must be a minimum of two acres in size.
4.10.7.3 Not more than eight vehicles associated with the business (maximum of four construction equipment such as loader/backhoe, skidder, etc.) shall be parked at the site at any given time, including employee vehicles and construction vehicles, but excluding personal vehicles not typically used for the operation of the business.
4.10.7.4 The activities related to the business may be conducted in part outdoors, but all such activities, equipment, and storage shall be substantially and permanently screened from the view of abutters and from public ways by buffers such as vegetation, fences, and/or topography.
4.10.7.5 No more than 25% of the parcel, exclusive of areas covered by buildings, shall be used for business activities, including outdoor storage or parking.
4.10.7.6 The total square footage of buildings used for storage or garaging of vehicles or equipment associated with the business shall be no greater than 2,000 square feet. This shall not be construed to mean that a greater number of vehicles may be parked at the site than is permitted above.
4.10.7.7 The Planning Board shall take into consideration the road network serving the proposed business location in regard to safety of the residents of the vicinity and the types of vehicles to be used by the business, including delivery trucks, and the projected number of trips to and from the site each day.
4.10.8 Application Procedure
4.10.8.1 Applicants for a Home Business shall submit a request to the Land & Building Services office on the form provided, for review by the Code Enforcement Officer. If the he/she determines that the proposed business meets the criteria of this category, then he/she shall sign the form stating that the proposed home business does not require approval under sections 4.10.6 or 4.10.7 (i.e. a conditional use permit is not required).
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-41
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.10.8.2 Applicants for a Customary Home Occupation or a Home Based Contractor shall submit an application for a conditional use review to the Land & Building Services office.
4.10.8.3 Applicants shall demonstrate that they have adequate right, title and interest in a property in order to apply for a Home Business, Customary Home Occupation, or Home Based Contractor.
4.10.8.4 Conditions Necessary for Approval of Customary Home Occupation or Home Based Contractor. If in the judgment of the Planning Board additional improvements or safeguards are necessary in order to make a proposed business safe, sanitary or less intrusive in a neighborhood the Board may place conditions on the approval that further limit the operation of the business, provide for screening or buffers, or improve traffic safety.
4.10.9 Previously Approved Home Occupations
4.10.9.1 If additions or alterations have been constructed or are proposed for construction to residences or accessory buildings, which in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer significantly alter a Planning Board approved Use of a Residence for Business Purposes, the Code Enforcement Officer shall require that the owner of the business seek a new permit from the Planning Board. In order to determine if the alterations or additions alter the approved business the Code Enforcement Officer shall review the municipal documents on file including the minutes of the Board meeting at which the Use of a Residence for Business Purposes was approved.
4.11 Sanitary Provisions
4.11.1 Sewage Disposal
4.11.1.1 All plumbing facilities in the Town of Hampden and all sewage disposal systems shall be installed and operated in compliance with the municipal sewer ordinance.
4.11.1.2 Plumbing and sewage disposal systems shall be installed only after a plumbing permit has been obtained.
4.11.2 Solid Waste Handling and Disposal Sites or Facilities
4.11.2.1 No hazardous, radioactive, or nuclear waste shall be disposed of in the Town of Hampden.
4.11.2.2 Solid waste handling and disposal sites or facilities shall be designed and operated in accordance with the regulations of this Ordinance, the State of Maine Department of Environmental Protection, and the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
4.12 Temporary Structures - Temporary structures necessary for the construction of approved facilities such as construction trailers, contractors offices, as well as, temporary office space, portable classrooms and similar structures are permitted in all zones. When the reason for their existence has been completed, they shall be removed. Persons contemplating erecting a temporary structure shall obtain a permit for such structure from the code enforcement officer prior to erecting it. Permits for temporary structures shall be for no more than one (1) year from date of issuance. The Code Enforcement Officer may extend the duration of the permit one additional year for due cause. Structures which will be needed for longer than the one year time frame, or need extensions beyond the two years allowed by the CEO shall obtain the appropriate permits in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
4.13 Mobile Homes
4.13.1 Purpose - To regulate mobile homes and mobile home parks; to establish minimum standards governing the construction and maintenance of mobile home parks; to establish minimum standards for utility service, facilities and site design in mobile home parks which serve to make such parks,
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-42
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
decent, safe, and sanitary residential areas; to establish the responsibilities and duties for owners and operators of mobile home parks.
4.13.1.1 Administration of Mobile Home Parks. Mobile home parks shall be administered in accordance with the Town of Hampden Mobile Home Park Ordinance.
4.13.2 Mobile Homes Located Outside Mobile Home Parks
4.13.2.1 Non-certified Mobile Homes. No person shall locate, maintain, occupy or operate a non- certified mobile home, as defined, in the Town of Hampden that fail to meet the standards found in Article 8, Safety Standards of the Town Of Hampden, Maine Mobile Home Park Ordinance. Written findings by the Code Enforcement Officer that the non-certified mobile home satisfies the standards of Article 8, Safety Standards of the Town Of Hampden, Maine Mobile Home Park Ordinance shall be required prior to locating said mobile home on a lot in the Town. Provided, however, that any non-certified mobile home in the Town of Hampden as of August 2, 2004 that is not located in a mobile home park may continue in accordance with §4.5.1 of this Ordinance. Such a mobile home shall not be replaced by another non-certified mobile home unless the replacement complies with the referenced safety standards.
4.13.2.2 Certified Mobile Homes. No person shall locate, maintain, or operate a certified mobile home, as defined, in the Town of Hampden outside a licensed mobile home park except in conformity with Article 3 of this Ordinance and the following:
1. All running gear including wheels, tires and axle assembly and all hitch assembly gear shall be removed from the mobile home.
2. The mobile home shall have a pitched, shingled roof with a minimum pitch of 2 in 12 (2 vertical units for every 12 horizontal units). A shingled roof shall mean asphalt or fiberglass composition or other similar materials.
3. In cases where a mobile home is not placed on a full foundation, the area below the unit shall be fully enclosed with skirting.
4. The mobile home shall have exterior siding which is residential in appearance, such as brick or masonry veneers, stucco or exterior plaster, wood siding, wood shingles, aluminum or vinyl siding simulating a clapboard pattern, or hardboard siding.
5. No certified mobile home may be located within the Residential A or Residential B districts.
4.13.2.3 No person shall locate, maintain or operate any other mobile home, as defined, in the Town of Hampden.
4.13.3 Construction of a New Mobile Home Park or Modification of an Existing Mobile Home Park
4.13.3.1 Procedure - Construction of a New Mobile Home Park shall require Site Plan approval and Major Subdivision Plan approval. Modification of an existing Mobile Home Park shall require Site Plan approval and may require Major or Minor Subdivision Plan approval as determined by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall apply the standards found in §4.13.3.3 Design Standards, §4.13.3.4 Utilities, §4.13.3.5 Road Construction and Traffic Standards, §4.13.3.6 Drainage, §4.13.3.7 Open Space and Recreation, §4.13.3.8 Landscaping, §4.13.3.9 Accessory Structures, and §4.13.3.10 Service Buildings to all applications for construction or modification of a Mobile Home Park.
4.13.3.2 Plans to be Submitted - Applicant shall submit plans prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer. The plans should be drawn to scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch. The plans shall include:
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-43
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
1. A location map of a scale not less than 500 feet equals one inch
2. A boundary survey prepared by a register land surveyor
3. A topographic plan indicating the existing and proposed grading at a minimum of 2 foot intervals
4. The names of all abutting property owners of record
5. The size and shape of all lots numbered on the plan
6. The location of all parking areas
2. The right of ways, streets and pedestrian ways existing and/or proposed
3. The location of all manufactured housing units
4. The location of all utilities above ground and below ground and the easements therefore
5. The location of existing and proposed vegetation
6. The size and location of all recreation areas
7. Adjacent building outlines and other significant features within 300 feet
8. The location and use of all proposed accessory structures and signs
9. The location of all existing streams, drainage channels, and wetlands.
10. The location, type, and intensity of all outdoor lighting.
11. The location of drainage ways, culverts, and storm drainage facilities including size and inverts of facilities.
12. The existing zoning
In addition to the above required plans detail drawings shall be required for the following:
1. Road construction: plan, profiles and cross sections
2. Utilities
3. Typical lot layout
4. Recreation areas and service buildings
5. Other details as requested by the Planning Board
4.13.3.3 Design Standards
1.
Lot Dimensions
Standard
Cluster
Minimum Lot Area
6,500 sq. ft.
5,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Road Frontage
55 feet
50 feet
Minimum Lot Depth
110 feet
100 feet
Minimum Setbacks:
Street Yard
Other Yards
30 feet
10 feet
20 feet
5* feet
Lot Coverage
30 percent
35 percent
Open Space (percent of lotted area)
10 percent
35 percent
2. Parking - All parking shall be designed in conformance with §4.7.1. All mobile homes shall have a minimum of 2 off-street parking spaces on each lot. In addition, mobile home parks with an excess of 40 units shall provide visitor parking at a rate of 1 space per 4 units. Cluster design shall permit clustered parking within 250 feet of the unit served. If mobile home lots are located along a public street, parking shall be designed and arranged so that cars do not have to back into the street. On-street parking shall be prohibited.
3. Access - Mobile home lots shall not have direct access to collector or arterial streets.
4. Additional Cluster Design Standards for Mobile Home Parks
1. Underground electrical utilities
2. Maximum of 32 units clustered with 30 foot open space break between clusters
3. 20' separation between all units required
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-44
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.13.3.4 Utilities
1. Water Supply Requirements - All mobile home parks shall be connected to a public water supply, capable of furnishing a minimum of 150 gallons per day per mobile home space.
2. Hydrants - Hydrant locations shall be approved by the Fire Chief.
3. Plumbing - All plumbing in the mobile home park shall comply with State and local plumbing laws and regulations and shall be maintained in good operating condition.
4. Sewage Disposal - All mobile home parks in the Town of Hampden shall be connected to the public sewer system. Each mobile home space shall be provided with a satisfactory sewer connection. All sewage disposal apparatus, including appurtenances thereto, shall be provided, maintained, and operated in accordance with the Hampden Sewer Ordinance.
5. Refuse and Garbage Disposal - The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the park shall not create health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident hazards, or air pollution. All refuse and garbage shall be stored in fly-tight, watertight, rodent-proof containers, which shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to prevent any refuse from overflowing. Satisfactory container racks or holders shall be provided by the mobile home park owner or operator and shall be located not more than 150 feet from any mobile home lot.
6. Electric Installation and Outlet Requirements - Mobile home service equipment and power outlet assembly will be installed in accordance with the National Electrical Code as adopted by the State of Maine.
7. Lighting - All outdoor lighting shall be designed so as not to create a nuisance to the residents or abutters of the park. Streets shall have a minimum lighting level of 1.0 foot candle and pedestrian walkways .5 foot candles.
4.13.3.5 Road Construction & Traffic Standards - Mobile Home parks may be constructed with either public or private roadways. Public roadways shall be constructed to the towns road standards. Private roadways must provide a minimum of:
1. 23 foot right of way
2. 20 foot paved surface
3. Be designed by a registered professional engineer.
4. Be built to generally accepted engineering and construction standards
5. Private roadways shall conform to Section 551 of the Town of Hampden, Maine Subdivision Ordinance.
4.13.3.6 Drainage - Applicant shall provide pre development and post development storm water analysis in accordance with the Hampden Subdivision Ordinance guidelines including a narrative explaining the results and recommendations.
4.13.3.7 Open Space & Recreation – A minimum of 20% of the site must be kept in open space, and 50% of the open space area must be of such character as to be useable for active recreation and accessible by all residents of the park. All development proposals shall provide a plan for pedestrian circulation.
4.13.3.8 Landscaping - All development shall provide the required buffers in accordance with §4.7.2 of this Ordinance. All existing vegetation to be retained where possible. All disturbed areas shall be covered with lawn, ground cover or other suitable material. In addition, all clustered parking areas, dumpster or trash buildings, utility structures and other nonresidential buildings shall be screened from view by means of trees shrubs or other vegetation.
4.13.3.9 Accessory Structures - Accessory structures shall conform to the following requirements: No accessory structure shall exceed 500 Sq. Ft. Accessory structures shall not exceed 18 feet in
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-45
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
height. Accessory structures shall be located as not to obstruct light, air or access from any unit. All decks, porches, or other accessory structures shall meet the setbacks in accordance with this section.
4.13.3.10 Service Buildings - All service buildings used in the operation and or promotion of the mobile home park shall comply with the following requirements: Service buildings shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from any street right of way and 25 feet from any mobile home lot line. Service buildings shall not exceed 1500 Sq. Ft. in ground coverage or 30 feet in height.
4.14 Shoreland Regulations – Repealed 3-1-2010, See Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
4.15 Swimming Pools - Any swimming pool shall conform with setback requirements.
4.16 Easements
4.16.1 Required Easements - If, in the administration of this Ordinance, the Town of Hampden requires that a landowner provide the town or the Hampden Water District with an easement of any kind, title to such easement shall be drawn up in a form and substance acceptable to the Town of Hampden (or the Hampden Water District if appropriate) and turned over to the town or water district before a building permit is issued.
4.16.2 Voluntary Easements - If a landowner requests that the Town of Hampden be the recipient of an easement on his property, such easement will only be accepted by the town if it is in a form and substance acceptable to the town. The town council shall determine if the easement is acceptable to the town. In making its decision the town council shall consult with the planning board.
4.17 Lots and Planned Group Development - Repealed 07-18-18
4.18 Essential Service - Whereas the provision of essential services is vital to the operation of the town and the welfare of its citizens and the size, shape and location of utilities offers little flexibility, the following exemptions shall apply to essential services and buildings for essential services.
4.18.1 Lot area, lot coverage and frontage shall not be required for the installation of essential services and buildings.
4.18.2 Above ground buildings for essential services shall meet the applicable yard requirements for the district in which they are located.
4.18.3 Above ground buildings for essential services shall be screened from residential properties to the extent possible.
4.18.4 Buildings and/or structures for essential service may exceed the height limitations of the zone in which they are located provided they are setback one third (1/3) the height from any property line.
4.19. Day Care Provisions
4.19.1 Purpose - In order to provide suitable day care opportunities in all areas of Hampden without adversely impacting the peaceful enjoyment of residential neighborhoods, day care facilities of all types which provide for the supervision and care of children under the age of sixteen shall comply with the following provisions.
4.19.2 Day Care Types:
4.19.2.1 Home Day Care
4.19.2.2 Day Care Facility
4.19.2.3 Child Care Center
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-46
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.19.3 Performance Standards:
4.19.3.1 Density: Day Care Facilities shall not exceed a density of 12 children per acre.
4.19.3.2 Outside Play Area: Outside play areas proposed as part of Home Day Care, Day Care Facility or Child Care Center shall be fenced and no closer than 25 feet to any adjacent property lines.
4.19.3.3 Hours of Operation: Home Day Care or Day Care Facilities located in the Residential A, Residential B or Rural Districts shall not operate between the hours of 7:00 pm and 6:00 am.
4.19.3.4 Parking: Home Day Care, Day Care Facilities and Child Care Centers shall provide one off-street parking space per four (4) children plus one (1) space per employee who does not reside on the premises.
4.19.3.5 Signs: Home Day Care may have one unlighted sign not to exceed four square feet. Day Care Facilities located in the Residential A, Residential B or Rural Districts may have an unlighted sign not to exceed 12 square feet.
4.19.3.6 Employees: Day Care Facilities located in the Residential A, Residential B or Rural Districts may employ one (1) person who does not reside on the premises.
4.19.3.7 Day Care Facility. Notwithstanding the definition of Day Care Facility, when located in a commercial or industrial district this use is not required to be operated within a dwelling or by a person residing on the premises. Notwithstanding the definition of Day Care Facility, when located in a Rural District this use may be operated within a separate building on a lot common to a dwelling in which a person or persons operating the facilities reside.
4.19.3.8 As part of the review process written comment shall be obtained from Hampden Public Safety to identify any child safety issues.
4.19.3.9 Child care centers located in the Residential B district shall be a re-use of an existing building, although building additions and alterations are allowed.
4.19.4 Approvals Required
4.19.4.1 Home Day Care is subject to §5.3.2.2 Certificate of Compliance regulations.
4.19.4.2 Day Care Facility is subject to approval as stipulated in §3.1.3, Use Table.
4.19.4.3 Child Care Centers operated as a business are subject to approval as stipulated in §3.1.3, Use Table.
4.20 Customary Rural Business - Repealed 7-18-18
4.21 Structures Necessary For Access For Person With Disabilities – Repealed 7-18-18
4.22 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
4.22.1 Applicability - This subsection applies to all construction and expansion of wireless telecommunications facilities, as defined in §7.2, except as provided in §4.22.2 below.
4.22.2 Exemptions - The following are exempt from the provisions of §4.22:
4.22.2.1 Public Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. Wireless telecommunications facilities for communications by public officials.
4.22.2.2 Amateur (Ham) Radio Stations. Amateur (ham) radio stations licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-47
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.22.2.3 Parabolic Antennae. Parabolic antennae less than seven feet (7') in diameter, that are an accessory use of the property.
4.22.2.4 Maintenance or Repair. Maintenance, repair or reconstruction of a wireless telecommunications facility and related equipment, provided that there is no change in the height or any other dimension of the facility.
4.22.2.5 Temporary Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. Temporary wireless telecommunications facilities, including temporary microcell wireless tele-communications facilities, in operation for a maximum period of one hundred eighty (180) days shall be permitted under the provisions of §4.12 Temporary Structures.
4.22.2.6 Antennas as Accessory Uses. An antenna or satellite dish that is an accessory use to a residential dwelling unit.
4.22.2.7 Microcell Wireless Telecommunication Facilities. Microcell wireless telecommunication facilities as defined in §7.2 when co-located on water towers.
4.22.3 Site Plan Review Application. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be subject to Site Plan Review under the provisions of §4.1 of this ordinance. Applications for approval of wireless telecommunications facilities, including expansions of existing facilities, shall comply with the application requirements of §4.1.4 and shall include the following additional information:
4.22.3.1 A copy of the FCC license for the facility, or a signed statement from the owner or operator of the facility that the facility will comply with all applicable FCC regulations.
4.22.3.2 A site plan prepared and certified by a professional engineer, registered in Maine, indicating the location, type and height of the proposed facility, antenna capacity, on-site and abutting off-site land uses, means of access, and setbacks from property lines. The site plan must include certification by a professional engineer registered in Maine that the proposed facility complies with all American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and other applicable technical codes.
4.22.3.3 Elevation drawings of the proposed facility, and any other proposed structures, showing height above ground level.
4.22.3.4 A landscaping plan indicating the proposed placement of the facility on the site; the location of existing structures, trees and other significant site features; the type and location of plants proposed to screen the facility; the method of fencing; the color of the structure; and the proposed lighting method.
4.22.3.5 A written description of how the proposed facility fits into the applicant’s telecommunications network. This submission requirement does not require disclosure of confidential business information. The narrative shall identify the following:
1. Duration of time for which the proposed facility would be visible to a passing motorist or boater within a designated scenic resource as identified in the Town of Hampden Comprehensive Plan;
2. The tree line elevation of vegetation within 100 feet of the facility; and
3. The distance to the proposed facility from scenic areas and scenic views located within a one mile radius of the proposed site, as designated in the Comprehensive Plan.
4.22.3.6 Evidence demonstrating that no existing building, site, or structure can accommodate the applicant’s proposed facility, which may consist of one or more of the following:
1. Evidence that no existing facilities are located within the targeted market coverage area as required to meet the applicant’s engineering requirements;
2. Evidence that existing facilities do not have sufficient height, or cannot be increased to a sufficient height at a reasonable cost and within the height limitations of this ordinance, to meet the applicant’s engineering requirements;
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-48
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
3. Evidence that existing facilities do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant’s proposed antenna(e) and related equipment;
4. For facilities existing prior to the effective date of this subsection, evidence that the fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share or adapt an existing facility are unreasonable; or
5. Evidence that an otherwise suitable facility is legally unavailable for the applicant’s use after a good-faith effort to secure authorization to use such facility.
4.22.3.7 A form of surety approved by the Planning Board to pay for the costs of removing the facility if it is discontinued.
4.22.4 Standards. The applicant for approval of a new wireless telecommunications facility or expansion must demonstrate compliance with the following approval standards:
4.22.4.1 Lot Dimensions. Notwithstanding the lot dimension requirements of the underlying zoning district, the following dimensional standards shall apply to new wireless telecommunications facilities approved under this ordinance:
1. Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area for new wireless telecommunications facilities shall be 10,000 square feet. The area of any access drives shall be excluded in calculating the lot area for this purpose. The Planning Board may require a larger lot when necessary to accommodate guy wires or other supporting cables or structures. The minimum lot area shall not apply to facilities, other than towers, co-located on existing facilities or structures. Provided, that any new facility requiring on-site sewage disposal or an on-site ground water supply shall meet the minimum lot area requirements of the underlying zoning district.
2. Where a lot meeting the requirements of this subparagraph is created through division of an existing lot, through sale, lease, or otherwise, the existing lot, following such division, must continue to meet all dimensional requirements of the underlying zoning district.
3. Minimum road frontage and street yard. The minimum road frontage and street yard requirements of the underlying zoning district shall not apply to lots for new wireless telecommunications facilities. Provided, however, that each lot for a new wireless telecommunications facility shall be provided with leased or deeded access, sufficient for use by emergency and service vehicles, to a public road or year-round public right-of-way.
4. Minimum other yard. The minimum depth for other yards shall be as provided in the underlying zoning district. Transmission towers, tower-mounted antennas, guy wires and other supporting cables and structures may not be located within the required other yard areas. Yard requirements for the principal and accessory structures must be met within the leased or deeded area of the lot concerned.
5. Maximum ground coverage. The maximum ground coverage provisions of the underlying zoning district shall not apply.
6. Maximum height. The maximum height for transmission towers, tower-mounted antennas and supporting towers or antennas shall be two hundred feet (200'). The maximum height for other structures or buildings shall be as provided in the underlying zoning district.
7. Accessory structures. Dimensional requirements for accessory structures shall be as provided in the underlying zoning district.
4.22.4.2 Siting on Municipal Property. If an applicant proposes to locate a new wireless telecommunications facility, or expand an existing facility, on municipal property, the applicant must show the following:
1. The proposed location complies with applicable municipal policies and ordinances.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-49
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
2. The proposed facility will not interfere with the intended use of the property.
3. The applicant has adequate liability insurance and a lease agreement with the municipality that includes reasonable compensation for the use of the property and other provisions to safeguard the public rights and interests in the property.
4.22.4.3 Design for Co-location. A new wireless telecommunications facility and related equipment must be designed to accommodate future co-location of at least three additional wireless telecommunications facilities or providers.
4.22.4.4 Public Road Setback Requirements. New wireless telecommunications facilities approved under this ordinance must be located a minimum of two hundred feet (200') from all public roads and public rights-of-way existing as of the application date. Except as provided in paragraph 5 below, the setback area need not be owned or controlled by the facility owner or applicant.
4.22.4.5 Clear Zones. All telecommunications towers and tower-mounted antenna must be set back one hundred five percent (105%) of the tower height from all abutting properties. This setback requirement may be satisfied by including areas outside the wireless telecommunication facility=s lot boundaries, if secured by a recorded easement that precludes location of buildings intended for human or animal occupancy from the clear zone area. The following exceptions apply to this requirement:
1. The required setback may be reduced by the Planning Board upon a showing by the applicant that the facility is designed to collapse in a manner that will not harm other property.
2. An antenna is exempt from the setback requirement if it extends no more than five feet (5') horizontally from the edge of the structure to which it is attached, and does not encroach upon an abutting property.
4.22.4.6 Landscaping. A new wireless telecommunications facility must be screened with native plants from view of abutting properties, to the maximum extent practicable. The intent is to site such facilities in an existing stand of mature wooded land.
1. This wooded area must surround the tower and accessory structures in all directions for a radius of at least 100 feet from the edge of the proposed development.
2. his landscaping requirement may be satisfied by either a lot of sufficient size to include the required landscaping area or by including areas outside the wireless telecommunication facility’s lot boundaries, if secured by a recorded easement that provides adequate control to preserve existing native plants and natural landforms.
3. The site shall be preserved as follows: Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is permitted provided that a well distributed stand of trees and other vegetation is maintained. For the purposes of this section a "well-distributed stand of trees and other vegetation" adjacent to a tower, shall be defined as maintaining a rating score of twelve (12) or more in any twenty-five (25') foot by twenty-five (25') foot square (six hundred twenty-five [625] square feet) area as determined by the following rating system:
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than forty (40%) percent of the total volume of trees four inches or more diameter, DBH may be removed in any ten year period.
4.22.4.7 Fencing. A new wireless telecommunications facility must be fenced to discourage trespass on the facility and to discourage climbing on any structure by trespassers.
Tree Diameter
(DBH, measured 4.5’ from ground)
Point Value
2 – 4 inches
1
4 – 12 inches
2
Larger than 12 inches
4
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-50
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.22.4.8 Lighting. A new wireless telecommunications facility must be illuminated only as necessary to comply with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other applicable federal and state requirements. However, security lighting may be used as long as it is shielded to be down- directional, so as to retain light within the boundaries of the site to the maximum extent practicable.
4.22.4.9 Structural Standards. A new wireless telecommunications facility must comply with the current Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries Association (EIA/TIA) 222 Revision Standard titled Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures.
4.22.4.10 Noise. A new wireless telecommunications facility or expansion must be designed to minimize noise disturbances to abutting properties, to the extent practicable. This requirement shall not apply during construction, repair or replacement, while operating a back-up generator during electric power outages, or during testing of a back-up generator between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
4.22.5 Standard Conditions of Approval. The following standard conditions of approval shall be a part of any approval issued by the Planning Board. Reference to the conditions of approval shall be clearly noted on the site plan, and shall include:
4.22.5.1 Future Co-Location. The owner of the wireless telecommunications facility and his or her successors and assigns agree to:
1. Respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request for information from a potential co- location applicant, in exchange for a reasonable fee not in excess of the actual cost of preparing a response;
2. Negotiate in good faith for shared use of the wireless telecommunications facility by third parties;
3. Allow shared use of the wireless telecommunications facility if an applicant agrees in writing to pay reasonable charges for co-location;
4. Require no more than a reasonable charge for shared use of the wireless telecommunications facility, based on rates typically charged by commercial facility owners in the local market. This charge may include, but is not limited to, a pro rata share of the cost of site selection, planning, project administration, land costs, site design, construction and maintenance, financing, return on equity, depreciation, and all of the costs of adapting the facility tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing electromagnetic interference. The amortization of the above costs by the facility owner shall be accomplished at a reasonable rate, over the projected economic life span of the wireless telecommunications facility.
4.22.6 Discontinuance. A wireless telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months after commencement of operation shall be considered to be discontinued. The Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner of a discontinued facility in writing and order removal of the facility within ninety (90) days of receipt of the written notice. The owner of the facility shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of the written notice to demonstrate to the Code Enforcement Officer that the facility has not been discontinued.
If the owner fails to show that the facility has not been discontinued, the owner shall have sixty (60) days to remove the facility. If the facility is not removed within this period, the municipality may remove the facility at the owners expense. The owner of the facility shall pay all necessary and reasonable site reclamation costs, as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, to return the site to its pre- construction condition, including the removal of roads and the re-establishment of vegetation.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-51
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
If a surety has been given to the municipality to assure removal of the facility, the owner of the facility may apply to the Planning Board for release of the surety when the facility and related equipment have been removed by the owner to the satisfaction of the Planning Board, or when the expense of removal and reclamation by the municipality have been reimbursed by the owner or surety.
4.23 Excavation, Gravel Pit and Quarry
4.23.1 Purpose. The purpose of §4.23 is to:
4.23.1.1 Regulate in an environmentally sound manner the excavation, removal, processing, and storage or stockpiling of topsoil, loam, rock, sand, gravel, clay, and other similar earth materials within the Town. and provide for the sound reclamation of all excavations within the Town.
4.23.1.2 Protect the quantity and quality of the groundwater and other water bodies.
4.23.1.3 Prevent a lowering of the average water table.
4.23.1.4 Control erosion.
4.23.1.5 Regulate access to excavations to and from public and private streets or roads.
4.23.1.6 Provide for the safety of the public.
4.23.1.7 Ensure continued access to and availability of a critical natural resource for the benefit of the people of Hamden and the State of Maine.”.
4.23.2 Effective Date. These provisions shall apply to all applications received after January 16, 2008.
4.23.3 Applicability. After January 16, 2008, all excavations within the Town shall be operated and maintained in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance except for those excavations with previously issued valid permits that specifically allow otherwise. Examples of exceptions include, but are not limited to, previously issued site location of development permits, (38 MRSA §480), filed a Notice of Intent to Comply with the Performance Standards for Excavation and/or Quarries (38 MRSA §490) and amendments and variances thereof or other arrangements that have been approved by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection. Notwithstanding other permits or approvals all excavations in the Town will be subject to the Reclamation provisions of this Ordinance. Notwithstanding the foregoing all excavations, gravel pits and quarries shall be subject to the requirements of §4.23.4 Registration of Existing Excavations, §4.23.7.3 Buffer Strips, §4.23.8 Reclamation, and §4.23.7.10. Noise. Activities such as filling and grading land in preparation for development and construction activities and stockpiles of materials for use in construction and industrial activities are governed in §4.9 Filling and Grading of Land and Stockpiling of Materials.
4.23.4 Registration of Existing Excavations. In order to preserve existing conforming buffers, improve the quality of undersized natural buffer areas and to create a benchmark for future review and closure of existing excavations, gravel pits and quarries any such activity within the Town of Hampden shall be registered with the town under this ordinance. Registration will create a benchmark for excavations, gravel pits and quarries. The basis of the benchmark document will be a site exhibit of the excavation parcel(s) superimposed upon Town provided digital aerial photography dated April, 2006 (and revisions thereafter). In addition to the site exhibit and the aerial photography the following items shall be included.
4.23.4.1 Name, address, telephone number, fax, and email address of current owner of the property.
4.23.4.2 Name, address, telephone number, fax, and email address of operator if different from owner.
4.23.4.3 For excavations subject to current Maine Department of Environmental Protection permitting or any other State or Federal regulations copies of those permits and plans shall be submitted with the application.
4.23.4.4 A site exhibit plan containing the following:
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-52
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
1. Boundaries of the entire parcel to sub-meter accuracy.
2. Present use of entire parcel including existing excavated areas.
3. Type and location of all existing and proposed surface water including drainage ways.
4. Limits (top of bank) of the areas previously excavated to sub-meter accuracy.
5. Limits of the areas previously reclaimed.
6. Limits of the areas proposed to be excavated including those areas (identified in §4.23.5.1 subject to current Maine Department of Environmental Protection permitting)
4.23.4.5 A narrative description of the operations including methods of excavation, gravel pit and quarry, uses of on-site processing equipment, type and location of any structures, stockpiled materials, disposition of stumps, brush, or other materials, and on-site storage of any hazardous materials.
4.23.4.6 Parcel description by tax map and copy of deed with Registry of Deeds Book and Page Number.
4.23.4.7 A signed statement attesting that, to the best of the Applicant’s knowledge, the information contained in the application is true, accurate, and complete.
All existing excavations, gravel pits and quarries within the Town of Hampden shall register their operation with the town and submit the required documents in accordance with this section within six months of the effective date of this amendment.
4.23.5 Jurisdictional Classifications. This section recognizes two general jurisdictional classifications of excavations and the regulations contained herein make certain distinctions between them:
4.23.5.1 Those excavations that are required to have a permit from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection in accordance with PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR EXCAVATIONS FOR BORROW, CLAY, TOPSOIL, OR SILT 38 MRSA §§ 490-A to 490-M (generally five acres of activity), PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR QUARRIES (38 MRSA §§490W – 490Z) or excavations that have (or are required to have) filed a notice of intent to comply pursuant to 38 MRSA § Section 484-A of the Site Location of Development Law and have adhered with the compliance schedule as required by that Section.
4.23.5.2 Those excavations that are not required to have a permit from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection as identified in 4.23.5.1, but are required to have an excavation permit from the Town.
4.23.5.3 Note that there are also earthmoving activities governed under §4.9, Filling and Grading of Land and Stockpiling of Materials.
4.23.6 Excavation Permits
4.23.6.1 Permit required. Any proposed new excavation, or any proposed expansion of an existing excavation, beyond previously approved limits, is required to obtain an excavation permit from the Town in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
4.23.6.2 Duration. An excavation permit shall be for eight years by the Planning Board.
4.23.6.3 Planning Board approval required. Planning Board approval is required before an excavation permit is issued by the Town.
4.23.6.4 Application procedure and contents. An application for an excavation permit shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer. The application and its contents shall be sealed by a professional engineer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall verify that the application is complete. The following information shall be included with the application for a permit:
1. Name, address, telephone number, fax, and email address of current owner of the property.
2. Name, address, telephone number, fax, and email address of operator if different from owner.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-53
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
3. For excavations identified in §4.23.5.1 subject to current Maine Department of Environmental Protection permitting or any other State or Federal regulations copies of those permits and plans shall be submitted with the application.
4. A site plan in accordance with §4.1 Site Plan Review. In addition to the requirements of §4.1 the site plan shall also contain the following:
1. Boundaries of the entire parcel to sub-meter accuracy.
2. Contours of land within the proposed excavation area and 100 feet beyond the limits of the excavation contour intervals of not more that five feet. For areas beyond those requiring five foot contour intervals and for land areas extending two-hundred (200) feet in all directions beyond the boundaries of the parcel contours intervals shall be not more than 10 feet.
3. Present use of entire parcel including existing excavated areas.
4. Type and location of all existing and proposed surface water including drainage ways.
5. Limits of the areas excavated, reclaimed and proposed to be excavated.
6. Location of all proposed accesses to and from public or private streets.
7. The location of existing wells and waterbodies.
5. Reserved.
6. The depth to groundwater at the site of the proposed excavation as determined by test pits or boring(s) to substantiate that the groundwater will not be disturbed. The number of test pits or borings to be required shall be a minimum of 1 per site and no less than 1 for each five-acre proposed excavation.
7. Plans for controlling access to the site.
8. Provisions for shielding the excavation from surrounding properties with adequate screening or buffering.
9. Description of existing or proposed signs and lighting.
10. A narrative description of the operations including methods of excavation, gravel pit and quarry, uses of on-site processing equipment, type and location of any structures, stockpiled materials, disposition of stumps, brush, or other materials, and on-site storage of any hazardous materials including SPCC plans (spill plan).
11. Parcel description by tax map and copy of deed with Registry of Deeds Book and Page Number.
12. Names and addresses of abutting property owners.
13. Present uses of abutting and nearby properties.
14. A signed statement attesting that, to the best of the Applicant’s knowledge, the information contained in the application is true, accurate, and complete.
4.23.6.5 Review. The Planning Board shall review each application for an excavation permit according to the procedures of this Ordinance.
4.23.6.6 Conflicting regulations. For excavations identified in §4.23.5.1 subject to current Maine Department of Environmental Protection permitting, in the event that the provisions of this ordinance are inconsistent with State statutes or regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection, the State statute or regulation shall prevail. The foregoing sentence shall not be construed as preventing the Town from adopting or enforcing more stringent requirements under this ordinance.
4.23.6.7 Timeline. Within 30 days of receipt of an application for an excavation, gravel pit and quarry permit the Code Enforcement Officer shall write a letter indicating that the application is complete and ready for review or detailing what elements of the application are deficient. A public hearing by the Planning Board shall be held within forty-five (45) days of the date that the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the application is complete.
4.23.6.8 Planning Board review criteria. The Planning Board shall determine that the excavation, as planned, will conform to the requirements of the district in which it is to be located and to other pertinent requirements of this Ordinance. Following such determination, the board shall
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-54
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
approve the proposed excavation plan if it makes a positive finding based on the evidence presented that it meets all of the following standards. In all cases, the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant.
1. Buffer strips and shielding in accordance with the requirements of §4.23.7 of this Ordinance.
2. Fencing to protect children when adjacent to a school or for other similar special circumstances.
3. Signs in accordance with the provisions of §4.7.5 and lighting in accordance with the provisions of §4.7.3 designed to minimize public nuisance conditions or undesirable aesthetic effects on the neighborhood.
4. Safe entrances and exits in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
5. Documentation of security provisions on both the site plan and in written narrative.
6. Mitigation plan for control of noise, dust, runoff, and other environmental considerations that are outside of the property line boundaries of the excavation operation.
7. The plan shall also present mitigation measures to minimize negative impacts of the project on surrounding or nearby properties or public facilities including, but not limited to public roads.
4.23.7 Excavation Regulations
4.23.7.1 General. All excavation operations shall be in accordance with the excavation and reclamation requirements of the Maine Department of Environmental Protection and the requirements of the applicable sections of this Ordinance.
4.23.7.2 Property lines. All property boundaries must be identified by markers such as metal posts, stakes, flagging, or blazed trees.
4.23.7.3 Buffer Strips. A natural buffer strip of existing vegetation must be maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
1. A natural buffer strip at least twenty-five (25) feet wide must be maintained between any topsoil excavation and any property boundary. A natural buffer strip at least fifty (50) feet wide must be maintained between any other excavation and any property boundary. These distances may be reduced to not less than ten (10) feet with the written permission of the affected abutting property owner or owners. The written permission indicating the registry book and page reference to the subject property(s) shall be recorded at the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds. The distance may not be reduced to less than twenty-five (25) feet from the boundary of any cemetery or burial ground.
2. The buffer strip between excavations owned by abutting owners may be eliminated with the written permission of the abutters, provided that the elimination of this buffer strip does not increase the runoff from either excavation across the property boundaries.
3. A natural buffer strip at least one-hundred (100) feet wide must be maintained between any quarry and any property boundary. This distance may be reduced to not less than ten (10) feet with the written permission of the affected abutting property owner or owners. The written permission indicating the registry book and page reference to the subject property(s) shall be recorded at the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds.. The distance may not be reduced to less than twenty-five (25) feet from the boundary of any cemetery or burial ground.
4. The buffer strip between quarries owned by abutting owners may be eliminated with the written permission of the abutters, provided that the elimination of this buffer strip does not increase the runoff from either excavation across the property boundaries.
5. Natural buffer strips must be maintained for the environmental protection of flowing water, water bodies, wetlands, and significant wildlife habitats contained in wetlands as follows:
1. A natural buffer strip at least one-hundred (100) feet wide must be maintained between the working edge of any excavation or quarry and the normal high water
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-55
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
line of a great pond classified as GPA or a river or stream flowing to a great pond classified as GPA.
2. A natural buffer strip at least seventy-five (75) feet wide must be maintained between the working edge of any excavation or quarry and any other water body.
3. A natural buffer strip at least seventy-five (75) feet wide must be maintained between the working edge of any excavation or quarry and any river, stream, or brook as defined in 38 MRSA Section 480-B.
4. A natural buffer strip at least seventy-five (75) feet wide must be maintained between the working edge of any excavation or quarry and a freshwater wetland consisting of or containing either or both of:
a. Under normal circumstances, at least twenty-thousand (20,000) square feet of aquatic vegetation, emergent marsh vegetation, or open water except for artificial ponds or impoundments (aka wetlands of special significance).
b. Peat lands dominated by shrubs, sedges, and sphagnum moss.
5. A natural buffer strip at least seventy-five (75) feet wide must be maintained between the working edge of any excavation or quarry and a significant wildlife habitat contained within a freshwater wetland.
6. A natural buffer strip at least one-hundred-fifty (150) feet wide must be maintained between the working edge of any excavation or quarry and the nearest edge of the right of way of an adjacent road designated as a Scenic Highway by the Department of Transportation.
7. A natural buffer strip at least one-hundred (100) feet wide must be maintained between the working edge of any excavation or quarry and the nearest edge of the right of way of any adjacent public road that has not been designated as a Scenic Highway.
8. A natural buffer strip at least fifty (50) feet wide must be maintained between the working edge of any excavation or quarry and any adjacent private road as well as the nearest edge of the right of way of any adjacent private road present at the time of application submission. The width of the buffer strip adjacent to a private right of way may be reduced if written permission is obtained from those who possess the use of the right of way. The written permission must be recorded in association with the deed of the affected property of the right of way at the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds
9. The vegetation located within natural buffer strips between the working edge of any excavation or quarry and any adjacent property lines and roads shall provide shielding from excavation activities. In the event that the Planning Board determines after a site visit that the required natural buffer strips called for in this section do not provide adequate levels of shielding, applicant shall provide a mitigation plan to augment the existing tree growth to satisfy this regulation. The Planning Board may consider adjacent land uses when determining the appropriate level of shielding.
4.23.7.4 Dust. Dust generated by activities at the excavation, including dust associated with traffic, must be controlled by reasonable means such as watering, paving, or other suitable management practices.
4.23.7.5 Erosion and sedimentation control for all reclaimed and unreclaimed areas. Erosion and sedimentation control for all reclaimed and unreclaimed areas, except for access roads, shall be in accordance with the following:
1. The area of a working excavation may not exceed ten (10) acres except for excavations that have received a variance under 38 MRSA § 490 E or § 490 CC.
2. Stockpiles of top soil to be used for reclamation must be seeded, mulched, or otherwise temporarily stabilized.
3. Grubbed areas shall be stabilized.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-56
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4. Sediment shall be contained within the excavation site. Sediment shall not leave the parcel and shall not enter a protected natural resource.
4.23.7.6 Erosion and sedimentation control for access roads. Erosion and sedimentation control for access roads, shall be in accordance with the Maine Department of Environmental Protection best management practices.
4.23.7.7 Surface water discharges. Surface water discharges from the excavation and associated improvements shall comply with the standards contained in §4.1.6.2.8 and may not increase the post development storm water runoff rate for storms up to a level of intensity of a twenty-five (25) year, twenty-four (24) hour storm and must also be in accordance with the following standards:
1. Grading or other construction activity on the site may not alter natural drainageways such that the drainage, other than that which occurred before development, adversely affects an adjacent parcel of land, or that any drainageways flowing from an adjacent parcel of land to the parcel are impeded.
2. Excavations or quarries two (2) acres or larger in size must be naturally internally drained. Structures such as detention ponds, retention ponds, and undersized culverts may not be used to meet the requirements of this Section unless the operator first obtains a variance from the Department of Environmental Protection in accordance with the requirements of 38 MRSA Section 490-E for gravel pits, 490-CC for quarries, and submits a copy of the variance approval to the Code Enforcement Officer.
4.23.7.8 Protection of groundwater, setbacks & separation. To ensure adequate protection of groundwater, setback requirements for excavations and quarries shall be in accordance with the following requirements:
1. Excavation may not occur within a vertical distance of five (5) feet of the seasonal high water table except for excavations that have received a variance under 38 MRSA §490 E or §490 CC. A benchmark sufficient to verify the height of the seasonal high water table must be established and at least one test pit or monitoring well must be established on each five (5) acres of unreclaimed land.
2. A minimum separation of two-hundred (200) feet must be maintained between any excavation and any private drinking water supply that is a point-driven or dug well and that was in existence prior to the excavation.
3. A minimum separation of one-hundred (100) feet must be maintained between any excavation and any private drinking water supply that is drilled into saturated bedrock and that was in existence prior to the excavation.
4. A minimum separation of one-thousand (1000) feet must be maintained between any excavation and a public drinking water source present at the time of application submission.
4.23.7.9 Protection of groundwater, contamination. To ensure adequate protection of groundwater, operational requirements for excavations and quarries shall be in accordance with the following requirements: Refueling operations, oil changes, and other maintenance activities requiring the handling of fuels, petroleum products, hydraulic fluids, and other on site activity involving the storage or use of products that, if spilled, may contaminate groundwater, shall be conducted in accordance with a Maine Department of Environmental Protection spill prevention, control, and countermeasures plan. Petroleum products and other substances that may contaminate groundwater shall be stored and handled over impervious surfaces that are designed to contain spills. The spill prevention, control, and countermeasures plan shall be on file and available for inspection at the site.
4.23.7.10 Noise. The level of noise associated with the operation of an excavation or quarry shall be controlled to minimize impacts upon nearby neighbors. All operations shall be conducted in accordance with the following requirements:
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-57
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
1. Except as noted in §4.23.7.13 and §4.23.7.14 below, routine operation of an excavation shall not cause sound levels at any property line of the excavation, or a property line of a contiguous property owned by the operator whichever is farther from the sound source, that exceed the following limits: No such activities that would generate noise shall be permitted between 9:00 pm and 5:00 am Monday through Saturday and no noise generating activities shall be permitted at any time all day Sunday. Hours of operation may be waived temporarily in accordance with §4.23.7.10.2.
2. The Hampden Town Council shall have the authority to waive the hours of operation for a period not to exceed one month for cause, such as a special construction project. The Town Council shall consider ways to mitigate noise during these construction projects that will best balance industry needs and neighborhood needs.
3. In the event that noise levels are found by neighboring property owners to be a nuisance operators shall meet with the affected property owners and town officials to effect a mutually acceptable remediation plan which shall be established and followed. Particular attention shall be given to noise generators that are loud and intrusive as well as those that are persistent and repetitive for long periods of time.
4.23.7.11 Sound levels, routine operation. Sound levels resulting from routine operation of excavations and quarries shall be measured in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection for noise as found in Chapter 375 Section 10-H.
4.23.7.12 Sound levels, blasting. Sound resulting from production blasting at an excavation and quarry shall be measured in peak linear sound level (dBLA) with a linear response down to 5 Hz and shall be limited as follows:
1. Blasting shall not occur on Sundays.
2. Blasting shall not occur between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
3. Blasting shall not occur more frequently than four times per day.
4.23.7.13 Governing Regulation Blasting. Blasting must be conducted in accordance with 25 MRSA, Chapter 318 and 38 MRSA, Section 490-Z.
4.23.7.14 Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from the sound level limits in this Section.
1. Registered and inspected vehicles while operating on public ways, or while entering the excavation area to make a delivery or a pickup and which are moving, starting, or stopping, but not when they are parked continuously for more than sixty (60) minutes in the excavation area.
2. Warning signals and alarms. Notwithstanding this provision if back-up alarms create persistent noise and are found by the Code Enforcement Officer to be a noise nuisance to neighboring property owners those devices shall not be deemed as exempt from the sound limits of this section.
3. Emergency maintenance and repairs
4. Operations necessary for public works projects.
5. Railroad activities accessory to excavation activities regulated in this section.
4.23.7.15 Significant Wildlife Habitat. No part of any land affected by a gravel mining operation may be located in a significant wildlife habitat, as defined in 38 MRSA Section 480-B, or in an area listed pursuant to the Natural Areas Program, 12 MRSA Section 544.
4.23.7.16 Waste disposal. Solid waste, including stumps, wood waste, and land-clearing debris generated on the affected land must be disposed of in accordance with the rules of the Maine Department of Environmental Protection Chapter 13, including any rules adopted to implement those laws.
4.23.7.17 Traffic. Truck traffic at any excavation operation shall be limited to thirty-five (35) trucks per hour or comply with applicable permit requirements of the Maine Department of Transportation under Title 23, Section 704-A, and all applicable Ordinances of the Town.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-58
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.23.8 Reclamation
4.23.8.1 General. Any land on which excavation or quarry activities were conducted thereon between May 14, 2007 and January 16, 2008, or which are conducted thereon at any time subsequent to January 16, 2008, must be reclaimed in accordance with the requirements of this Section or as provided under 38 MRSA Section 490-E or 490-CC.
4.23.8.2. Purpose. The purpose of reclamation is to restore affected areas to a condition that is environmentally sound and sustainable and that does not preclude the future development of such land because of instability, stagnant ponds or flooding.
4.23.8.3 Categories of Reclamation. Reclamation may include, but is not limited to:
1. Stabilization of slopes.
2. Creation of safety benches.
3. Planting of forests.
4. Seeding of grasses and legumes.
5. Seeding for grazing purposes.
6. Planting of crops for harvest.
7. Enhancement of wildlife and aquatic habitat.
8. Enhancement of aquatic resources.
9. Enhancement of recreational resources.
4.23.8.4 Alternate Reclamation. An owner or operator may apply to the Planning Board for approval of plans for alternative forms of reclamation.
1. The site may be converted to another use.
2. An owner or operator may develop a recreational management area and be exempt from the reclamation standards set forth in this Section if the following three conditions are all met:
1. The owner or operator first obtains a variance from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection in accordance with the requirements of 38 MRSA Section 490-E for gravel pits and 490-CC for quarries.
2. The Off-road Recreational Vehicle Division of the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife determines that the site is suitable under Title 12, Section 1893-A.
3. The owner or operator receives site plan approval from the Planning Board.
4.23.8.5 Best Management Practices. Unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board, reclamation shall be conducted in accordance with the Maine Department of Environmental Protection best management practices for erosion and sediment control within two (2) years after final grading and shall include:
1. Side slopes shall not be steeper than one (1) foot vertical for two-and-one-half (2 1/2) feet horizontal.
2. A vegetative cover shall be established by seeding within one year of the completion of excavation. Vegetative cover is acceptable if, within one year of seeding both of the following are accomplished:
1. The planting of trees and shrubs results in a permanent stand or a stand capable of regeneration and succession, sufficient to ensure a 75% survival rate.
2. The planting of all materials results in a permanent ninety (90) percent of ground coverage.
3. The CEO may require, when no longer in use for its intended purpose, the removal of all associated above ground structures, equipment, foundations, utilities, and access roads or driveways constructed to specifically service the reclaimed area.
4.23.8.6 Surety. The Town shall require an acceptable form of surety to cover the estimated cost to complete the reclamation of excavations with a working excavation larger than one acre in size, excluding any reclaimed areas, unless the operator demonstrates that a bond or similar financial
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-59
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
assurance has been secured for the Maine Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to 38 MRSA Section 490-E. The estimated cost to complete the reclamation shall be determined on the basis of usual, customary, and reasonable costs for similar reclamation. The applicant shall provide surety in the form of cash, certified bank checks, insurance bonds, or irrevocable letters of credit all payable to the Town. Any such surety shall be satisfactory to the Municipal Officers and to the Town Attorney as to sufficiency, manner of execution, and amount. The applicant shall record a limited easement to provide the Town and/or a third party the right to enter the subject property and engage in construction activities therein for the purpose of completing reclamation of the property in the event that the performance guarantee must be utilized.
4.23.9 District Regulations
4.23.9.1 Excavation limited to the Rural District. Excavation activities requiring a permit in accordance with §4.23.6 of this Ordinance shall be considered allowed uses in the Rural District only.
4.23.9.2 Excavation further regulated under Shoreland Zoning. Resource Protection (RP) and Stream Protection (SP) Districts and land areas subject to Shoreland Zoning are further regulated under the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
4.23.10 Inspections. Annual inspections are required for all excavations. The purpose of annual inspections is to determine or reaffirm that the excavation is in full compliance with all applicable requirements of §4.23 Excavation, Gravel Pit and Quarry.
4.23.10.1 Annual inspection shall be filed as part of the Annual Report required in §4.23.14.
4.23.10.2 Annual inspections. Annual inspections of excavations shall be performed by persons who are deemed qualified by the Code Enforcement Officer to determine the degree of compliance of the excavation with the requirements of this Ordinance. Persons deemed qualified shall include but not be limited to professional engineers and professional land surveyors.
1. All costs of the inspection shall be borne by the owner or operator of the excavation.
2. The person doing the inspection shall be provided with an escort in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Federal Mining Safety and Health Administration (MSHA). Upon appropriate notice, the operator or a designee shall be the escort for inspection of the excavation.
3. The person doing the inspection shall determine, as much as may be possible, the extent of the compliance of the excavation with the requirements of this Ordinance. If there are any instances of not being in compliance, those instance shall be noted on the inspection form in accordance with §4.23.10.2.4 of this ordinance.
4. The person doing the inspection shall complete the proper inspection form “Annual Inspection for Excavations”, with any appropriate comments, and deliver the completed form to the owner or operator.
5. The owner or operator shall forward a copy of the completed inspection report to the Code Enforcement Officer within thirty (30) days of receipt with payment of a fee in accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance for the recording of the report.
4.23.10.3 DEP inspections accepted. Inspections of excavations (identified in §4.23.5.1 subject to current Maine Department of Environmental Protection permitting) by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection shall be deemed sufficient provided that the owner or operator forwards a copy of the inspection report to the Code Enforcement Officer within thirty (30) days of receipt with payment of a fee in accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance for the recording of the report.
4.23.10.4 Additional inspection reports. If any additional inspection reports related to an excavation are received from any State or Federal Agency, the owner or operator shall forward a copy of the inspection report to the Code Enforcement Officer within thirty (30) days of receipt.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-60
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.23.10.5 Entry to excavation. By submitting an application for a permit, or by submitting an Annual Report, the applicant agrees to authorize a properly escorted designated representative of the Town to enter the property including buildings, structures, or conveyances on the property at reasonable hours to determine compliance with the terms and conditions of a permit for an excavation.
4.23.11 Expansions of Nonconforming Uses. No nonconforming mineral exploration, excavation, or removal of lands for the purpose of creating a sand, fill, or gravel pit shall be extended to other land or parts of land unless the other land or parts of the land were designated for such use prior to the effective date of this amendment January 16, 2008.
4.23.12 Waiver of Provisions The Town shall accept waivers or variances granted by the Department of Environmental Protection under 38 MRSA Section 490-E provided that the operator provides a copy of the variance approval to the Code Enforcement Officer prior to commencing the activity requiring the variance.
4.23.13 Change of Owner or Operator. Notice of a change of owner or operator shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer of the Town in accordance with the following requirements:
4.23.13.1 Documentation required. For excavations identified in §4.23.5.1 subject to current Maine Department of Environmental Protection permitting, the new owner or operator shall submit evidence to the Town that the excavation meets either of the following conditions:
1. The excavation has a valid Site Location of Development License pursuant to 38 MRSA Section 481.
2. The excavation has a valid gravel pit or rock quarry registration from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to 38 MRSA 490-C, or 490-Y.
4.23.13.2 Certification of intent to comply. The new owner or operator of all excavations shall submit a written certification of intent to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance.
4.23.13.3 New surety required. Where there is a change in ownership of an excavation operation for which a surety has been provided, the new owner shall be responsible for providing a new surety in accordance with the requirements of §4.23.8.6. Such surety shall be provided before the Town releases the original surety.
4.23.13.4 New performance guarantee required. Where there is a change in ownership of an excavation operation for which a performance guarantee has been provided, the new owner shall be responsible for providing a new performance guarantee in accordance with the requirements of §4.23.8.6. Such performance guarantee shall be provided before the Town releases the original performance guarantee.
4.23.14 Annual Report. The owner or operator of all excavations shall submit a report for each separately permitted excavation to the Code Enforcement Officer of the Town no later than March 1 of each year on a form specified by the Town. The report shall include the following information:
4.23.14.1 Name, address, telephone number, fax, and email address of owner.
4.23.14.2 Name, address, telephone number, fax, and email address of operator if different from owner.
4.23.14.3 Location of excavation with street address or directions to the excavation and Town Lot and Map designation.
4.23.14.4 Area in acres of working excavation.
4.23.14.5 Total area in acres that is currently permitted for excavation.
4.23.14.6 Total area in acres that is “grandfathered” in accordance with §4.23.3, §4.23.7.1, §4.23.9.2, or §4.23.11 of this Ordinance.
4.23.14.7 Total area in acres that has been excavated.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-61
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.23.14.8 Total area in acres that has been reclaimed.
4.23.14.9 An estimate of when the total area that is expected to be excavated will reach the limits of the area that has been permitted for excavation.
4.23.14.10 A statement of whether or not the Department of Environmental Protection has conducted an on-site inspection since the most recent previous report.
4.23.14.11 A signed statement attesting that the information submitted in the report is truthful, accurate, and correct to the best of the knowledge of the owner or operator and reaffirming that the excavation is in full compliance with the permit issued under this Ordinance.
4.23.14.12 Payment of required fee.
4.23.14.13 Copy of annual inspection as contained in §4.23.10.
4.23.15 Performance Guarantees. The Town may require a bond payable to the Town with sureties satisfactory to the Town or such other security as the Town may determine adequately secures compliance with this ordinance, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the requirements set forth in this ordinance. Other security may include a security deposit with the Town, an escrow account and agreement, insurance or an irrevocable trust. In determining the amount of the bond or the security, the Board shall take into consideration the character and nature of the overburden, the future suitable use of the land involved and the cost of grading and reclamation required. All proceeds of forfeited bonds or other security must be expended by the Town for the reclamation of the area for which the bond was posted and any remainder returned to the operator. Assurance may include the following:
4.23.15.1 Performance standards relating to operation or maintenance plans;
4.23.15.2 Performance standards for determining the reclamation period including annual revisions of those plans;
4.23.15.3 Limits, terms and conditions on bonds or other security;
4.23.15.4 Proof of financial responsibility of a person engaged in excavation activity or the affiliated person who guarantees performance;
4.23.15.4 Estimation of reclamation costs; and reports on reclamation activities; or the manner of determining when the bond or other security may be discharged.
4.23.16 Enforcement
4.23.16.1 A penalty fee shall be assessed for a failure to file the required Annual Report with payment of the required Annual Fee by March 1 of each year in accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance.
4.23.16.2 Failure to pay the required Annual Fee by July 1 of each year or failure to file the required Annual Report by July 1 of each year shall constitute sufficient cause for the Town to terminate any excavation permit that has been issued under the provisions of this Ordinance.
4.23.16.3 Failure to comply with any of the terms of the excavation permit granted under this Ordinance shall constitute sufficient cause for the Town to terminate that permit or to undertake any other appropriate enforcement action or penalties.
4.23.16.4 Failure to comply with any approval granted under this Ordinance or any other requirement of this Ordinance shall be considered a violation, which may be subject to enforcement under the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-62
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.24 Performance Standards for Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensaries, Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facilities and Methadone Clinics
4.24.1 Adequacy of Building for the Subject Use. The property and building for a Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary and/or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility and/or Methadone Clinic shall be adequate to accommodate sufficient interior space so as not to have outside patient queuing on sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas outside of the building(s). A letter of compliance from the Town of Hampden Code Enforcement Officer shall be submitted to the Planning Board as part of the site plan application. The size of the inside waiting area shall be calculated at a minimum of 15 square feet per person based on total client capacity (registered patients and the registered primary caregiver of each registered patient). Any Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary and/or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall adhere to the laws of the State of Maine and the State of Maine Rules Governing the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Program (10-144 CMR Chapter 122), and any Methadone Clinic shall adhere to the laws of the State of Maine and the State of Maine Regulations for Licensing and Certifying Substance Abuse Treatment Programs (14-118 CMR Chapter 5), as any the same may be amended from time to time, and to Ordinances and Codes of the Town of Hampden, as the same may be amended from time to time.
4.24.2 Required Setbacks. No Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary and/or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility and/or Methadone Clinic shall be located within 500 feet of the property line upon which the Dispensary and/or Facility and or Methadone Clinic is or are located and the nearest property line of a preexisting public or private school.
4.24.3 Maximum Number of Subject Use Within the Town of Hampden. No more than one (1) Medical Marijuana Registered Facility and/or one (1) Marijuana Cultivation Facility and/or one (1) Methadone Clinic shall be located in the Town of Hampden. If both a Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary and a Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility are located in Hampden, they shall be located on the same property and shall be under common ownership.
4.24.4 Hours of Operation. A Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary shall only be open for business between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. daily. A Methadone Clinic shall only be open between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
4.24.5 Signs and Advertising. Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary and/or Medical Cultivation Facility and/or Methadone Clinic shall conform to the provisions of §4.7.5, Signs, of this Ordinance.
In addition thereto, any freestanding or sign attached to building(s) in which the Dispensary and/or Facility is located in shall clearly state that it is a Medical Marijuana Dispensary and/or Medical Cultivation Facility and/or Methadone Clinic. There shall be no signage in any window and/or door, except for the hours of operation and the presence of a security system. In addition, no signage or advertising shall use the word “marijuana” or “cannabis,” or any other word, phrase or symbol commonly understood to refer to marijuana unless such word, phrase or symbol is immediately preceded by the word “medical” in type and font that is at least as readily discernible as all other words, phrases or symbols on the sign. Such signage and advertising must clearly indicate that the products and services are offered only for medical marijuana patients and primary caregivers and/or methadone clinic patients.
4.24.6 Security Requirements for Subject Use. Security measures at a Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary and /or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility and/or Methadone Clinic shall include the following at a very minimum:
4.24.6.1 Security surveillance cameras installed and operating twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week to monitor all entrances, along with the interior and exterior of the Dispensary
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-63
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
and/or Facility and/or Clinic, to discourage and facilitate the reporting of criminal acts and nuisance activities occurring on the property;
4.24.6.2 Door and window intrusion, robbery and burglary alarm systems with an audible on-site system and Police Department notification components that are professionally monitored and maintained in good working condition, using hard line traditional telephone communications and cellular communications;
4.24.6.3 A safe affixed to the building in which it is located that is suitable for the storage of all prepared and/or processed marijuana and cash stored overnight in the Dispensary and/or Facility, and a secure storage container for methadone and cash stored overnight in a Clinic;
4.24.6.4 Exterior lighting that illuminates all exterior walls of the licensed Dispensary and/or Facility and/or Clinic; and
4.24.6.5 Deadbolt locks on all exterior doors and locks or bars on any other access point.
4.24.6.6 All security recordings shall be preserved for thirty (30) days by the management of the licensed Dispensary and/or Facility and/or Clinic.
4.24.7 Consumption, Ingestion Or Inhalation Of Medical Marijuana. The consumption, ingestion or inhalation of medical marijuana on or within the property of a Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary and/or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility is prohibited; provided, however, that a Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary and/or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility employee who is a registered patient, as that term is defined in 22 M.R.S.A. Section 2422(12), as the same may be amended from time to time, may consume medical marijuana inside the building(s) on the licensed property, if such consumption occurs via oral consumption and not by smoking. For purposes of this subsection, the term "licensed property" shall include the lot or parcel of the land upon which the Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary and/or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility are located.
4.24.8 Visibility Of Activities; Control Of Emissions; Disposal Plan for Subject Use. Visibility of activities; control of emissions; disposal plan for a Medical Marijuana Registered Facility and/or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility and/or Methadone Clinic shall be as follows:
4.24.8.1 All activities of a Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary and/or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility and/or Methadone Clinic, including, without limitation, cultivating, growing, processing, displaying, selling and storage shall be conducted indoors.
4.24.8.2 No marijuana or paraphernalia shall be displayed or kept in a Dispensary or Facility so as to be visible from outside the building (s).
4.24.8.3 Sufficient measures and means of preventing smoke, odors, debris, dust, fluids and other substances from exiting a Dispensary and/or Facility and/or Clinic must be provided at all times. Sufficient measures shall be provided for the proper disposal of all such materials, items and other substances in a safe, sanitary and secure manner and in accordance with all applicable state and local laws and regulations.
4.24.8.4 Any Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary and/or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall have in place an operation plan, subject to the approval of Hampden Public Safety, for proper disposal of marijuana related byproducts.
4.24.8.5 Class II Buffers in accordance with §4.7.2 Buffers and Landscaping shall be provided along each lot line or at least along each line of the developed area of buildings and parking areas.
4.24.9 Limitations of Food Products. No food products shall be sold, prepared, produced or assembled by a Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary except in compliance with all operation and other requirements of state and local law and regulation, including without limitation, food establishment
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-64
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
licensing requirements. Any goods containing marijuana for human consumption shall be stored in a secure area.
4.24.10 Compliance With State and Local Law. A Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary and/or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility and/or Methadone Clinic shall meet all operating and other requirements of state and local law and regulation. To the extent the State of Maine has adopted or adopts in the future any stricter law or regulation governing medical marijuana dispensaries or methadone clinics, the stricter law or regulation shall control.
4.25 Accessory Apartments. Notwithstanding the minimum lot size requirements of this Zoning Ordinance, construction of an accessory apartment is allowed upon the granting of a Conditional Use Permit either within or attached to a new or existing detached single-family dwelling or within or attached to a new or existing detached accessory structure subject to the requirements below. It should be noted that properties within any zoning district that allows two-family dwellings by right have the option of considering a second unit that is within the single family house to be a two-family dwelling as opposed to an accessory apartment.
4.25.1 Purpose. The purpose of the Accessory Apartment section is to:
4.25.1.1 Provide homeowners with a means of providing relatives with housing, enabling the homeowner to provide care and companionship in a private home setting;
4.25.1.2 Provide homeowners with a means of obtaining, through tenants in accessory apartments, rental income, companionship, security, and services, and thereby to enable them to stay more comfortably in homes and neighborhoods they might otherwise be forced to leave;
4.25.1.3 Add rental units to the housing stock to meet the needs of smaller households, both young and old; and
4.25.1.4 Protect stability, property values, and the residential character of a neighborhood by ensuring that accessory apartments are installed only in owner-occupied houses and under such additional conditions as may be appropriate to further the purposes of this ordinance.
4.25.2 Accessory Apartment Standards. The following standards must be met for a Conditional Use Permit to be granted:
4.25.2.1 Only one accessory apartment may be created on the property.
4.25.2.2 The owner(s) of the residence in which the accessory apartment is located must occupy at least one of the dwelling units on the premises.
4.25.2.3 The accessory apartment shall clearly be a subordinate part of the single family dwelling, designed so that the appearance of the building remains that of a single family residence or detached accessory structure. Where feasible, any new entrances should be located on the side or rear of the building.
4.25.2.4 An accessory apartment shall occupy no more than 40 percent of the living area of the single family home nor have more than two bedrooms. An addition to the original building is permitted provided that the addition is designed in such a manner as to retain the appearance of the building as a single family dwelling or detached accessory structure (e.g. garage, carriage house).
4.25.2.5 In order to provide for the development of housing units for disabled and handicapped individuals, the Planning Board will allow reasonable deviation from these limits to allow installation of features that facilitate access and mobility for the occupants in cases where an accessory apartment is designed or remodeled for such individuals.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-65
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.25.2.6 There shall be at least one dedicated off-street parking space provided for the accessory apartment, and to the extent feasible it shall be located to the side or the rear of the structure.
4.26 Private Event Venue
4.26.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate Private Event Venues to ensure they are designed and operated in such a manner as to minimize potential nuisance issues with abutters and to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of those in the neighborhood.
4.26.2 Exemptions. The following sites are exempt from the provisions of this §4.26: place of worship, property owned by the Town of Hampden, RSU 22, state owned property that is used for public purposes, or property owned by a non-profit club.
4.26.3 Standards. Private Event Venues must meet the following standards:
Standard
Rural
Rural
Bus / Bus B
TC
CS
Waterfront
Min lot size1
5-20
>20
3
5
3
5
Buffers2
Class 23
Class 23
Class 2
Class 2
Class 1
Class 1
Min distance to nearest dwelling
150’
150’
100’
100’
100’
100’
Max number of events/year
104
Unlimited
Unlimited
Unlimited
Unlimited
Unlimited
Max number of days/event5
1
3
7
3
7
7
Hours for event6
9 am to 10 pm
8 am to 10 pm
8 am to 10 pm
8 am to 10 pm
8 am to 11 pm
8 am to 11 pm
Max number of attendees/event7
125
200
300
300
300
300
Permanent signage8
12 sq ft
12 sq ft
Per §4.7.5.7.1
Per §4.7.5.7.5
Per §4.7.5.7.3
Per §4.7.5.7.1
Neighborhood notification9
Required
Required
Not Required
Not Required
Not Required
Not Required
(See footnotes on next page)
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-66
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Footnotes:
1. Minimum acreage of the parcel or parcels that are part of the proposed venue.
2. Buffer required on property lines abutting a residential district or an existing residential use. The Planning Board may modify this requirement by no more than 20% if the physical characteristics of the site prevent the installation of the full buffer, and a smaller buffer would not adversely impact any abutting properties. The Planning Board may modify this requirement to relocate the buffer to be closer to the area where the activity will occur, based on the topography and vegetative type (e.g. open field, wooded) of the site and the general neighborhood.
3. The Board may require a greater buffer if it is determined that sound or light impacts to abutters warrant a greater buffer, based on the topography and existing vegetation (e.g. wooded or open field) on the venue property that lies between the venue and nearby residences.
4. Events held between 9:00 am and 5:00 pm that are held entirely indoors are not counted against this limit, provided the venue has permanent sanitary facilities designed for the maximum number of attendees the facility is designed for.
5. Maximum number of days per event does not include ancillary activities such as wedding rehearsals, rehearsal dinners, decorating the venue, and similar activities for preparation for an event.
6. The hours for the event include activities related to setting up or taking down that produce noise audible at the property line, such as testing musical equipment, but does not include indoor activities or quiet outdoor activities such as setting up chairs, setting tables, and decorating the venue. All activities must cease and all attendees must vacate the property no later than 1 hour after the time listed in the table.
7. The Planning Board may approve an application for no more than 20% more attendees in cases where the event facilities (e.g. buildings housing event hall, restrooms, tents, or outdoor stage or seating area) are situated on the site such that the impact on abutting properties is negligible.
8. Relates to permanent signage, see below for temporary signage.
9. Neighborhood notification is a requirement to mail or email written notice of planned events to all direct abutters as well as any other residences in the neighborhood that request such notification; such notification to be a listing of planned events scheduled for the following month (or more at the venue operators option). The listing must include the dates, type of event, estimated number of attendees, expected hours of the event, and contact information for the venue operator. The purpose of this notification is to allow the neighbors to be aware of the dates and times of events.
4.26.4 In addition to the above standards, all proposed Private Event Venues must comply with the following criteria regardless of which zoning district they are in:
4.26.4.1 Major Site Plan Review is required regardless of whether there are any permanent buildings proposed or not.
4.26.4.2 All parking must be on the site of the venue or on another property provided there is a written agreement with the owner of that property (if not owned by the venue owner) and the off-site location is within walking distance or a shuttle service is provided to transport guests to the venue; no on-street parking is permitted.
4.26.4.3 All parking lots must comply with the requirements of §4.7.1.6.
4.26.4.4 Private event venues with capacity for more than 100 attendees must submit a Traffic and Parking Management Plan as part of the Site Plan application. This Plan must address how traffic will be handled on the adjacent roads and at any critical intersections leading to the site, as determined by the Planning Board (e.g. hire police detail), in addition to the entrance to the site. It must also address how traffic circulation within the parking lot will be handled (e.g. staff to direct attendees to parking spaces). Traffic management must be carried out to handle both traffic arriving at and leaving the site. This Traffic and Parking Management Plan is completely separate from any plan or permit required by the Maine DOT.
4.26.4.5 On-site temporary signage is permitted to guide attendees to the venue, provided the signage is limited to directional instructions and is only displayed on the day(s) of the event and must be removed within one day of the conclusion of the event.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-67
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
4.26.4.6 Outdoor lighting for the event, including parking lot lighting, must be turned off within one hour of the conclusion of the event. All permanent light fixtures must comply with §4.7.3, Lighting. All temporary light fixtures must be located and aimed such that they do not shine light onto abutting properties or produce glare on adjacent roads.
4.26.4.7 Sanitary facilities:
4.26.4.7.1 For venues approved for more than 6 events per year, permanent bathroom facilities must be provided in compliance with the Maine State Plumbing Code. Additional portable facilities may be used to supplement the permanent facilities.
4.26.4.7.2 For venues approved for 6 or fewer events per year, portable bathroom facilities are permitted. At least one must be handicap accessible.
4.26.4.7.3 The location of each area where portable facilities will be located for all events must be shown on the site plan.
4.26.4.8 The serving of alcoholic beverages must be in compliance with all applicable state laws.
4.26.4.9 Overnight accommodations for attendees is only permitted in duly approved facilities, which may be located on the same property as the Private Event Venue.
4.26.4.10 The site must comply with all applicable state and federal laws concerning accommodations of disabilities, including but not limited to the Americans with Disabilities Act.
4.26.4.11 The owner must comply with the Town of Hampden Private Event Venue Licensing Ordinance.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
4-68
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
5-1
Town of Hampden, Maine
Effective Date: December 4, 2019 Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE 5 - ENFORCEMENT
5.1 Administrative Officer - This Ordinance shall be enforced by a Code Enforcement Officer appointed by the Town Manager with confirmation by the Town Council.
5.2 Duties - The Code Enforcement Officer, in enforcing this Ordinance, shall be responsible for establishing reasonable procedures for enforcement, keeping all activities within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance under surveillance, issuing building and/or use permits where applicable, keeping public records of his proceeding and instituting or causing to be instituted any or all actions that might be appropriate for the enforcement of this Ordinance.
5.3 Permits - Application for a building permit and/or a certificate of compliance shall be made in accordance with the following.
5.3.1 Building Permits
5.3.1.1 Building Permit Required - Building Permits shall be required per the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code as amended from time to time.
5.3.1.2 No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. However, when a building permit is requested for a lot within a subdivision approved by the Planning Board and recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds and has not been vacated, a building permit may be issued without compliance with the frontage requirement of §3.4.1.
5.3.1.3 Within fourteen (14) days of the filing of an application for a building permit, the Code Enforcement Officer shall approve or deny such application or shall refer the applicant to the planning board or the Board of Appeals. The decision shall be in writing and communicated directly to the applicant. In the case of a denial of an application, the decision shall include reasons for such. One (1) copy of the Code Enforcement Officer's decision shall be filed in the municipal office.
5.3.1.4 No building permit for a building or structure on any lot shall be issued except to the owner of record thereof, or his authorized agent. The Code Enforcement Officer may require that any application for such a permit shall be accompanied by a plan, accurately drawn to scale, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, an on site soils survey, the exact location and size of all buildings or structures already on the lot, the location of new buildings to be constructed, together with the lines within which all buildings and structures are to be constructed, the existing and intended use of each building or structure, and other such information as may be necessary to provide for the execution and enforcement of this Ordinance.
5.3.1.5 Applications for permits with their accompanying plans and building permits shall be maintained as a permanent record by the Code Enforcement Officer.
5.3.1.6 A building permit secured under the provisions of this Ordinance shall expire if the work or change is not commenced within twelve (12) months of the date on which the permit is granted, or if the work or change is not substantially completed within two (2) years of the date on which the permit is granted.
5.3.1.7 No building permit, demolition permit, earth moving permit, sign permit, certificate of occupancy, or certificate of compliance shall be issued without payment of fees in accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance. Any structure on which construction, including but
5-2
Town of Hampden, Maine
Effective Date: December 4, 2019 Zoning Ordinance
not limited to foundation work, has begun before the issuance of a building permit will be assessed double the above described fees.
5.3.1.8 Wastewater Disposal Permit Required - No building permit shall be issued for any structure or use involving the construction, installation, or alteration of plumbing facilities unless either a subsurface wastewater disposal permit or sewer hook-on permit has been secured by the applicant or his authorized agent in conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules or the Town of Hampden Sewer Ordinance.
5.3.2 Certificate of Occupancy and Certificate of Compliance
5.3.2.1 Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy is required for any structure requiring a building permit.
1. After completion of the work permitted by the building permit and stabilization of the site, the applicant shall submit an application for a certificate of occupancy to the Code Enforcement Officer.
2. The Code Enforcement Officer, Building Official, and Fire Inspector shall inspect the site and the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue the certificate of occupancy only upon finding that the building, structure, or site and the use or occupancy thereof comply with the provisions of this Ordinance, any other applicable codes/ordinances, and of any site plan or subdivision plan approved by the Planning Board (see certificate of compliance, below).
3. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue or deny the certificate of occupancy within fifteen days of receipt of the application.
4. Certificates of occupancy for structures on subdivision lots may only be granted if the public improvements in accordance with the Planning Board approved Subdivision Plan or phase are completed and associated roads, if any, are accepted by the Town Council, or for a private road, approved by the Director of Public Works.
5. The Code Enforcement Officer may issue one conditional certificate of occupancy, valid for no more than twelve (12) months from the date issued, upon the request of the permit holder, if in the judgment of the Code Enforcement Officer the portion or portions of the structure may be occupied safely. Once the structure is completed, the applicant shall apply for a “final” certificate of occupancy.
6. The Code Enforcement Officer shall maintain a public record of all certificates of occupancy which are issued.
5.3.2.2 Certificate of Compliance. A certificate of compliance is required for any development requiring a site plan approval, conditional use permit, or subdivision approval from the Planning Board. A Certificate of Compliance is also required for Home Day Care.
1. After completion of the work permitted by the Planning Board and stabilization of the site, the applicant shall submit an application for a certificate of compliance to the Code Enforcement Officer. An as-built plan in both full size paper and digital format (pdf) must be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer for any project that involved a site plan, sketch plan, or subdivision plan.
2. The Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Inspector, and Town Planner shall inspect the site and the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue the certificate of compliance only upon finding that the site, including all buildings, structures, site improvements, use, and occupancy comply with the provisions of this Ordinance, other applicable ordinances, and the site or subdivision plan and decision (Board Order) approved by the Planning Board.
3. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue or deny the certificate of compliance within fifteen days of receipt of the application.
5-3
Town of Hampden, Maine
Effective Date: December 4, 2019 Zoning Ordinance
4. Certificates of compliance for developments within approved subdivisions may only be granted if the public improvements in accordance with the Planning Board approved subdivision plan or phase are completed and associated roads, if any, are accepted by the Town Council.
5. The Code Enforcement Officer may issue one conditional certificate of compliance, valid for no more than twelve (12) months from the date issued, upon the request of the permit holder, if in the judgment of the Code Enforcement Officer and Town Planner the completed portion or portions of the site may be occupied safely. Once the development is completed, the applicant shall apply for a “final” certificate of compliance. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of the Planning Board approval.
6. The Code Enforcement Officer shall maintain a public record of all certificates of compliance which are issued.
5.3.2.3 The Code Enforcement Officer shall in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of compliance issued under the provisions of this ordinance if the certificate was issued in error, if the certificate was issued on the basis of incorrect information supplied by the applicant, or where it is determined that the building, structure, or site is in violation of the Town of Hampden Zoning Ordinance.
5.4 Legal Action and Violations - When any violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be found to exist, the Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, that may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance in the name of the Town of Hampden. However, this section shall not prevent any person entitled to equitable relief from enjoining any act contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance.
5.4.1 Any person, firm, or corporation, being the owner of, or having control of, or the use of, any building or land or part thereof, who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a civil violation and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with the following:
5.4.1.1 The minimum penalty for starting construction or undertaking a land use activity without a required permit shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), and the maximum penalty shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00); and
5.4.1.2 The minimum penalty for a specific violation shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), and the maximum penalty shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
All civil penalties imposed shall enure to the benefit of the Town of Hampden. Each day any violation continues to exist after notification shall constitute a separate offense.
5-4
Town of Hampden, Maine
Effective Date: December 4, 2019 Zoning Ordinance
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
6-1
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
ARTICLE 6 - APPEALS
6.1 Creation and Appointment of the Board of Appeals
6.1.1 Establishment - A Board of Appeals is hereby established in accordance with the state law and the provisions of this Ordinance. The Board of Appeals shall be governed by the provisions of the Town of Hampden Board of Appeals Ordinance including but not limited to filing deadlines, application requirements, fees, appeal procedures, decisions of the Board of Appeals and subsequent appeals to Superior Court.
6.2 Jurisdiction
6.2.1 Administrative Appeals - All administrative appeals shall be subject to the provisions of the Town of Hampden Board of Appeals Ordinance including but not limited to filing deadlines, application requirements, fees, appeal procedures, decisions of the Board of Appeals and subsequent appeals to Superior Court. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide administrative appeals. An administrative appeal is an appeal:
6.2.1.1 Where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination by the code enforcement officer or the planning board in the enforcement of this Ordinance. For an alleged error to be reviewed, it must involve a standard which is easily measurable such as a dimensional or numerical standard. A decision of the planning board, based on a judgmental, non-numerical standard, is not a matter for review by the Board of Appeals. If the Board of Appeals finds that the code enforcement officer or the planning board acted wrongly in the administration or enforcement of this Ordinance relative to such dimensional or numerical standards, upon a vote in favor of the appellant of at least five (5) members of the Board of Appeals, the board may order the code enforcement officer or the planning board to modify or reverse their decision.
6.2.1.2 Where it is alleged that the planning board or the code enforcement officer refused to consider certain information or evidence, submitted by the applicant or an interested party, in making its decision. In this case the appellant must prove to the Board of Appeals that the information in question was submitted, that it is germane to the issue under consideration, and that the accused board or officer did not consider the information in making its decision. A vote in favor of the appellant must include a majority vote of the Board of Appeals members present and eligible to vote, provided such vote shall include at least two (2) votes in favor of the appellant.
6.2.1.3 Where there are contradictions or incomplete or inconclusive definitions within this Ordinance which affect the decisions of the planning board or the code enforcement officer in the enforcement of the Ordinance in a specific case. In the case of contradictions, the Board of Appeals shall first resolve the conflict in favor of the property owner and then notify the planning board and the town council of any potential need to amend the Ordinance. In the case of incomplete or inconclusive definition, the Board of Appeals shall clarify the definition based on any of the following consideration: the context in which the word is used in the Ordinance; the legislative intent implicit in the use of the word; definitions given by experts qualified in the field under consideration; other evidence which is germane to the issue but does not involve the specific proposal at hand; and ordinary usage of the word.
A vote in favor of the appellant must include a majority vote of the Board of Appeals members present and eligible to vote provided such vote shall include at least two (2) votes in favor of the appellant. The Board of Appeals shall then report its decision to the appropriate board or officer for such board or officer to use in the execution of their duty as assigned under this Ordinance.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
6-2
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
6.2.1.4 Or where it is alleged that a procedural error was made by the planning board or the code enforcement officer in the administration or enforcement of this Ordinance. In this case, if the appellant proves that a procedural error has been made, the Board of Appeals shall remand the case back to the appropriate board or officer and order that the case be reconsidered, following the correct procedure(s). A vote in favor of the appellant must include a majority vote of the Board of Appeals members present and eligible to vote provided such vote shall include at least two (2) votes in favor of the appellant.
6.2.2 Variances - The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide variance applications, with the exception of accessibility to dwellings for persons with disabilities (see §6.2.2.3.2). All variance applications are subject to the provisions of the Town of Hampden Board of Appeals Ordinance including but not limited to filing deadlines, application requirements, fees, decisions of the Board of Appeals and appeals to Superior Court. A variance from the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance may be granted by the Board of Appeals in accordance with the following provisions.
6.2.2.1 General Variances. A variance may be granted from the restrictions imposed by Zoning Ordinance in §3.4.1, Table of Dimensional Requirements, Maximum Building Height, §4.3, Rural Alternate Frontage Lots, §4.10, Use of Residence for Business Purposes, or §4.18, Essential Services, only when a strict application of the Ordinance to the petitioner and the petitioner's property would cause undue hardship, which means that:
1. The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted; and
2. The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood; and
3. The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and
4. The hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner; and
5. When a variance to the maximum height restriction listed in §3.4.1 is requested, the setbacks must be increased by one foot for every foot of additional height over the maximum height allowed in the Table of Dimensional Requirements.
6.2.2.2 Dimensional Variances. A variance may be granted to reduce the restrictions imposed by Zoning Ordinance in §3.4.1, Table of Dimensional Requirements pertaining to lot area, frontage, building coverage, impervious coverage, or setbacks, only when the following conditions exist:
1. Strict application of the Ordinance to the petitioner and the petitioner's property would cause a practical difficulty, which means that the strict application of the Ordinance to the property precludes the ability of the petitioner to pursue a use permitted in the zoning district in which the property is located and results in significant economic injury to the petitioner; and
2. The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the general condition of the neighborhood; and
3. The granting of a variance will not produce an undesirable change in the character of the neighborhood and will not unreasonably detrimentally affect the use or market value of abutting properties; and
4. The practical difficulty is not the result of action taken by the petitioner or a prior owner; and
5. No other feasible alternative to a variance is available to the petitioner; and
6. The granting of a variance will not unreasonably adversely affect the natural environment; and
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
6-3
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
7. The property is not located in whole or in part within shoreland areas as delineated in Hampden’s Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
6.2.2.3 Disability Variances. Requests for variances related to persons with a disability may be approved as follows. In this section, the term “disability” has the same meaning as a physical or mental disability under Title 5 MRSA §4553-A, as amended. All medical records and other documents submitted for the purpose of describing or verifying a person’s disability are confidential.
1. Vehicle Storage. The Board of Appeals may grant a variance to an owner of a dwelling for the purpose of making that dwelling accessible to a person with a disability who resides in or regularly uses the dwelling for the construction of a place of storage and parking for a noncommercial vehicle and no other purpose. For the purposes of this paragraph, “noncommercial vehicle” means a motor vehicle as defined in Title 29-A, §101-42 with a gross vehicle weight of no more than 6,000 pounds, bearing a disability registration plate issued pursuant to Title 29-A, §521 and owned by the person with the permanent disability. The width and length of the structure may not be larger than two times the width and length of the noncommercial vehicle. The owner must submit proposed plans for the structure with the variance request. The applicant must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the person’s disability is permanent. The board may impose conditions on the variance.
2. Dwelling Accessibility. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to issue a permit to an owner of a dwelling for the purpose of making that dwelling accessible to a person with a disability who resides in or regularly uses the dwelling, even when the proposed structures encroach into setbacks and would require a variance. However, only structures or equipment necessary to provide ingress and egress for the person with the disability may be approved for a variance under this subsection. Eligible structures include ramps and associated railings, and walls or roof systems necessary for the safety or effectiveness of the ramps. The Code Enforcement Officer may impose conditions on the permit, including limiting the permit to the duration of the disability or to the time that the person with the disability lives in the dwelling.
6.2.2.4 The variance authority of the Board of Appeals is limited to the matters expressly set forth in §6.2.2.1, §6.2.2.2.and §6.2.2.3. Establishment of or an expansion of a nonconforming use shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district.
6.2.2.5 The Board of Appeals shall grant a variance only by a concurring vote of at least a simple majority of the Board as constituted and in so doing, may prescribe any conditions and safeguards as are deemed necessary or appropriate by the board for carrying out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance. The Board shall not hear within any twelve (12) month period more than one variance application requesting the same, or substantially similar, relief.
6.3. Appeal Procedure
6.3.1 In all cases outlined under the provisions of §6.2.1 of this Ordinance, a person aggrieved by the decision of a town board or official shall commence his appeal within thirty (30) days after a decision is made by said board or official. The appeal shall be filed with the Board of Appeals on forms approved by the board, and the aggrieved person shall specifically set forth on the form the grounds for the appeal.
6.3.2 Following the filing of an appeal, and before taking action on any appeal, the Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting which would be held more than twenty (20) days from the date the appeal was filed. The Board of Appeals shall notify the code enforcement officer and the planning board, in advance, of the time and place of the hearing, and shall
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
6-4
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
publish notice of the hearing at least ten (10) days in advance in a newspaper of general circulation in the area.
6.3.3 In appeals involving the use of buildings or premises, the Board of Appeals shall notify by mail the appellant and the owners of all property within five hundred (500') feet of the property involved at least ten (10) days in advance of the hearing, of the nature of the appeal and of the time and place of the public hearing.
6.3.4 In the case of appeals involving space and bulk regulations or interpretation, the Board of Appeals shall notify by mail the appellant and only the owners of property abutting the property for which an appeal is taken, at least ten (10) days in advance of the hearing, of the nature of the appeal and of the time and place of the public hearing thereon. For the purpose of this section, abutting properties shall include properties directly across a street or waterbody from the property for which the appeal is made if such property is located in the Town of Hampden.
6.3.5 All variance appeals shall include application fees paid in accordance with the Town of Hampden Fees Ordinance.
6.3.6 The owners of property shall be considered to be those against whom taxes are assessed. Failure of any property owner to receive a notice of public hearing shall not necessitate another hearing or invalidate any action by the Board of Appeals.
6.3.7 Within thirty-five (35) days of the public hearing, the Board of Appeals shall reach a decision on an appeal at a public meeting and shall inform, in writing, the appellant, the code enforcement officer, the planning board, and town council of its decision and its reasons therefore.
6.3.8 Upon notification of the granting of an appeal by the Board of Appeals, the code enforcement officer or the appropriate board or officer of the town shall issue the contested permit in accordance with the conditions of the approval.
6.3.9 A variance under the provisions of this Ordinance secured by vote of the Board of Appeals shall expire if the work or change involved is not commenced within one year of the date on which the appeal is granted, and if the work or change is not substantially completed within two (2) years.
6.3.10 An appeal may be taken from the decision of the Board of Appeals to the superior court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the written decision with the town office and in accordance with the provisions of rule 80(B) of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
6.3.11 A copy of all variances granted by the Board of Appeals for property within shoreland areas shall be submitted to the department of environmental protection.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
7-1
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
ARTICLE 7 - DEFINITIONS
7.1 Construction Language - In this Ordinance, certain terms or words shall be interpreted as follows: The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual; the present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive; the words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended", "designed", or "arranged to be used or occupied", the word "building" includes the word "structure" and the word "dwelling" includes the word "residence", the word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel". In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Ordinance and any map or illustration, the text shall control.
Terms not defined shall have the customary dictionary meaning in the Merriam-Webster print or online dictionary.
7.2 Definitions - In this Ordinance the following terms shall have the following meanings unless a contrary meaning is required by the context or is specifically prescribed:
Accessory Apartment: A separate housekeeping unit, complete with its own sleeping facilities, kitchen and sanitary facilities, that is contained within the structure of a single family dwelling or detached accessory structure on the premises.
Accessory use or structure: A use or structure of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to those of the principal use or structure.
Accessory structure (mobile home parks): A detached, subordinate structure, the use of which is clearly incidental and related to that of the principal structure or use of the land, and which is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use.
Adult use marijuana: All parts of the plant of the genus Cannabis whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or its resin including cannabis concentrate. "Adult use marijuana" does not include industrial hemp, fiber produced from the stalks, oil, cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination or any ingredient combined with cannabis to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink or any other product.
Adult use marijuana cultivation: the planting, propagation, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming or other processing of marijuana for use or sale, including “nursery cultivation” as that term is used in 28-B MRSA Chapter 1. "Cultivation" does not include manufacturing, testing or marijuana extraction.
Adult use marijuana product: a product composed of marijuana or marijuana concentrate and other ingredients that is intended for use or consumption, including but not limited to an edible marijuana product, a marijuana ointment and a marijuana tincture, but excluding marijuana concentrate.
Adult use marijuana product manufacture: the production, blending, infusing, compounding or other preparation of marijuana and marijuana products, including, but not limited to, marijuana extraction or preparation by means of chemical synthesis. "Manufacture" does not include cultivation or testing.
Adult use marijuana social club: An entity licensed to sell adult use marijuana and adult use marijuana products to consumers for consumption on the licensed premises.
Adult use marijuana store: An entity licensed to purchase adult use marijuana from an adult use marijuana cultivation facility and to purchase adult use marijuana products from an adult use marijuana products manufacturing facility and to sell adult use marijuana and adult use marijuana products to consumers.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
7-2
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Adult use marijuana testing: the research and analysis of marijuana, marijuana products or other substances for contaminants, safety or potency. "Testing" does not include cultivation or manufacturing.
Agriculture: The production, keeping or maintenance of plants and/or animals including but not limited to: forages and sod crops, grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry products; livestock; fruits and vegetables; and other plants. Agricultural uses include wholesaling, retailing, and processing of agricultural products which are customary and accessory to an agricultural use, including having a farm stand for sale of agricultural products produced on site. Agriculture does not include forest management, commercial nurseries and timber harvesting activities, or commercial cultivation of marijuana.
Agricultural Diversity Uses: Activities that are intended to diversify and supplement income generated on properties that are principally used for agriculture, and that are accessory uses to the principle agricultural uses of the property, including but not limited to farm-stay vacations, public events for education and enjoyment that directly relate to agricultural products, services, or experiences (e.g. horse show or competition, sheep shearing event).
Alteration: Any change, addition, or modification in construction, or any change in the structural members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.
Animals as usual pets: Those animals which by their type or behavior are suited to be pets in an urban or suburban neighborhood and which would not generally be disruptive to neighboring properties. Such animals include or are similar to dogs, cats, hamsters, rabbits, hen chickens, pigeons, or game hens. Such animals do not include roosters, nor wild animals such as raccoons, turkeys or deer.
Animals other than usual pets: Those animals which by their type or behavior are not generally suited to be pets in an urban or suburban neighborhood and which could be disruptive to neighboring properties. Such animals include horses, ponies, or similar animals. Such animals do not include wild animals such as raccoons, turkeys or deer. In addition, this definition includes animals as usual pets in quantities between 10 and 15.
Antiques dealership: A business specializing in antiques, including trade or restoration work, and may be a store for retail sale, a workspace for refurbishing or restoration, or a large structure or space for holding auctions.
Aquaculture: The growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater, estuarine, or marine plant or animal species.
Arterial street: Route 1A, Kennebec Road, Western Avenue, Route 69 and Coldbrook Road from Route 202 to the Hermon town line.
Attached commercial development: A complex of commercial structures consisting of individual self- contained units which are joined by a common wall, but are accessible only from out-of-doors and not through the interior of other joined units.
Automobile graveyard: A yard, field or other outdoor area used to store 3 or more unregistered or uninspected motor vehicles or parts of vehicles, and includes areas or buildings used for automobile dismantling, salvage, and recycling operations.
Automotive fuel station: A facility for the sale of gasoline or other fuels for automotive use. Such facilities may include convienence stores.
Automotive sales: A facility for the sale or rental of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, recreational vehicles (including trailers), or other such motorized vehicle.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
7-3
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Automotive service: A facility providing repair or maintenance of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, or recreational vehicles (including trailers). Such facilities may include an automotive fuel station or a carwash.
Average Daily Traffic (ADT): The average 24 hour volume of vehicular traffic on a roadway segment, being the total volume during a stated period divided by the number of days in that period.
Best Management Practices: "Best Management Practices" refers to the document “Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Best Management Practices” published by Bureau of Land and Water Quality, Maine Department of Environmental Protection, March, 2003 and as revised. “Best Management Practices” also means the erosion and sedimentation control practices and strategies contained in that document.
Bar, pub, tavern: Establishment or part of an establishment used primarily for the serving of alcoholic beverages and in which the service of food is incidental to the consumption of such beverages .
Bed and Breakfast: See Inn
Blasting: The use of explosives to break up or otherwise aid in the extraction or removal of rock or other consolidated natural formation.
Blazed Tree: A tree from which a section of bark has been removed to display a visible spot that can be easily recognized.
Buffer: An area of land along with buffering vegetation (existing or planted), berms, walls, or fences, that is located along the boundaries a property to mitigate visual and sound impacts of a land use on the uses on abutting properties.
Buffering vegetation: Shrubs or trees which provide a screen that is opaque or nearly opaque year-round from the ground to a height of at least ten feet at maturity. Where existing vegetation is present which is not opaque year-round, but where the depth of the vegetated area is large enough to provide a similar effect, such vegetation will be considered consistent with this definition.
Building coverage: The percentage of the lot covered by all buildings.
Building height: As defined by the current building code in effect in the Town of Hampden.
Business park: A subdivision of a tract of land, of twenty or more acres, into five or more lots, served by public water and sewer, with a master plan approved by the Planning Board, and intended primarily for commercial and/or industrial development. For the purposes hereof, a tract of land means all contiguous land in the same ownership.
Campground: Any area or tract of land designed or used to accommodate two (2) or more paying parties in temporary living quarters, including, but not limited to tents, recreational vehicles or other shelters.
Certificate of Occupancy: A certification by the Town stating that a structure has been constructed in compliance with all applicable codes and approvals. This includes MUBEC, the Hampden Life Safety Code Ordinance, the Hampden Zoning Ordinance, the State of Maine Plumbing Code, and the building permit that was issued for the structure.
Certificate of Compliance: A certification by the Town stating that a development site has been constructed in compliance with all applicable codes and approvals. This includes the Hampden Zoning Ordinance, Hampden Subdivision Ordinance, and the approved site plan or subdivision plan for the development.
Certified manufactured home: See definition under “Manufactured housing”.
Child Care Center: A building or buildings in which a person or persons maintains or otherwise carries out a program, for any part of the day, providing care and protection for 3 or more children. Child Care Centers,
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
7-4
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
with or without consideration for the services rendered, may be operated as a service business or within a church or community building.
Cluster development: A method of land subdivision and development in which the developer is allowed to vary certain site development specifications such as lot size requirements in return for providing more open space and better site design than would result from conventional subdivision and development practices.
Code enforcement officer: A person appointed by the municipal officers to administer and enforce this Ordinance. Reference to the code enforcement officer may be construed to include building inspector, plumbing inspector, electrical inspector and other duties assigned by the town council.
Conference center: A facility that includes meeting or banquet rooms for the purpose of holding meetings, seminars, or other gatherings. Hotel accomodations, a bar, or a restaurant may be included as ancillary uses. A conference center differs from a hotel with meeting rooms in that the primary business is accommodating large gatherings.
Commercial Nursery: The propagation and sale of woody plants and other customary nursery products. Sale of non agricultural products shall be limited.
Commercial Storefront: The first floor of a multi-story structure in which the glass area does not exceed 60% of the street facade measured from the ground elevation to the top of the lintel. In addition no one glass panel shall exceed 50 square feet in area.
Commercial Use: The use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than "Use of Residence for Business Purposes", as defined, the intent and result of which activity is the production of income from the buying or selling of goods and/or services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings and/or dwelling units.
Community building: A building owned by the municipality, RSU22, or a nonprofit organization which is used for educational, fraternal, cultural or recreational activities (e.g. auditorium, library, historical building, lodge, indoor swimming, performing arts center).
Community facility: Any land area, structure, building, location, equipment or combination thereof, operated for the purpose of providing public services for the residents of the Town of Hampden by the municipality, Hampden Water District, or local United States Post Office.
Conforming use: A use of buildings, structures or land which complies with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
Congregate care facility: Residential housing consisting of individual living and sleeping quarters and central dining facilities and within which a congregate housing supportive services program serves primarily elderly occupants which is licensed by the State of Maine.
Construction and Demolition Debris (CDD): Debris resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition of structures. It includes, but is not limited to, building materials, asphalt, wallboard, pipes, metal conduits, mattresses, household furniture, fish nets, rope, hose, wire and cable, fencing, carpeting and underlay; it excludes asbestos and other special wastes.
Day Care Facility: A dwelling in which a person or persons residing on the premises provides or maintains a regular program for consideration, for any part of the day, providing care and protection for four to twelve children.
Deck: A platform, without a roof or walls, either freestanding or attached to another structure, that may or may not have railings or access to the ground.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
7-5
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
District: A specified portion of the municipality, delineated on the official zoning map, within which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this Ordinance.
Disturbed area: Disturbed area is clearing, filling, grading and excavation. Disturbed area does not include routine maintenance, but does include redevelopment and new impervious areas. Routine maintenance, as it relates to disturbed area, is maintenance performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, and original purpose of the facility. Paving an impervious gravel surface while maintaining the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity and original purpose of the facility is considered routine maintenance. Mere cutting of trees, without grubbing, stump removal, disturbance or exposure of soil is not considered disturbed area.
Drive through business: Any establishment other than a drive-through restaurant which offers service via a window, automated teller machine (ATM) or other means whereby the driver of the automobile does not have to exit the vehicle.
Drug store or Pharmacy: An establishment engaged in the retail sales of prescription drugs, non-prescription medicines, medical equipment or supplies, with or without other consumer products for sale, but not including the sale of marijuana or products containing marijuana.
Duplex: A two family dwelling with a fire-rated separation wall between the two units and with the exterior designed to look like two separate units, e.g. separate front doors, separate garages, separate driveways, etc.
Dwelling: A fixed structure, containing one or more dwelling units.
Dwelling unit: A room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use as living quarters for one family, including provisions for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. The term shall include mobile homes but shall not include trailer or recreational vehicles.
Earth: Topsoil, sand, gravel, clay, peat, rock or other minerals.
Elderly: For use in elderly housing and congregate care facilities. A residential development whereby eighty (80%) percent of the occupants have attained sixty-two (62) years of age or are fifty-five (55) years old and are receiving some type of disability income. In the case of double occupancy of a unit, only one (1) resident is required to meet the age or disability requirement. Documentation shall be provided to demonstrate that the proposed project will meet the criteria of this definition.
Essential services: The construction of gas, electrical, communication facilities; steam, fuel or water distribution systems; collection, supply or disposal systems. For the purposes of this definition, a disposal system shall not be construed to include a solid waste disposal facility. Such systems may include poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories, and shall include buildings which are necessary for furnishing of such services but not administration, office, storage, or equipment servicing buildings. In order to qualify as an essential service, the service must be provided by a regulated public utility, the Town of Hampden, a water or sewer district, or a cable company that has a franchise agreement with the Town of Hampden.
Excavation: Any digging, mining, or removal of borrow, topsoil, loam, rock, sand, gravel, clay, silt, or other similar non-metallic earth materials whether alone or in combination.
Expansion of an existing excavation: An increase in the excavation, pit, quarry, and or stockpile as regulated in §4.23 which is clearly beyond the horizontal distance of any previously permitted or legally constituted area by a factor of 21,780 square feet.
Expansion of a structure: An increase in the floor area or volume of a structure, including all extensions such as, but not limited to attached: decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
7-6
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Expansion of use: The addition of months to a use's operating season; the use of more floor area or ground area; the increase in the volume or height of a use, including but not limited to the storage or disposal of materials of any kind; or the extraction of additional material such as gravel excavation.
Family: Shall mean an individual occupying a single dwelling unit, or a group of two or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit and living together as a single housekeeping unit, including the sharing of common living, sleeping, cooking and eating facilities. When occupancy of a dwelling unit is by a group of two or more persons, the group of persons occupying the dwelling must either be:
a. Related by blood, adoption, domestic partnership, or marriage; or
b. Comprised of two persons who are not related by blood, domestic partnership, adoption or marriage, and any children related to either or both of them by blood, adoption or marriage;
c. Comprised of persons, whether or not related to each other by blood, domestic partnership, adoption or marriage, but not to exceed four unrelated persons. Family shall not include a group of unrelated persons occupying a boarding home, rooming house, hotel/motel, tourist home or inn.
d. A Community Living Arrangement as defined by Title 30-A, Section 4357-A.
Note: For the purposes hereof, the number of unrelated persons occupying a dwelling unit shall be calculated as follows: Any persons related by blood, adoption or marriage plus one unrelated person shall be considered to constitute a total of two unrelated persons, and each additional unrelated person shall be added to determine the total number of unrelated persons occupying the dwelling unit. By way of example, two or more related persons occupying a dwelling unit combined with two unrelated persons occupying the dwelling unit yields a total of three unrelated persons occupying the dwelling unit.
Filling: Depositing or dumping any matter on or into the ground or water.
Freshwater wetland: For the purposes of shoreland zoning; freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and other similar areas which are; ten (10) or more contiguous acres; or of less than ten (10) acres and adjacent to a surface water body, excluding any river, stream or brook such that in its natural state, the combined surface area is in excess of ten (10) acres; and inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils. Further, the freshwater wetlands regulated by the provisions of shoreland zoning shall be indicated on the Freshwater Wetland Map prepared by the Maine Geological Survey in 1983 and as amended (the upland edge of these wetlands need to be field verified).
Frontage, road: The continuous horizontal distance on a street or road, as defined by §7.2, between the intersection of the side lot lines with the front lot line. An abandoned/ discontinued road is not considered accepted road frontage. For a lot to meet minimum road frontage requirements for establishment of uses under the requirements of Article 3 of this Ordinance, the lot width must equal at least the minimum road frontage required (in the applicable district) for the continuous distance from the front lot line to the front setback line.
Frontage, shore: The horizontal distance, measured in a straight line, between the intersections of the side lot lines with the shoreline at normal high-water elevation.
Functionally water-dependent uses: Those uses which require, for their primary purpose, location on submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location in, coastal and inland waters and which cannot be located away from these waters. These uses include, but are not limited to commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities, finfish and shellfish processing, fish storage and retail and wholesale fish marketing facilities, waterfront dock and port facilities, shipyards and boat building facilities, marinas, navigation aides, basins and channels, industrial uses dependent upon water-borne transportation or requiring large volumes of cooling or processing water and which cannot reasonably be located or operated at an inland site, and uses which primarily provide general public access to marine or tidal waters.
Grade: In relation to buildings, the average of the finished ground level at the center of each wall of a building.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
7-7
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Gravel Pit: An excavation for removal, processing, or storage of borrow, topsoil, loam, gravel, rock, sand, clay, silt, or other similar non-metallic earth materials whether alone or in combination.
Hazardous waste: Any waste as defined by Title 38 MRSA, Section 1303(5), as amended, or by United States Environmental Protection Agency rules.
Home Day Care: A dwelling in which a person or persons residing on the premises provides or maintains a regular program for consideration, for any part of the day, providing care and protection for up to three children.
Home occupation: See Use of Residence for Business Purposes.
Hotel: An establishment that provides temporary lodging for transient guests which has access to sleeping rooms from a corridor internal to the building. Hotels may or may not have public dining rooms, bars as an ancillary use, recreational or entertainment amenities, meeting rooms, or personal service facilities for the guests.
Individual private campsite: An area of land which is not associated with a campground, but which is developed for repeated camping by only one group and which involves site improvements which may include but not be limited to gravel pad, parking area, fire place, or tent platform.
Indoor recreational facility: A building or other structure used for recreational pursuits, such as but not limited to swimming, tennis, soccer, bowling, skating, arcade games, table tennis, card games, board games, or other similar activities.
Industrial park: An area zoned Industrial Park District, or an area where two (2) or more industrial uses are grouped together on the same lot, or an area designed to serve two (2) or more industrial uses on the same lot.
Industry, Light: A use that involves the manufacturing, production, processing, fabrication, assembly, packaging, treatment, or repair of finished products, predominantly from previously prepared or refined materials or raw materials that do not need refining.
Industry, Heavy: Manufacturing or other enterprises with significant external effects, or which pose significant risks due to the involvement of explosives, radioactive materials, poisons, pesticides, herbicides, or other hazardous materials in the manufacturing or other processes.
Inn: A building that contains a dwelling unit occupied by an owner or resident manager in which guest rooms are offered on a day to day basis to the general public for compensation, either with or without meals. “Inn” includes such terms as “guest house,” “bed and breakfast,” and “tourist house.”
Institutional building: A building or group of buildings used to provide a public service and operated by a Federal, State or local government, public or private utility, public or private school or college, tax- exempt organization, and/or a place of religious assembly. Examples include: public agency, public safety and emergency services, essential and utility services, cultural, service and religious facilities, public/private health facilities or other similar uses.
Kennel: A commercial establishment where domestic animals (e.g. cats or dogs) are boarded (for day or longer periods), trained, or bred.
Level of Service (LOS): A rating of the quality of traffic flow on a roadway segment or intersection ranging from A (excellent) through F (failure).
Living quarters for personnel: A dwelling unit that is an integral part of a non-residential building or complex which is occupied either on an occasional basis or a full time basis by the property owner, business owner, or
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
7-8
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
vital personnel such as security or operations employees. Such living quarters may be occupied by such person’s family in cases of full-time occupancy.
Lagoon: An artificial enlargement of a waterbody, primarily by means of dredging and excavation.
Lodging or rooming house: A building of residential character usually in a neighborhood; usually a converted large dwelling, several rooms of which are rented to guests usually staying more than two (2) weeks. Rental rooms do not include cooking facilities (if they did they would be dwelling units).
Lot (aka Parcel): A contiguous piece of land in identical ownership throughout, bounded by other lots or by streets and not divided by a street or river, and used or set aside and available for use as a site for one or more buildings or other definite purpose. For the purpose of this ordinance, a lot may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
Lot area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines.
Lot, corner: A lot with at least two contiguous sides abutting upon streets.
Lot lines: The lines bounding a lot.
Lot line, front: The line separating the lot from the street. On a lot fronting on more than one street, the line separating the lot from any street.
Lot line, rear: The lot line opposite the front lot line. On a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line between the side lot lines parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten (10') feet long, lying farthest from the front lot line. On a corner lot, the rear lot line shall be opposite the front lot line of least dimension.
Lot line, side: Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line.
Lot of record: A parcel of land, a legal description of which or the dimensions of which are recorded on a document or map on file with the Penobscot County Register of Deeds.
Lot width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at the front setback line.
Manufactured housing: "Manufactured housing" means a structural unit or units designed for occupancy and constructed in a manufacturing facility and then transported by the use of its own chassis or placement on an independent chassis to a building site. The term includes any type of building which is constructed at a manufacturing facility and then transported to a building site where it is utilized for housing and may be purchased or sold by a dealer in the interim. For purposes of this Act, two (2) types of manufactured housing are included. They are:
a. Certified manufactured home: These include:
1. Certified mobile home: Those units constructed after June 15, 1976, which the manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance with the HUD standard, meaning structures transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, are fourteen (14') body feet or more in width and are seven hundred fifty (750) or more square feet, and which are built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as dwellings, with or without permanent foundations, when connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 United States Code 5401 et seq.; also included are:
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
7-9
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
2. Modular homes: Those units which the manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance with the state's Manufactured Housing Act and Title 10, chapter 957, and rules adopted under that chapter, meaning structures transportable in one (1) or more sections, which are not constructed on a permanent chassis and are designed to be used as dwellings on foundations when connected to required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning or electrical systems contained therein.
b. Non-certified mobile homes: Those units constructed prior to June 15, 1976, meaning structures, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which are eight (8') body feet or more in width and are thirty- two (32') body feet or more in length, and which are built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as dwellings, with or without permanent foundations, when connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning or electrical systems contained therein.
c. Other manufactured homes: All manufactured homes which are neither certified manufactured homes nor non-certified mobile homes.
Manufacturing: The mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the assembling of component parts, the creation of products, the treatment of materials, and the blending of materials. This definition does not include any type of manufacture of medical or retail marijuana.
Medical Marijuana: The leaves, stems, flowers and seeds of all species of the plant genus cannabis, whether growing or not; but shall not include the resin extracted from any part of such plant and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation from such resin including hashish and further, shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks, fiber, oil or cake or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
Marina: A shorefront commercial facility with provisions for one (1) or more of the following: boat storage, boat launching, or the sale of supplies and services for watercraft and their equipment and accessories.
Maximum Gross Density: The total number of units divided by the gross area of the parcel(s) to be developed, including open space to be set aside.
Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary: Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary means a not-for-profit entity as defined under Title 22 M.R.S.A. Section 2422 and registered pursuant to Title 22 M.R.S.A. Section 2428 and to Section 6 of the State of Maine Rules Governing the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Program (10-144 CMR Chapter 122) that acquires, possesses, cultivates, manufactures, delivers, transfers, transports, sells, supplies or dispenses marijuana, paraphernalia or related supplies and educational materials to registered patients who have designated the Dispensary to cultivate marijuana for their medical use and the registered primary caregivers of those patients. Any Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary shall be further defined in, and shall adhere to, the laws of the State of Maine and to the State of Maine Rules Governing the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Program (10-144 CMR Chapter 122), as the same may be amended from time to time.
Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility: Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility means a building owned or operated by a not-for-profit entity registered pursuant to the laws of the State of Maine and to Section 6 of the State of Maine Rules Governing the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Program (10-144 CMR Chapter 122) that is used for the cultivation or storage of marijuana for the Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary licensed by the State of Maine for Penquis District 6. Any Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall be further defined in, and shall adhere to, the State of Maine Rules Governing the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Program (10-144 CMR Chapter 122), as the same may be amended from time to time.
Medical office or clinic: An office where paitents interact with medical providers, such as but not limited to a physician’s office, dental office, chiropractor’s office, optometrist office, or physical therapy office. Includes walk-in clinics, but excludes methadone clinics.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
7-10
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Methadone Clinic: Methadone Clinic is a clinic which has been established for the dispensing of methadone (Dolophine) to those who abuse heroin and other opiates. The focus of these clinics is the elimination or reduction of opiate usage by putting the patient on methadone.
Microcell Wireless Telecommunications Facilities: see Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, Microcell:
Mineral Extraction: For the purpose of shoreland zoning, any operation which, within any twelve (12) month period, removes more than one hundred (100) cubic yards of soil, loam, gravel, clay, bedrock, peat or other similar material from its natural location to be processed or transported to another location.
Mixed residential/commercial use: A project that includes both residential and non-residential uses within the same development (e.g. a store with an apartment above, or a project with a residential area and a commercial area that is designed as a single coordinated and integrated project).
Mobile home: For the purpose of this ordinance mobile home shall have the same meaning as manufactured home.
Mobile home lot: Means a minimum area of land on which an individual mobile home may be situated within a mobile home park and which is reserved for use by the occupants of that home. Lots shall be designated on the mobile home park plan.
Mobile home park: Means a parcel of land under unified ownership approved by the municipality for the placement of 3 or more manufactured homes.
Mobile home stand: That part of an individual mobile home lot which has been constructed and reserved for the placement of a mobile home.
Motel: An establishment which provides temporary lodging for transient guests and in which the rooms are directly accessible from an outdoor parking area.
Multi-family building: A building containing more than two (2) dwelling units.
Multi-family development: A development that consists of three or more dwelling units in one or more buildings on a single parcel of land. This includes developments with two or more two-family buildings on a single parcel, except for those that can meet the provisions of §3.4.2.12.
Municipal Solid Waste: Any solid waste emanating from household and normal commercial sources, excluding construction and demolition debris.
Nonconforming lot: A lot which was in existence on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance which does not conform to the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance (e.g. lot size, frontage).
Nonconforming structure: A building or structure which was in existance on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance which does not conform to the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance (e.g. setbacks, height, building coverage).
Nonconforming use: A use which was in existence on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance which is not listed as a use permitted by right or by conditional use in the Use Table.
Non-profit club: A meeting or recreational facility owned or leased and operated by an organization which is fraternal, religious, recreational, charitable, or literary in nature and which operates as a nonprofit enterprise (e.g. Rotary Club). This does not include facilities categorized as commercial or industrial uses (e.g. store, processing, or warehouse).
Normal high-water line: That line which is apparent from visible markings, changes in the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation, and which distinguishes between
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
7-11
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial land. In the case of wetlands adjacent to rivers and ponds, the normal high-water line is the upland edge of the wetland, and not the edge of the open water.
Nursing home: A facility which provides nursing care and medical services prescribed by or performed under the general direction of persons licensed to practice medicine. Nursing home shall include both skilled care and intermediate care facilities licensed by the State of Maine. For the purpose of this Ordinance, convalescent home shall mean the same as nursing home.
Office: A place (room, suite of rooms, or building) for the transaction of business where the functions of conducting the business or profession are performed, records are kept or services rendered, but where little or no retail sales are offered and where no manufacturing, assembling or fabricating takes place. Examples include but are not limited to professional services such as lawyers, accountants, engineers, or architects; financial businesses such as lenders, brokerage houses or real estate agents; corporate headquarters; data processing; sales offices; government or public utility offices; and TV and radio studios. Office uses may be either the primary use or an accessory use.
Open Space Ratio: A ratio of open space to gross lot area. To calculate, divide the land area of open space set aside by the gross site area. OPEN SPACE AREA
GROSS AREA
Open Space & Recreation Area: (mobile home parks) an unoccupied space exclusive of parking, drives, and structures, set aside for the purpose of passive and/or active recreation.
Open space use: A use involving none of the following: a principal structure; earth-moving activity; the removal or destruction of vegetative cover, spawning grounds of fish, aquatic life, bird or other wildlife habitat.
Operator: The owner or operator of an excavation.
Outdoor dining: An outside area designated for dining with tables and or seating in conjunction with a restaurant. This area may be enclosed on no more than three sides and may be covered with a roof or other structure (e.g. pergola).
Outdoor recreation: Any use of land to accommodate the gathering, seating, or entertainment, of ten (10) or more people for the purpose of recreation where the activity is not enclosed within a building. Other uses in the Use Table that have more specific definitions shall be interpreted using those definitions (e.g. campground, golf course).
Outdoor storage: The keeping of goods, equipment, or materials outside of any structure, where it is the primary use of the property; a small office building may be located on the site. Note that other uses may include outdoor storage as an ancillary use, e.g. warehousing, wholesale distribution, or retail businesses.
Park or playground: A noncommercial, not-for profit facility designed to serve the recreation needs of the residents of the community. Such facilities include subdivision recreation facilities (neighborhood parks and playgrounds), community parks, and regional parks, and they may include passive recreation or active recreation such as ball fields, swimming facilities, boating facilities, and playground equipment.
Parking space: An area exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances, fully accessible for the storage or parking of vehicles designed in accordance with the standards contained in §4.7 of this Ordinance.
Peak Hour Trip: A one-way vehicular trip occurring during the hour of the day during which the traffic volume on the adjacent roadway segment is higher than the volume during any other hour of the day.
Permit Granting Authority: The officer, committee, or board responsible for acting upon an application. This includes the Code Enforcement Officer for projects requiring a permit for construction or a minor revision to
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
7-12
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
an approved site plan, the Staff Review Committee for projects requiring minor site plan review, or the Planning Board for projects requiring major site plan review, conditional use review, or subdivision review.
Petroleum extraction or refining: The act of removing from the ground any gas, oil, or other hydrocarbon substance, or the processing of such substances into fuels, lubricants, or other useful materials.
Place of assembly: Any building or use of land to accommodate the gathering, seating or entertainment of ten (10) or more people, including but not limited to banquet halls, movie theaters, auction halls, museums, galleries, private membership clubs or lodges, and enclosed recreation centers, but excluding places of worship, hotels, and motels.
Place of worship: A structure or site used for religious assembly, such as but not limited to church, synagogue, mosque, or temple.
Premises: One (1) or more lots which are in the same ownership and are contiguous or separated only by a road or waterbody, including all buildings, structures and improvements.
Preschool: A service business whereby an instructional program is provided for compensation to three (3) or more children between the ages of one (1) and five (5) years.
Principal building: The primary use to which the premises is devoted, and the main purpose for which the premises exists.
Private Event Venue: A facility (building or portion of a building, outdoor areas, and related parking areas) which is made available to individuals or groups to accommodate private functions including but not limited to weddings, receptions, anniversaries, private parties, business meetings, fundraisers, banquets, and dances, but not concerts, events open to the general public, or events for which an admission or other charge (monetary or not) is imposed on individual attendees, with the exception of fundraisers.
Private Membership Club or Lodge: An organization or facility which is open to people upon invitation, nomination, or payment of fees or dues, for social, recreational, and/or entertainment activities.
Private road or street: An area of land that provides access to more than one principal structure and is privately owned, provides vehicular access to approved lots and has not been dedicated to public use other than access by emergency and public safety vehicles, and is maintained by its private owners.
Processing: For industrial uses, including but not limited to: treating, converting, filtering, screening, coating, heating, separating, refining or otherwise altering the initial state, form, or substance of materials and the collection, sorting, or handling of solid waste or of construction and demolition debris. This definition does not include transfer stations or on-site disposal of solid waste, nor any type of processing of medical or adult use marijuana, nor petroleum refining.
Protected Natural Resource: As defined in 38 MRSA Section 480-B Subsection 8.
Pub: see Bar.
Public utility: Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department, board or commission authorized to furnish gas, steam, electricity, waste disposal, communication facilities, transportation or water to the public.
Public Works Projects: A project for the Town, other municipal entity, or the State of Maine including, but not limited to, the Maine Department of Transportation.
Quarry: An excavation for the extraction of rock.
Reclamation: The rehabilitation of an area of land affected by excavation or mining.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
7-13
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Research and development: A facility where research, development, and testing is conducted that does not involve the mass manufacture, fabrication, processing, or sale of products. This does not include any such activity related to marijuana (medical or otherwise).
Residential use: A lot with one or more dwelling units, including any outdoor areas where the residents of the units can be expected to normally spend time, such as a deck, patio, yard, play area, or garden.
Restaurant, drive-in or drive-through: A high turnover restaurant that includes drive-up or drive-through facilities.
Restaurant, high turnover: An eating establishment with turnover rates normally of less than one hour, with or without take-out facilities. Examples include but are not limited to coffee shops, sandwich or pizza shops, ice cream shops, bakeries, and fast-food establishments.
Restaurant, low turnover: A sit-down eating establishment with turnover rates generally of more than one hour. Typically these restaurants do not serve breakfast, and many serve only dinner, and often include alcoholic beverages.
Retail sales: The sale or rental of merchandise to the general public. Retail sales shall be limited to merchandise typically kept in stock on the premises. Retail sales shall allow accessory service unless prohibited elsewhere in this Ordinance. Retail sales shall not include the sale of adult use marijuana as defined in this ordinance in any form or for any purpose.
River-dependent uses: Any non-residential use that requires direct access to the Penobscot River, such as but not limited to fishing facilities (finfish or shellfish processing, storage, and marketing facilities), boating facilities (docks, marinas, boat building, and shipyards), and industrial uses dependent on water-borne transportation.
Road or street: Shall mean a right-of-way in the Town of Hampden intended for motorized traffic which is either:
a. maintained by the Town of Hampden, the County of Penobscot, or the State of Maine, or
b. is shown on a plan of a subdivision which has been duly approved by the Hampden Planning Board and recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds and has not been vacated as a result of 23 M.R.S.A. §3032, 23 M.R.S.A. §3031, 23 M.R.S.A. §3027, or 23 M.R.S.A. §3027-A, or
c. a private road, owned, established, maintained and having been inspected and deemed consistent with the Subdivision Ordinance private road standards by the Public Works Director.
Rock: A natural substance, a solid aggregate of one or more minerals (for example, granite, a common rock, is a combination of the minerals quartz, feldspar and biotite). Removal from the earth requires cutting, blasting, or similar methods of forced extraction.
School, commercial: A private, for profit school established to provide for the teaching of industrial, business, clerical, managerial, artistic, or other technical skills. Examples include automobile or truck driving school, beauty school, book-keeping school, secretarial school, music school, and dance school.
School, K-12: A public, private, or parochial school offering instruction at the elementary, junior, and/or senior high school levels in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of Maine.
School, post-secondary: An institution for higher learning that grants associate, bachelor, master, or doctoral degrees and may also have research facilities.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
7-14
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Screening: Is either:
a. a hedge or buffer strip at least five (5') feet wide consisting of densely planted shrubs or trees, at least four (4') feet in height at the time of planting, and eventually reaching a mature height of at least six (6') feet, or
b. a wall or fence at least six (6') feet in height, but not exceeding eight (8') feet, which provides an effective visual barrier.
Self service storage facility: A building or group of buildings divided into separate compartments leased or licensed to and designed to meet the storage needs of individuals, organizations, and businesses.
Service building: a building within a mobile home park which provides shelter for people or equipment which is exclusively used in the operation of the park or for the sole use of the residents of the park. Service buildings shall not contain retail sales or service businesses except for the sale or rental of units located within the park. Allowable structures: including but not limited to, community buildings, recreational halls, equipment storage buildings, common laundry facilities and management offices.
Setback: The minimum horizontal distance from a lot line to the nearest part of a structure.
Setback from water: The minimum horizontal distance from the normal high-water elevation to the nearest part of a structure.
Shielding: For purposes of an excavation, pit, quarry, and or stockpile as regulated in §4.9 and §4.23 shielding shall mean isolation from view. Such visual isolation may require mechanisms such as planting of screening or fences within or inside of the natural buffer strips or setback areas.
Shopping center: An area where three (3) or more businesses are grouped together on the same lot and use common, off-street parking.
Shoreland area: All land area within two hundred fifty (250') feet horizontal distance of the normal high- water line of the following water bodies: Ben Annis Pond, Hammond Pond, Hermon Pond, Patten Pond, Penobscot River, Souadabscook Stream and West Branch Souadabscook Stream; and all land area within one hundred (100') feet horizontal distance of the normal high-water line of the following waterbodies: Brown Brook (from West Branch Souadabscook Stream to Maine Route No. 69) and Reed Brook (from Main Road to Bangor and Aroostook track); and all land area within two hundred fifty (250') feet of the upland edge of a coastal or freshwater wetland.
Sign: Structure, device, letter, word, model, banner, pennant, insignia, flag, or other representation which is used as or is in the nature of advertisement, announcement, or direction. The area of a sign is the area of the geometric shape exemplified by a square, rectangle, triangle, circle, etc., encompassing all lettering, wording, design, symbols, together with the background which is not a normal color of the building. An inconspicuous support exemplified by a slim post is not part of the sign. Both sides of freestanding signs, pole signs and projecting signs may be used for advertisement, announcement, or direction. Limitation of sign size refers to the structure of the sign, not to the surface.
Sign, Detached or freestanding: Shall mean a sign that is not attached to any building or structure and is portable and self-supporting.
Sign, Industrial park: A pole sign or a projecting sign directing the public to an industrial park. Such sign may identify the name of the industrial park and the name of uses, services, or businesses located on the premises but shall not describe goods or brand or trade name except in instances where the brand name and company are identical. Such sign shall be a maximum of fifty (50) square feet.
Sign, Pole: Shall mean any sign which is supported by structures or supports in or upon the ground and independent of support from any building.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
7-15
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Sign, Projecting: Shall mean any sign, other than a wall sign, affixed to any building or wall whose leading edge extends beyond such building or wall by more than twelve (12") inches.
Sign, Roof: Shall mean any sign erected or constructed wholly upon and over the roof of any building and supported solely on the roof structure.
Sign, Shopping Center: A pole or a projecting sign directing the public to a shopping center. Such sign may identify the name of the shopping center and the name of shops or stores located in the shopping center. In addition, the sign may contain information about the shopping center of a general nature, such as its hours of operation. However, it shall not describe goods or brand or trade name except in instances where the brand name and business name are identical.
Silt or clay: A material that consists of particles of such size that forty-five (45) percent or more of the fraction of those particles able to pass through a three (3) inch sieve pass through the United States Standard Number 200 sieve, or a material that exhibits similar erosion potential, difficulty of stabilization, or runoff based upon gradation, plasticity, permeability, or other relevant criteria.
Single family dwelling: A building constructed for residential occupancy by one family, which is not attached to any other dwelling unit except for a permitted accessory apartment. This definition includes a “Certified Manufactured Home”.
Skirting: Shall mean the enclosure of the area below the unit with aluminum or vinyl, exterior grade plywood, chipboard, or matched boards on a wooden frame or masonry. Interior grade plywood, particle board or plastic or tarpaper are not acceptable materials.
Snack bar: Accessory use of a business, industry, school, or community use in which food, beverage and confection is offered or sold to guests, members, customers, or patrons and may include a refreshment stand in a school or park but such use is strictly incidental and subordinate to the primary use. On-premises cooking and preparation of food shall be limited to hot and cold beverages, confections such as cookies, donuts and ice cream, pre-packaged foods to be heated in a microwave oven, and hot dogs from a steam tray. Alcoholic beverages shall not be served or consumed on-site.
Solid waste: Useless, unwanted or discarded solid material with insufficient liquid content to be free flowing, including by way of example and not by limitation, rubbish, garbage, scrap materials, junk refuse, inert fill material and landscape refuse, but shall not include septic tank sludge or agricultural wastes.
Solid waste disposal: The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid waste into or on any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air, or discharged into any waters, including ground waters.
Solid waste facility: Any land area, structure, location, equipment or combination of them, used for handling solid waste.
Stockpile(s): Any area(s) where either man-made or natural materials are being piled up temporarily, either undercover or exposed to the elements, for future processing and or distribution. These piles are only for materials that are necessary for uses which have been approved by the Planning Board.
Stormwater: Stormwater shall mean storm water runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. “Stormwater” has the same meaning as “storm water”.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, except a fence or boundary wall, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something on the ground.
Swimming pool: Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over 24 inches deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
7-16
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Swimming pool, barrier: A fence, wall, building wall or combination thereof which completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool.
Swimming pool, indoor: A swimming pool which is totally contained within a structure and surrounded on all four sides by the walls of the enclosing structure.
Swimming pool, outdoor: Any swimming pool which is not an indoor pool.
Swimming pool, residential: Any swimming pool which is situated on the premises of a detached one or two-family dwelling or a one-family townhouse not more than three stories in height.
Tavern: See Bar.
Topsoil: The top layer of soil that is predominantly fertile and ordinarily moved in tillage or the equivalent of such a layer in uncultivated soils.
Tourist home: See Inn.
Travel trailer: A vehicle designed to be moved on wheels and intended as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation use. This term shall also include campers, recreational vehicles, and other similar short term devices.
Trailer park: A plot of ground on which two (2) or more trailers, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located.
Transfer station: Any solid waste facility constructed or managed for the transfer of household or municipal solid waste.
Tributary Stream: A channel between defined banks created by the action of surface water, whether intermittent or perennial, and which is characterized by the lack of upland vegetation or presence of aquatic vegetation and by the presence of a bed devoid of topsoil containing waterborne deposits on exposed soil, parent material of bedrock, and which flows to a water or wetland as defined. The term stream does not include "stream" previously defined and only pertains to tributary streams within the shoreland zone.
Two family dwelling: A building constructed for residential occupancy by two families, including duplexes. This definition does not include a single family dwelling with a permitted accessory apartment.
Use: The purpose for which land or a structure is arranged, designed, or intended, or for which land or a structure is or may be occupied.
Use of Residence for Business Purposes: The subordinate use of a dwelling unit or structure accessory to a dwelling unit for gainful employment involving the manufacture, provision or sale of goods and/or services, with the exception that neither adult use marijuana sales nor adult use marijuana social clubs shall be operated under these provisions. There are three categories of such use, which are defined in §4.10 of this ordinance: home business, customary home occupation, and home based contractor.
Veterinary hospital: An establishment where pets or other animals are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for and boarded during the time of such treatment.
Warehouse: A facility for storage and/or distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment; does not include self-service storage facilities.
Water recreational facility, low intensity: A recreational land use which is dependent on direct access to the water, including buildings or other structures if any, located on the shore of any river or water body, such as a boat launch for non-motorized boats, a picnic area, or a nature preserve with or without trails.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
7-17
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Water recreational facility, high intensity: A recreational land use which is dependent on direct access to the water, including buildings or other structures if any, located on the shore of any river or water body, such as a boat launch for motorized boats, a beach, or a campground.
Wholesale: An establishment engaged in the sale and/or distribution of merchandise to other businesses – commercial, industrial, institutional, etc. – and not directly to the general public.
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities: The term “wireless telecommunications facilities” as used in this ordinance means any structure, antenna, tower, or other device which provides radio/television transmission, commercial mobile wireless services, un-licensed wireless services, cellular phone services, specialized mobile radio communications (SMR), common carrier wireless exchange access services, personal communications service (PCS) or pager services.
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, Microcell: The term microcell wireless telecommunications facilities as used in this ordinance means any antenna, other device which provides cellular phone services, personal communications service (PCS) or pager services. Microcell wireless telecommunication facilities shall be co- located on water towers including the tank surfaces in a manner that minimizes and mitigates any adverse impacts upon affected properties, streetscapes, and vistas through careful design, siting, screening, landscaping, and innovative camouflaging techniques shall be considered accessory to a water tower use. Such microcell antennas and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment located on a water tower shall be surface mounted wherever feasible so as to blend in with the contour and color. Antennas and equipment mounted on top of a water tower shall not extend more than 20 feet above the principal structure.
Working Excavation: The area of extraction, including side slopes, of an excavation for borrow, topsoil, loam, gravel, rock, sand, clay, silt, or other similar non-metallic earth materials whether alone or in combination. The area of a “working excavation” does not include areas for stockpiles, permanent fixed structures such as an office building, permanent processing facility, or fixed fuel storage.
Yard: The area of land on a lot not occupied by the principal building.
Yard, other: An unoccupied space between any structure and any property line which is not a street yard.
Yard, rear: The area of land between the rear lot line and the nearest part of the principal building.
Yard, side: The area of land between the side lot line and the nearest part of the principal building.
Yard, street: An unoccupied space between a public or private street right of way or proposed public street right of way and any structure. For the purpose of this definition, right of way shall include only rights of way for the passage of motorized vehicles and not right of ways for power transmission lines, fuel pipelines, or other.
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
7-18
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
A1-1
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Appendix 1: Detailed Table of Contents
Article
Sec
SubSec
What it is (title or content)
Page
Article 1
General Administration
1.1
Title and Purpose
1-1
1.2
Basic Requirement
1-1
1.3
Severability
1-1
1.4
Conflict With Other Ordinances
1-1
1.5
Amendment
1-1
1.5.1
Initiation of Amendment
1-1
1.5.2
Text Amendments
1-1
1.5.3
Zoning District Amendments (Map Amendments)
1-1
1.5.4
Process
1-2
1.5.5
Adoption of Amendment
1-2
Article 2
Establishment of Zones
2.1
Zoning Districts
2-1
2.2
Purpose of Districts
2-1
2.3
Location of Districts
2-2
2.4
Uncertainty of Boundary Location
2-2
2.4.1
Centerlines
2-2
2.4.2
Lot Lines
2-2
2.4.3
Water Boundaries
2-2
2.4.4
Features
2-3
2.4.5
Determination of Distances
2-3
2.4.6
Existing Structures
2-3
2.4.7
Questions of Interpretation
2-3
2.5
Parcels in More Than One Zoning District
2-3
Article 3
District Regulations
3.1
Use Designations
3-1
3.1.1
Principal Uses
3-1
3.1.2
Accessory Uses
3-1
3.1.3
Use Table
3-3
3.2
Specific Use Standards
3-1
3.2.1
Multi-Family Development and Cluster Development that includes multi-family buildings
3-1
3.2.2
Lodging or Rooming House
3-2
3.2.3
Animals As Usual Pets
3-2
3.2.4
Animals Other Than Usual Pets
3-2
3.2.5
Schools, K-12 and Post-Secondary
3-2
3.2.6
Schools, Commercial
3-2
3.2.7
Nursing Home
3-2
3.2.8
Congregate Care Facility
3-2
3.2.9
Public Or Private Utility That Is Not Essential Service
3-2
3.2.10
Municipal Solid Waste Facility
3-2
3.2.11
Community Facility
3-2
3.2.12
Community Building
3-2
3.2.13
Place of Worship
3-5
3.2.14
Non-Profit Club
3-5
3.2.15
Retail Sales
3-5
3.2.16
Antique Dealership
3-5
3.2.17
Kennel
3-5
3.2.18
Veterinary Hospital
3-5
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
A1-2
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Article
Sec
SubSec
What it is (title or content)
Page
Article 3
District Regulations, continued
3.2.19
Automotive Fuel Station
3-5
3.2.20
Automotive Service
3-5
3.2.21
Inn
3-5
3.2.22
Restaurant, Low Turnover
3-5
3.2.23
Restaurant, High Turnover
3-6
3.2.24
Restaurant, Drive-In or Drive-Through
3-6
3.2.25
Bar, Pub, Tavern
3-6
3.2.26
Funeral Home
3-6
3.2.27
Drive-Through Business
3-6
3.2.28
Mixed Residential/Commercial Use
3-6
3.2.29
Business Park
3-6
3.2.30
Outdoor Storage
3-6
3.2.31
Industrial Uses (all uses listed in Category H in the Use Table)
3-6
3.2.32
Processing
3-6
3.2.33
Light Industrial Operations
3-6
3.2.34
River-Dependent Uses
3-7
3.2.35
Outdoor Storage as an accessory use to non-residential uses
3-7
3.2.36
Living Quarters For Personnel
3-7
3.2.37
Outdoor Dining
3-7
3.2.38
Retail Sales as an accessory use to non-residential uses
3-7
3.3
Temporary Uses
3-7
3.3.1
Temporary Event
3-7
3.3.2
Temporary Housing Unit
3-7
3.3.3
Occupancy of existing single family dwelling during construction of new one
3-7
3.4
Dimensional Requirements
3-8
3.4.1
Table of Dimensional Requirements
3-8
3.4.2
Special Provisions
3-8
Article 4
General Regulations
4.1
Site Plan Review
4-1
4.1.1
Purpose
4-1
4.1.2
Multi-level Review
4-1
4.1.3
Applicability
4-1
4.1.4
Procedure
4-2
4.1.5
Submission Requirements
4-4
4.1.6
Approval Standards
4-5
4.1.7
Denial
4-6
4.1.8
Appeal
4-6
4.1.9
Lapse
4-6
4.1.10
Fees
4-6
4.2
Conditional Uses
4-7
4.2.1
Purpose
4-7
4.2.2
Applicability
4-7
4.2.3
Procedure
4-7
4.2.4
Submission Requirements
4-7
4.2.5
Approval Standards
4-7
4.2.6
Conditions
4-8
4.3
Rural Alternate Frontage Lots
4-10
4.3.1
Purpose
4-10
4.3.2
Application Procedure
4-10
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
A1-3
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Article
Sec
SubSec
What it is (title or content)
Page
Article 4
General Regulations, continued
4.3.3
Approval Standards
4-10
4.4
Performance Standards
4-11
4.4.1
Odorous Matter
4-11
4.4.2
Electromagnetic Interference
4-11
4.4.3
Fire Safety
4-11
4.5
Nonconformities
4-11
4.5.1
General
4-11
4.5.2
Nonconforming Structures
4-11
4.5.3
Nonconforming Site Developments
4-12
4.5.4
Nonconforming Uses
4-12
4.5.5
Nonconforming Lots
4-13
4.6
Cluster Housing
4-14
4.6.1
Uses Allowed
4-14
4.6.2
Dimensional Requirements
4-15
4.6.3
Maximum Number of Dwelling Units Allowed
4-15
4.6.4
Common Open Space
4-16
4.6.5
Tract Buffers
4-17
4.6.6
Private Road Cluster Housing Development
4-18
4.7
Design Standards
4-19
4.7.1
Off-street Parking, Loading, and Drive-through facilities
4-19
4.7.2
Buffers and Landscaping
4-23
4.7.3
Lighting
4-25
4.7.4
Architectural Design
4-25
4.7.5
Signs
4-26
4.7.6
Stormwater Management
4-33
4.7.7
Flexibility in Design Standards
4-33
4.8
[Signs moved to 4.7.5]
4.9
Filling and Grading of Land and Stockpiling of Materials
4-33
4.9.1
Purpose
4-33
4.9.2
Earth Moving Permit Required
4-33
4.9.3
Earth Moving Permit Issued by the CEO
4-34
4.9.4
Earth Moving Activity Requiring a Permit from the Planning Board
4-35
4.9.5
Conditions of an Earth-Moving Permit from the Planning Board
4-35
4.9.6
Optional Conditions of an Earth-Moving Permit from the Planning Board
4-36
4.9.7
Performance Guarantees
4-36
4.9.8
Existing Operations
4-37
4.9.9
Stockpiles
4-37
4.9.10
Stockpiles in Excess of 1 Acre
4-38
4.10
Use of Residence for Business Purposes
4-38
4.10.1
Home Business
4-38
4.10.2
Customary Home Occupation
4-38
4.10.3
Home Based Contractor
4-38
4.10.4
General Requirements
4-39
4.10.5
Home Business Requirements
4-39
4.10.6
Customary Home Occupation Requirements
4-39
4.10.7
Home Based Contractor Requirements
4-40
4.10.8
Application Procedure
4-40
4.10.9
Previously Approved Home Occupations
4-41
4.11
Sanitary Provisions
4-41
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
A1-4
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Article
Sec
SubSec
What it is (title or content)
Page
Article 4
General Regulations, continued
4.11.1
Sewage Disposal
4-41
4.11.2
Solid Waste Handling and Disposal Sites or Facilities
4-41
4.12
Temporary Structures
4-41
4.13
Mobile Homes
4-41
4.13.1
Purpose
4-41
4.13.2
Mobile Homes Located Outside Mobile Home Parks
4-42
4.13.3
Construction of a New Mobile Home Park or Modification of an Existing Mobile Home Park
4-42
4.14
[Shoreland Regulations – repealed]
4.15
Swimming Pools
4-45
4.16
Easements
4-45
4.16.1
Required Easements
4-45
4.16.2
Voluntary Easements
4-45
4.17
[Lots and Planned Group Development – repealed]
4.18
Essential Service
4-45
4.19
Day Care Provisions
4-45
4.19.1
Purpose
4-45
4.19.2
Day Care Types
4-45
4.19.3
Performance Standards
4-46
4.19.4
Approvals Required
4-46
4.20
[Customary Rural Business – repealed]
4.21
Structures Necessary For Access For Person With Disabilities – repealed]
4.22
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
4-46
4.22.1
Applicability
4-46
4.22.2
Exemptions
4-46
4.22.3
Site Plan Review Application
4-47
4.22.4
Standards
4-48
4.22.5
Standard Conditions of Approval
4-50
4.22.6
Discontinuance
4-50
4.23
Excavation, Gravel Pit, and Quarry
4-51
4.23.1
Purpose
4-51
4.23.2
Effective Date
4-51
4.23.3
Applicability
4-51
4.23.4
Registration of Existing Excavations
4-51
4.23.5
Jurisdictional Classifications
4-52
4.23.6
Excavation Permits
4-52
4.23.7
Excavation Regulations
4-54
4.23.8
Reclamation
4-58
4.23.9
District Regulations
4-59
4.23.10
Inspections
4-59
4.23.11
Expansions of Nonconforming Uses
4-60
4.23.12
Waiver Provisions
4-60
4.23.13
Change of Owner or Operator
4-60
4.23.14
Annual Report
4-60
4.23.15
Performance Guarantees
4-61
4.23.16
Enforcement
4-61
4.24
Performance Standards for Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensaries, Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facilities and Methadone Clinics
4-62
4.24.1
Adequacy of Building for the Subject Use
4-62
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
A1-5
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Article
Sec
SubSec
What it is (title or content)
Page
Article 4
General Regulations, continued
4.24.2
Required Setbacks
4-62
4.24.3
Maximum Number of Subject Use Within the Town of Hampden
4-62
4.24.4
Hours of Operation
4-62
4.24.5
Signs and Advertising
4-62
4.24.6
Security Requirements for Subject Use
4-62
4.24.7
Consumption, Ingestion Or Inhalation Of Medical Marijuana
4-63
4.24.8
Visibility Of Activities; Control Of Emissions; Disposal Plan for Subject Use
4-63
4.24.9
Limitations of Food Products
4-63
4.24.10
Compliance With State and Local Law
4-64
4.25
Accessory Apartments
4-64
4.25.1
Purpose
4-64
4.25.2
Accessory Apartment Standards
4-64
4.26
Private Event Venue
4-65
4.26.1
Purpose
4-65
4.26.2
Exemptions
4-65
4.26.3
Standards
4-65
4.26.4
Additional Standards
4-66
Article 5
Enforcement
5.1
Administrative Officer
5-1
5.2
Duties
5-1
5.3
Permits
5-1
5.3.1
Building Permits
5-1
5.3.2
Certificate of Occupancy and Certificate of Compliance
5-2
5.4
Legal Action and Violations
5-3
5.4.1
Civil Violation
5-3
Article 6
Appeals
6.1
Creation and Appointment of the Board of Appeals
6-1
6.1.1
Establishment
6-1
6.2
Jurisdiction
6-1
6.2.1
Administrative Appeals
6-1
6.2.2
Variances
6-2
6.3
Appeal Procedure
6-3
6.3.1
Deadline for Filing
6-3
6.3.2
Public Hearing Required
6-3
6.3.3
Abutter Notification – Use Appeals
6-4
6.3.4
Abutter Notification – Space and Bulk Appeals
6-4
6.3.5
Application Fee
6-4
6.3.6
Owners per Tax Records
6-4
6.3.7
Deadline for Decision
6-4
6.3.8
Compel to Issue Contested Permit
6-4
6.3.9
Variance Expiration
6-4
6.3.10
Appeal to Superior Court
6-4
6.3.11
Variances Within Shoreland Areas Submitted To DEP
6-4
Article 7
Definitions
7.1
Construction language
7-1
7.2
Definitions
7-1
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
A1-6
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
A2-1
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Appendix 2: Zoning Amendment History
Adopted First Zoning Ordinance December 1964
Repeal and Adoption by Town Referendum March 13, 1979
Town Council Adopted Amendment on:
Amendment Became Effective on:
Sections Amended:
July 2, 1979
August 2, 1979
(unknown if blank)
August 6, 1979
September 6, 1979
April 21, 1980
May 21, 1980
January 5, 1981
February 5, 1981
May 4, 1981
June 4, 1981
September 8, 1981
October 8, 1981
January 5, 1982
February 4, 1982
May 3, 1982
June 3, 1982
June 7, 1982
July 7, 1982
September 7, 1982
October 7, 1982
October 4, 1982
November 4, 1982
February 22, 1983
March 22, 1983
April 4, 1983
May 4, 1983
June 20, 1983
July 20, 1983
July 5, 1983
August 5, 1983
September 19, 1983
October 19, 1983
Amended by Town Referendum November 8, 1983
Town Council Adopted Amendment on:
Amendment Became Effective on:
Sections Amended:
February 6, 1984
March 6, 1984
(unknown if blank)
May 7, 1984
June 6, 1984
October 11, 1984
November 11, 1984
March 18, 1985
April 17, 1985
October 7, 1985
November 6, 1985
May 5, 1986
June 6, 1986
March 2, 1987
April 1, 1987
March 16, 1987
April 15, 1987
April 6, 1987
May 6, 1987
May 18, 1987
June 17, 1987
August 3, 1987
September 3, 1987
September 21, 1987
October 20, 1987
October 5, 1987
November 3, 1987
December 21, 1987
January 20, 1988
March 7, 1988
April 6, 1988
April 4, 1988
May 3, 1988
August 1, 1988
August 30, 1988
October 17, 1988
November 16, 1988
January 3, 1989
February 1, 1989
April 17, 1989
May 17, 1989
May 15, 1989
June 13, 1989
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
A2-2
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Town Council Adopted Amendment on:
Amendment Became Effective on:
Sections Amended:
December 4, 1989
January 3, 1990
May 7, 1990
June 6, 1990
June 4, 1990
July 4, 1990
August 6, 1990
September 5, 1990
September 17, 1990
October 16, 1990
November 5, 1990
December 5, 1990
December 3, 1990
January 3, 1991
February 4, 1991
March 4, 1991
April 15, 1991
May 15, 1991
June 3, 1991
July 3, 1991
November 18, 1991
December 18, 1991
December 16, 1991
January 15, 1992
January 21, 1992
February 20, 1992
May 4, 1992
June 3, 1992
June 15, 1992
July 15, 1992
July 6, 1992
August 5, 1992
August 17, 1992
September 16, 1992
October 5, 1992
November 4, 1992
May 17, 1993
June 16, 1993
June 21, 1993
July 21, 1993
October 4, 1993
November 3, 1993
February 7, 1994
March 9, 1994
August 8, 1994
September 7, 1994
August 22, 1994
September 21, 1994
October 3, 1994
November 2, 1994
June 19, 1995
July 19, 1995
November 6, 1995
December 5, 1995
December 18, 1995
January 17, 1996
January 16, 1996
February 15, 1996
October 21, 1996
November 20, 1996
December 2, 1996
January 1, 1997
January 21, 1997
February 20, 1997
November 3, 1997
December 3, 1997
February 1, 1999
March 4, 1999
March 8, 1999
April 8, 1999
April 5, 1999
May 5, 1999
June 19, 1995
July 19, 1995 (corrected date September 20, 1999)
November 15, 1999
December 16, 1999
May 15, 2000
June 14, 2000
4.14.8.2.4
June 19, 2000
July 19, 2000
3.13.5.4
December 4, 2000
January 3, 2001
7.2
February 20, 2001
March 22, 2001
3.1.1, 3.1.2, 3.1.4, 7.2
May 21, 2001
June 20, 2001
3.6.2, 3.6.3
October 01, 2001
October 31, 2001
3.1.2, 3.2.2, 3.5.2, 3.6.2, 3.9.2, 4.2.2, 4.22, 7.2
June 3, 2002
July 3, 2002
3.9.2, 7.2
October 21, 2002
November 20, 2002
4.5.2.1, 4.5.2.1.a, 7.2
November 18, 2002
December 18, 2002
4.5.4.2, 4.5.4.3, 7.2
January 21, 2003
February 20, 2003
4.5.4.4, 4.8 (entire section)
April 7, 2003
May 7, 2003
3.3.3
June 2, 2003
July 2, 2003
6.2.2, 6.2.2.2
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
A2-3
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Town Council Adopted Amendment on:
Amendment Became Effective on:
Sections Amended:
July 14, 2003
August 13, 2003
4.17, 7.2
November 3, 2003
December 3, 2003
2.3.6, 2.3.7, 2.4, 4.5.5.2, 4.5.5.3
November 17, 2003
December 17, 2003
1.5.2.2.a, 4.1.3, 4.2.2, 4.3.4, 4.9.3.3, 4.9.4, 5.3.1.7, 6.3.5
June 21, 2004
July 21, 2004
3.7.6
October 12, 2004
November 11, 2004
4.5, 4.7, and 4.13
December 6, 2004
January, 5, 2005
3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14, 3.15, 7.2
February 7, 2005
March 9, 2005
4.1, 4.22, 7.2
March 21, 2005
April 20, 2005
3.4, 3.5, 3.6 3.7, 3.8, 3.9, 3.14, 4.1, 4.10
April 4, 2005
May 4, 2005
4.8.3.8, 4.8.10.1, 4.8.10.2, 4.8.10.3
December 5, 2005
January 4, 2006
3.8.2, 3.8.5, 3.8.6
January 19, 2006
February 18, 2006
3.6.4, 3.6.5.5
September 18, 2006
October 18, 2006
2.3.7, 4.5.5.1, 4.8.10.1, 5.3.1.3, 6.1.1, 6.1.2, 6.2.1, 6.2.1.1, 6.2.1.2, 6.2.1.3, 6.2.1.4, 6.2.2, 6.2.2.3, 6.2.2.4, 6.2.2.5, 6.3.1, 6.3.2, 6.3.4, 6.3.6, 6.3.7, 6.3.8, 6.3.9, 6.3.10
October 1, 2007
October 31, 2007
3.1.2
December 17, 2007
January 16, 2008
3.1.2, 3.1.3, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.3.3, 3.4.3, 3.5.3, 3.6.3, 3.9.3, 3.12.2, 3.12.3, 4.1.9, 4.1.9.1, 4.1.9.2, 4.9, 4.9.1, 4.9.2, 4.9.3, 4.9.4, 4.9.5, 4.9.6, 4.9.7, 4.9.8, 4.9.9, 4.9.10, 4.23 (new), 7.2
August 11, 2008
September 10, 2008
3.8.4, 3.8.6.8
March 1, 2010
March 31, 2010
3.3.3, 3.3.5.2, 3.3.5.7, 5.3.1.8, 5.3.1.9, 7.2
March 1, 2010
March 31, 2010
3.11 and 4.14 Deleted
April 19, 2010
May 19, 2010
7.2
July 6, 2010
August 5, 2010
3.9.5.3
January 3, 2011
February 2, 2011
3.9.5.3, 4.19.2.3, 4.19.3.1, 4.19.3.2, 4.19.3.2, 4.19.3.3, 4.19.3.4, 4.19.3.5, 4.19.3.6, 4.19.3.7, 4.19.3.8, 4.19.4
February 7, 2011
March 9, 2011
3.1.3, 3.2.3, 3.3.3, 4.7.1.19, 4.7.1.20, 4.24, 7.2
March 7, 2011
April 6, 2011
3.1.3, 3.2.3, 3.3.3, 4.7.1.19, 4.7.1.20, 4.24, 7.2
August 15, 2011
September 14, 2011
7.2
November 14, 2011
December 14, 2011
3.3.3
January 17, 2012
February 16, 2012
3.6.2, 3.6.3
June 4, 2012
July 4, 2012
3.16
October 29, 2012
November 28, 2012
3.7.6.10, 3.8.6.9, 7.2
July 15, 2013
August 14, 2013
3.6.2
August 5, 2013
September 4, 2013
4.8.7.5.a, 4.8.7.5.d, 4.8.7.5.e, 4.8.7.7
August 5, 2013
September 4, 2013
3.8.4, 3.8.6.10
July 14, 2014
August 13, 2014
3.13.2, 3.13.3, 3.13.4*, 3.13.5.8
October 6, 2014
November 5, 2014
4.6.5
June 15, 2015
July 15, 2015
3.9.5.4, 3.2.5.3, 4.3, 3.13.4, 4.15
August 3, 2015
September 3, 2015
4.7
January 4, 2016
February 4, 2016
4.8
January 19, 2016
February 19, 2016
7.2
April 4, 2016
May 4, 2016
4.6
October 3, 2016
November 2, 2016
4.8.1.4, 5.3.1.1
Town of Hampden, Maine
Zoning Ordinance
A2-4
Effective Date: December 4, 2019
Town Council Adopted Amendment on:
Amendment Became Effective on:
Sections Amended:
April 18, 2017
May 18, 2017
4.10, 3.4.2, 3.5.2, 3.6.2, 3.7.3, 3.8.3, 3.9.2, 3.13.2, 3.14.3, 4.1.9.1, 4.2.3.9, 4.8.1, 4.8.3.6, 4.8.3.7, 4.8.6, and 7.2
May 1, 2017
May 31, 2017
1, 4.7, 4.8, and 7.2
May 15, 2017
June 14, 2017
3.7.4, 3.7.6, 4.25, and 7.2
August 7, 2017
September 6, 2017
4.49.4.1, 5.3, and 7.2
November 20, 2017
December 20, 2017
7.2
June 18, 2018
July 18, 2018
This was a major reorganization and update of the entire Zoning Ordinance with amendments to many sections in Articles 2 through 7. Refer to the minutes of the Planning Board from December 2017 through May 2018, of the P&D Committee for June 6, 2018, and of the Town Council for June 18, 2018.
November 4, 2019
December 4, 2019
2.5, 3.1.3, 3.2.1.5, 3.4.1, 3.4.2.2, 4.1.5.2, 4.5.1, 4.5.5.4, 4.6, 4.7.1.1, 4.7.5.3.9, 4.25, 4.26 (added), 7.2