Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-5-2008]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3004, the ordinances of the Town of
Sanford, as codified by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through
280, together with an Appendix, shall be known collectively as the "Code
of the Town of Sanford," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever Science is
made in any of the ordinances contained in the Code of the Town of Sanford
to any other ordinances appearing in said Code, such reference shall be
changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article number
or section number appearing in the Code as if such ordinances had been
formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the Town Code and ordinances in force immediately prior to the
enactment of the Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of
such Code and ordinances and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness
of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior Code and
ordinances. All such provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect
and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Town of Sanford, and
it is the intention of said Town that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Town of Sanford which is not
in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full
force and effect.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this ordinance shall not
affect the following classes of ordinances, rights and obligations, which are
hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or, incurred under any
legislative provision of the Town of Sanford prior to the effective date of
this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement
of such right or liability.
B. Any offense of act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Town of Sanford
or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this ordinance or of any ordinances included in this Code now or through
supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or pan thereof directly
involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Town Clerk of the Town of Sanford and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and,
if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Town
Clerk of the Town of Sanford by impressing thereon the Seal of the Town,
and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said Town Clerk
to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all
times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this
ordinance, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Town of Sanford.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the Town of Sanford.
E. Any ordinance of the Town of Sanford providing for the laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place
within the Town of Sanford or any portion thereof.
F. Any ordinance of the Town of Sanford appropriating money or
transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or
authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Town of
Sanford or other instruments or evidence of the Town's indebtedness.
G. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any ordinances relating to salaries.
K. Personnel policies of the Town.
L. Any ordinances adopted subsequent to March 6, 2007.
§ 1-4 SANFORD CODE § 1-6
1:4
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of
the ordinances known collectively as the "Town of Sanford Code" or any
new ordinances, when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the
intention of the Town Council or Town Meeting to be a part thereof, shall
be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the
Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be enacted or adopted, they
shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the looseleaf
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
Nothing contained in this ordinance shall affect the status of any ordinances
contained herein, and such ordinances may be amended, deleted or
changed from time to time as the Town deems desirable.
§ 1-8. Codebook to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Town of Sanford Code required to be filed in the
office of the Town Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said Code and
all ordinances adopted by the Town subsequent to the enactment of this
ordinance in such form as to indicate the intention of said Town to be a part
of said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by
temporary attachment of copies of such changes or ordinances until such
changes or ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at
which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased
from the Town Clerk or an authorized agent of the Clerk upon the payment
of a fee to be set by the Town Council. The Clerk may also arrange for
procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Town Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Town of
Sanford Code or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the ordinances of the Town of Sanford to
be misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this
ordinance shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by a fine of not more than $500.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:5
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Town of Sanford Code, such ordinance to be titled "General Provisions,
Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this ordinance shall be
numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect at the expiration of 30 days after adoption.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Town
of Sanford Code, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
ordinances have been made, except as provided in Subsection B.
Certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Town that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A
attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become
effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.1 (Chapter and
section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-11B, the chapters, parts, and sections that were
added or amended by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote
referring to Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. During routine supplementation, footnotes
indicating such amendments or additions will be replaced with the following history:
"Amended (added) 2-5-2008." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all
changes, is on file in the Town offices.
§ 1-11 SANFORD CODE § 1-13
1:6
Chapter 20
DISBURSEMENT WARRANTS
§ 20-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an alternative to the statutory
procedure for approval of warrants authorizing the Treasurer to disburse
money.
§ 20-2. Legislative Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 3001 (municipal home
rule) and 5603(2)(A) as amended.
§ 20-3. Procedures for approval.
The Treasurer may disburse money only on the authority of a warrant drawn
for the purpose as described more fully below:
Chapter 27
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 27-1. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish an Emergency
Management Agency in compliance and in conformity with the provisions of
37-B M.R.S.A. § 781 et seq., to ensure the complete and efficient utilization
of the Town's facilities and resources to combat disaster as defined herein.
A. Municipal employee wages and benefits when such a warrant has been
signed by the Town Manager or Town Treasurer and one or more of the
Town Councilors.
B. School employee wages and benefits when such a warrant has been
signed by a majority of the School Committee and one or more of the
Town Councilors.
C. Invoices for education expenses when a disbursement warrant has been
signed by the School Superintendent or designee and by a majority of
the School Committee and one or more of the Town Councilors.
D. State fees when a warrant has been signed by the Town Manager or
Town Treasurer and one or more of the Town Councilors.
E. Invoices for municipal expenses when a disbursement warrant has been
signed by the Town Manager or Town Treasurer and by two or more of
the Town Councilors. Invoices for electronic credit card payments when
a warrant has been signed by one or more of the Town Councilors and
the Town Manager or Town Treasurer.
§ 1-13 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 27-2
27:7
§ 27-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this chapter:
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Town of Sanford Emergency Management
Agency, appointed as prescribed in the Town of Sanford Charter.
DISASTER — The occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe
damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or
man-made cause, including but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, wind,
storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring
emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination,
critical material shortage, infestation, explosion or riot.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The agency created under this
chapter for the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency
functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, in order to minimize and repair injury and damage resulting
from disasters or catastrophes caused by enemy or terrorist attacks,
sabotage, riots or other hostile action, or by fire, flood, earthquake or other
natural or man-made causes. These functions include, without limitation,
fire fighting, police, medical and health, emergency welfare, rescue,
engineering, public warning and communications services, evacuation of
persons from stricken areas, allocation of critical materials in short supply,
emergency transportation, other activities related to civilian protection and
other activities necessary to the preparation and carrying out of these
functions.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY FORCES — The employees,
equipment and facilities of all Town departments, boards, institutions and
commissions, and, in addition, it shall include all volunteer persons,
equipment and facilities contributed by or obtained from volunteer persons
or agencies.
§ 27-3. Administration.
§ 27-4. Emergency Management Director.
The Town Manager shall appoint an Emergency Management Director,
confirmed by the Town Council as prescribed in the Town Charter, who
shall coordinate the activities of all Town departments, organizations and
agencies for civil emergency preparedness within the Town and maintain
a liaison with other emergency management agencies and public safety
A. The Town Manager shall be responsible for the agency's organization,
administration and operation. The Town Manager may employ such
permanent or temporary employees as he deems necessary and
prescribe their duties.
B. The Town Council shall review the existing operational organization to
ascertain the Agency's ability to cope with its responsibilities and
approve the Town's Emergency Operations Plan.
§ 27-2 SANFORD CODE § 27-4
27:8
agencies and have such additional duties as prescribed by the Town
Manager.
§ 27-5. Emergency proclamation.
§ 27-6. Termination of emergency.
§ 27-7. Town Manager's duties and emergency powers.
A. The Town Manager shall have the power and authority, after
consultation with the Chairperson of the Town Council, to issue a
proclamation that an emergency exists whenever a disaster or civil
emergency exists or appears imminent. The proclamation may declare
that an emergency exists in any or all sections of the Town. If the Town
Manager is temporarily absent from the Town or otherwise unavailable,
the person designated by the Town Manager may issue the
proclamation that an emergency exists. If neither the Town Manager
nor the person designated to act in the Town Manager's absence is
available, then the following persons shall have the power and authority
to issue a proclamation that an emergency exists, in the following order
of succession: the Emergency Management Director, the Fire Chief, the
Police Chief, and the Public Works Director. A copy of such
proclamation shall be filed within 24 hours in the office of the Town
Clerk.
B. Notwithstanding the above, when consultation with the Chairperson of
the Town Council would result in a substantial delay in an effective
response in alleviating or preventing an emergency or disaster, the
Town Manager, or his successor as outlined above, is authorized to take
whatever actions are necessary to prevent the loss of life and property
in the Town.
C. The Town Manager and the Emergency Management Director shall be
responsible for submitting a full report to the Town Council of all
actions taken as a result of the declared emergency as soon as the Town
Council can be convened.
A. When the Town Manager or his successor as outlined above is satisfied
that a disaster or civil emergency no longer exists, he shall terminate
the emergency proclamation by another proclamation affecting the
sections of the Town covered by the original proclamation, or any part
thereof. Said termination of emergency shall be filed in the office of the
Town Clerk.
B. No state of emergency may continue for longer than five days unless
renewed by the Town Council.
A. During any period when an emergency proclamation is in effect, the
Town Manager may promulgate such regulations as he deems
necessary to protect life and property and to preserve critical resources
§ 27-4 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 27-7
27:9
§ 27-8. Emergency Operations Plan.
within the purposes of this chapter. Such regulations may include, but
are not limited to, the following:
(1) Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles in
areas within or without the Town;
(2) Regulations facilitating or restricting the movement of persons
within the Town;
(3) Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from hazardous
areas within the Town;
(4) Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health
and safety.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority or
responsibility of any department to proceed under powers and
authority granted to it by state statute, Town ordinance or the Charter
of the Town of Sanford.
C. The Town Manager or his designee may order the evacuation of persons
from hazardous areas within the Town.
D. The Town Manager or his designee shall be authorized to request aid or
assistance from the state or any political subdivision of the state and
may render assistance to other political subdivisions under the
provisions of Title 37-B, M.R.S.A.
E. The Town Manager or his designee may obtain vital supplies,
equipment and other items found lacking and needed for the protection
of health, life and property during an emergency without following
normal purchasing or formal bid procedures.
F. The provisions of this section will terminate at the end of the declared
emergency.
A. The Emergency Management Director shall prepare an all-hazard
Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) for the Town, which shall be
submitted to the Town Council for approval. The EOP shall incorporate
the principals of the National Emergency Management System (NIMS)
and the Incident Command System (ICS).
B. It shall be the responsibility of all municipal departments and agencies
to perform the functions assigned and to maintain their portions of the
plan in a current state of readiness. The Town plan shall be reviewed
periodically by the Town Manager in conjunction with all the Town
department heads and the Emergency Management Director.
§ 27-7 SANFORD CODE § 27-9
27:10
§ 27-9. Immunity from liability.
All Emergency Management Agency forces, while engaged in Emergency
Management Agency activities, shall be immune from liability, as set forth
in 37-B M.R.S.A. § 822.
§ 27-10. Compensation for injuries.
All Emergency Management Agency forces shall be deemed to be
employees of the state when engaged in training or on duty and shall have
all of the rights of state employees under the Workers' Compensation Act,
as set forth in 37-B M.R.S.A. § 823.
§ 27-11. Violations and penalties.
§ 27-12. Conflicting orders, rules and regulations suspended.
At all times when an emergency proclamation is in effect, the orders,
rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall
supersede all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations, insofar as
the latter may be inconsistent herewith.
Chapter 32
FINANCE COMMITTEE
§ 32-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to ensure that the budget process
conforms to the requirements of the Town Charter and that the final version
be the product of a deliberative and open public process.
§ 32-2. Recording and televising of meetings.
All meetings of the Finance Committee must be held in a location that has
cable television access. These meetings shall be televised on the public
access station unless circumstances beyond the control of the Town, such
as an equipment failure, prevent the transmission of the image.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions of this
chapter or of the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority
contained herein, or to obstruct, hinder or delay any Emergency
Management Agency forces as herein defined in the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter or any regulation or plan issued hereunder.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100 and not more
than $500 and the costs of prosecution.
§ 27-9 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 32-3
27:11
§ 32-3. Meeting rooms.
The meeting room selected shall have the capacity to seat at least 40
people and must be fully accessible to the public, including persons with
disabilities.
§ 32-4. Scheduling of meetings.
Meetings must be scheduled at a time that is convenient for all Finance
Committee members and does not exclude any member from attending
because the member is required to carry out other municipal duties.
§ 32-5. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by any court to
be invalid or unenforceable as enacted, such a decision shall not invalidate
any other section or provision and the court shall have the power to and
shall enforce the remaining provisions of this chapter according to their
purposes and effect when enacted.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 70
AIRPORT
§ 32-3 SANFORD CODE § 32-5
27:12
ARTICLE I
Hangar Construction; Design Standards
[Adopted 3-15-1988; amended in its entirety 8-1-2017 by Order No.
17-101.12]
§ 70-1. Administration; purpose; conformance with certain
requirements.2
A. These standards shall be known as the "Sanford Seacoast Regional
Airport (hereinafter "Airport") Hangar Construction and Design
Standards" (hereinafter "design standards"). These design standards
have been adopted by the Sanford City Council and are to be
administered by the Airport Manager or his/her agent. These design
standards may further be amended from time to time as determined by
the Sanford City Council upon the recommendation of the Airport
Advisory Committee and/or Airport Manager.
B. The purpose of these design standards is to insure that all development
on Airport property is consistent with the Ultimate Airport Layout Plan
(UALP) and is of safe and functional design. These design standards are
set forth as a basis for directing future construction and to preserve the
investment of all who use the Airport. Considerations include economic
aspects of development, practicality, aesthetics, and environmental
impacts.
C. General provisions. Structures may not be constructed on Airport
property unless approved by the Airport Manager and other relevant
City officials for conformance in each of the following areas:
(1) Contained on the current, approved Ultimate Airport Layout Plan
(UALP).
(2) All applicable building restriction lines and height restrictions
applicable to FAA Part 77, Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace.
(3) Interference with any Airport or Federal Aviation Administration
radio or guidance equipment due to location or type of structural
material.
(4) Submission of plans, a construction schedule and other information
as required to the Sanford Code Enforcement and Planning Offices
pursuant to City ordinances, including, but not limited to,
§ 280-11-9, Airport Development Zone (AD), as amended.
(5) Access to the proposed building, including any required easements,
roads or taxiways and their design.
(6) Construction coordination with the Airport Manager or designee to
assess impact on operations, develop a Construction Safety and
2. Editor's Note: The Typical Hangar Lot diagram is included as an attachment to this
chapter
§ 70-1 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-1
27:13
§ 70-2. Hangar construction requirements.
Phasing Plan (CSPP), and issue notices to airmen (NOTAMs) as
appropriate.
(7) Proof of contractor's liability insurance satisfactory to the City and
City's insurer provided. Said insurance shall list the City of Sanford
as additionally insured for the duration of construction.
(8) An approved land lease and operating rights agreement with the
City of Sanford or an approved sublease with an existing authorized
tenant of the Airport. Such lease is to include all areas deemed
necessary to the normal use of the building per the Airport's
Minimum Standards and Procedures for the Lease and Use of
Property and Facilities, Chapter 70, Article III.
A. General requirements. Following is a list of general requirements to be
used for all hangar construction at the Airport.
(1) All plans must be approved by all required local or State building
inspection offices, and all permits must be obtained before
construction begins. A copy of all permits must be submitted to the
Airport Manager prior to construction and occupancy.
(2) All electrical, plumbing, mechanical or any other work that is
governed by federal, State, or local licensing regulations will be
performed only by individuals or companies so licensed or as
allowed under current regulations.
(3) All construction shall be in compliance with all applicable zoning
regulations, FAA regulations, height restrictions, and other
regulations issued by any agency having jurisdiction over work or
projects within the scope of these standards.
(4) The Airport Manager must approve the schedule for all work, and
said approved schedule shall become binding upon the applicant
unless modification of said schedule has been approved in writing
by the Airport Manager. The construction schedule shall be
included in the land lease and operating rights agreement as
reviewed and approved by the Sanford City Council.
B. Life safety requirements. The fire ratings of structures used for the
storage of aircraft, motor vehicles, and flammable or hazardous
materials shall comply with the Building Code and any federal, State, or
municipal fire codes and are subject to approval by the City's Fire
Marshal as part of the approval process.
C. Special requirements. The following special requirements are
emphasized or added to promote safety, operability, and insurability of
structures on Airport properties and to maintain the value of Airport
properties.
§ 70-1 SANFORD CODE § 70-2
27:14
(1) Footings and foundations. If necessary, soil bearing tests shall be
performed at the location of the proposed structure and the design
of footings and foundation design will be based on the results.
Footings and foundations shall extend a minimum of one foot below
normal frost depth. Any enclosed structure not designed with a
continuous perimeter footing-foundation shall be provided with an
approved, continuous perimeter frost barrier.
(2) Structural strength and materials. The currently adopted Building
Code of the City of Sanford shall apply as to allowable materials
and structural strength for the structure class or type as
determined by use, seismic zone, wind and snow loads. All plans
must be stamped by a licensed architect or engineer whether
constructed on site or prefabricated and erected on site.
(3) Framing. All framing shall be of metal, wood, wood composite or
other engineered materials subject to stamped plans.
(4) Exterior.
(a) All exterior surfaces must be prefinished aluminum, steel,
prefinished cementous siding, CMU (concrete) or tensioned
fabric. No painted wood or other materials may be used. No
galvanized metal shall be used on any exterior surface. All
exterior materials and colors must be submitted to the Airport
Manager for approval before construction begins. Exceptions
to this rule may be granted by the Airport Manager based on
aesthetics, emerging technology, or Airport operational
requirements.
(b) Any structures added to the roof that are not essential
components of the roof such as, but not limited to: cupolas,
weathervanes, communications equipment, antennas, solar
panels, and lightning rods must be specifically noted in
construction plans and compliant with the requirements of
§ 70-1C(2).
(5) Exterior finishes. Exceptions to this rule may be granted by the
Airport Manager based on aesthetics, emerging technology, or
Airport operational requirements; however, no exception shall be
granted that would modify the requirements of § 70-2C(2).
Requests for exceptions to this requirement must be made in
writing at the time of initial plan approval.
(a) Wood. No wood or wood composite siding or roofing shall be
allowed.
(b) Steel. The minimum gauge of steel used for roofing or siding
shall be 28 and shall be factory finished in a color approved by
the Airport Manager and warranted by the manufacturer as to
colorfastness for a minimum of 20 years.
§ 70-2 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-2
27:15
(c) Concrete. Where (CMU), poured or preformed concrete walls
are used, the exterior shall be sealed and stained in a color
approved by the Airport Manager.
(d) Tensioned fabric. Fabric used on tension fabric structures must
have a minimum life expectancy of 15 years and must remain
colorfast during this time period.
(6) Floor construction. All floors must be constructed of concrete
having a minimum four-inch thickness and shall include steel
reinforcement. A stiff broom finish is required on exterior ramps.
(7) Doors. Bifold doors are recommended because of their ease of
operation during the winter months. Approved swing-out,
overhead, multi-zippered or roll-up on tension fabric or sliding
doors may also be used. All pedestrian doors shall be compliant
with structural plans and maintain an exterior finish during the life
of the building.
(8) Drainage.
(a) The gradient of the finished floor of any proposed structure
and the surrounding surfaces shall provide for positive flow of
water into the existing Airport storm sewer system. In areas
where no storm sewer exists, the City may require the
installation of inlets and pipe designed for anticipated
maximum flow and loading to be installed and attached to the
existing storm sewer system. Depending on the type of activity
to be performed in the building, an approved system of oil/
water separators may be required to prevent contamination of
surface or ground water resources.
(b) The hangar access ramp shall have a minimum two-inch pitch
or grade from the facing taxiway or ramp. The intent of this
requirement is to prevent runoff from rain or melting snow
from entering the hangar. Gutter systems should also be
considered.
(9) Landscaping.
(a) It will be the responsibility of the hangar owner to grade, loam
and seed the area impacted by construction of his/her hangar
in order to ensure mower access.
(b) The City may require landscaping due to location or use of a
structure. Certain landscaping may not be permitted due to its
potential as a wildlife attractant. All plans for landscaping shall
be contained in the construction plans.
(10) Utilities.
(a) Connection to electric, heating fuel, such as natural gas,
sanitary sewer, water, and communications shall be the
§ 70-2 SANFORD CODE § 70-2
27:16
responsibility of the lessee. All new electric, cable TV, internet
and telephone lines shall be placed underground. Upon
completion of construction, a plot plan with GPS coordinates
showing the exact location of all lessee-installed utilities shall
be given to the Airport Manager.
(b) No trenching or excavation shall commence until all pipes and
lines in the area have been located by Dig Safe. The Airport
Manager and utility companies shall be contacted for locations.
The lessee shall be responsible for any damage to existing
utilities or communications lines.
(c) Any hangar constructed 1) at a location greater than 500 feet
from an approved fixed base operator with a bathroom for use
by the general public, and 2) and within 200 feet of City sewer
and water lines, shall be required to have a bathroom with a
toilet and sink. Said bathroom shall be connected to City water
and sewerage systems and is the responsibility of the lessee.
This requirement may be waived with prior written approval by
the Airport Manager.
(11) Access. The lessee may be required to construct paved roadways,
taxiways, aprons or ramps, and controlled access gates to provide
access to the structure. Plans for any roads or taxiways so required
shall be submitted to the City for approval with the construction
plans. Under no circumstances will an uncontrolled opening in the
Airport's security fence be allowed.
(12) Setbacks. Land lease dimensions will be negotiated on a case-bycase
basis and determined by the individual location of the site.
Building setbacks will be determined on a case-by-case basis based
on proximity to other lots and any taxiway or runway object free
areas, size and orientation of the structure, aircraft and vehicle
parking, emergency access, snow removal and grounds
maintenance, and other relevant factors that may be present.
(13) Orientation. Consideration should be given to the building
orientation and exposures. Northern exposures for the side of the
building that contains the main hangar door should be avoided.
(14) Further restrictions or requirements may be imposed by the City
when, in consultation with the Airport Manager, Code Enforcement
Officer, City Planner, Fire Marshal, Maine Department of
Transportation, FAA, or other applicable entity, such restrictions or
requirements are necessary to ensure safety, continuity and
efficiency of Airport operations, aesthetics, or property value.
§ 70-2 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-2.1
27:17
§ 70-2.1. Additional requirements; applicability.
These standards shall apply to all properties on the Airport and are in
addition to any other jurisdictional requirements, including but not limited
to Zoning Ordinances and Building Codes of the City of Sanford.3
A. Three hard copies and one digital copy on a compact disc (CD) of all
structural plans, site plans, and material specifications developed by a
certified architect and/or engineer shall be provided to the City of
Sanford's Planning Office for review and approval and upon approval
shall become the property of the City of Sanford. Pre-engineered
structures with stamped plans may be used, provided that plans
showing all items addressed in § 70-2C. are submitted and meet the
overall standards.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer, Airport Manager or agent, or other
applicable agent of the City may make frequent inspections during
construction of any approved building or structure to ensure
compliance with lease agreements, building codes, the requirements of
this article, and the approved CSPP. No changes to, or variations from
approved plans and specifications shall be permitted unless approved in
writing by the City. Construction may be stopped as a result of
nonconformance with the approved safety plan.
C. Construction of any approved structure or material component thereof
may not commence until the following documents or proofs thereof are
provided to the City:
(1) Contractor's comprehensive general liability insurance policy in an
amount that meets industry standards but not less than $1,000,000
for injuries, including accidental death, to any one person and
subject to the same limit for each person, and in an amount of not
less than $1,000,000 on account of one occurrence. Contractor's
property damage liability insurance shall be in an amount of not
less than $400,000.
(2) Property insurance upon the entire work at the site to the full
insurable value thereof. This insurance shall include the interest of
the lessee, the contractor, and subcontractors in the work and shall
insure against the perils of fire and extended coverage and shall
include all-risk insurance for physical loss or damage, including,
without duplication of coverage, theft, vandalism and malicious
mischief.
(3) A performance, material and labor payment bond, if required by
the City based on the size and complexity of the project, payable to
the City of Sanford in an amount equal to the entire cost of the
project. Bond requirements for construction would be included in
the land lease and operating rights agreement as approved by the
lessee and City.
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning, and Ch. 90, Building Construction.
§ 70-2.1 SANFORD CODE § 70-2.1
27:18
D. Temporary buildings and structures requested to be placed on Airport
property must receive prior written approval from the Airport Manager
and specify type, use, design and location on an individual basis for a
specified term. Removal of temporary buildings and structures will be
completed in whole by the lessee, at the lessee's expense, within 15
days of the end of the approved term. The area where the building or
structure was located shall be returned to the same condition or better
as it was prior to the installation of said building or structure.
E. In the event of any failure on the part of any lessee to comply with
Airport requirements or any failure to complete a construction project
according to the approved plans and specifications, or within a
reasonable time as determined by the City, shall be cause for the City to
revoke any ground lease with the lessee of the project and require that
the structure be removed from the Airport property. In addition to the
foregoing remedies, the City shall retain all other remedies provided by
the lease term or provided by law.
F. Notice to proceed.
(1) When satisfied that all provisions of this directive have been, or will
be fulfilled, the City will issue a letter notifying the lessee to
proceed with the approved work.
(2) Any loss incurred due to work performed, materials purchased, or
subleases signed by the lessee prior to receipt of a notice to
proceed shall be the lessee's responsibility.
§ 70-2.1 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-2.1
27:19

ARTICLE II
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 8-7-1990; amended 3-18-2003]
§ 70-3. Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words when used
in any rule or regulation administered by the Maine Department of
Transportation, Bureau of Aeronautics for the Town of Sanford shall have
the following meanings:
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used
or designed for navigation of or flight in the air, except a parachute or
other contrivance designed for such navigation but used primarily as safety
equipment.
AIRMAN — Any individual who engages, as the person in command or as
pilot, mechanic or member of the flight crew, in the navigation of aircraft
while underway, and any individual who is directly in charge of the
inspection, maintenance, overhauling, or repair of aircraft, aircraft engines,
propellers, or appliances.
AIRPORT — The Sanford Seacoast Regional Airport as it now exists and as it
may be expanded in the future, including all lands and roadways.[Amended
5-1-2012]
AIRPORT MANAGER — The Manager of the Sanford Seacoast Regional
Airport as appointed by the Town Council.[Amended 2-5-2008; 5-1-2012]
FIXED BASE OPERATOR — Any person or company engaged in the business
of the sale of aircraft, aircraft parts, fuel, and petroleum products, or rental
of aircraft, flight instruction, and the rendition of any related service who
or which has applied to the Town and received a license to operate on the
Airport in accordance with the Minimum Operating Standards for Sanford
Airport.
FSS — The Flight Service Station operated by the Federal Aviation
Administration.
MINIMUM STANDARDS — Refers to the Minimum Operating Standards for
Sanford Airport as approved by the Town and as amended in the future.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, company, association, jointstock
association, or body politic and includes any trustee, receiver,
assignee or other similar representative thereof.
TOWN COUNCIL — The Town Council of the Town of Sanford,
Maine.[Amended 2-5-2008]
§ 70-4. Rules and regulations established. [Amended 5-1-2012]
The Town of Sanford, Maine, hereby establishes rules and regulations
controlling and governing the Sanford Seacoast Regional Airport. These
rules and regulations shall supersede all prior rules and regulations
§ 70-3 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-4
27:21
governing the Sanford Seacoast Regional Airport and the amendments
thereto which are repealed upon adoption of these rules and regulations,
except the Minimum Operating Standards for Sanford Airport.
§ 70-5. Purpose; administration. [Amended 2-5-2008; 5-1-2012]
The following rules and regulations govern the administration, operation
and use of the Sanford Seacoast Regional Airport. These rules are to be
strictly administrated by the Town Council or by its duly appointed
representative under the Council's control and responsibility.
§ 70-6. Scope. [Amended 2-5-2008]
All persons on the Airport shall be governed by these rules and regulations
which are subject to change by Town Council action only. In any
contingencies not covered by these rules and regulations, the Airport
Manager upon direction and instruction of the Town Council is hereby
authorized to establish on a pro forma basis such additional rules and
regulations as may seem desirable and proper. The Airport Manager, or his
duly authorized representative, and the Town Council shall deny the use
of the Airport to any person who knowingly violates any rule or regulation
herein established (or to be established prior to violation). Such person
upon conviction shall be subject to such fines or other penalties as may be
established by rules and regulations or state or federal law.
§ 70-7. Liability.
Any person using the Airport and its facilities shall do so at his/her own
risk. The Town of Sanford, Maine, will not assume any responsibility for
loss, injury, damage, or death to persons or property caused by fire, theft,
vandalism, flood, earthquakes, acts of God, the public enemy, or for any
other reason.
§ 70-8. Police power.
All powers of the Maine State Police, York County Sheriff's Department,
State of Maine Fish and Game Department and the Sanford Town Police
extend to all areas of the Airport.
§ 70-9. Report of accidents.
Any person involved in any accident at the Airport, whether it be personal,
aircraft, or vehicular, shall make a written report of such accident to the
Airport Manager as soon as possible. Such report shall be in addition to any
report required by law.
§ 70-10. Safety rule.
No person shall do or omit to do any act if the doing or omission thereof
endangers, or is likely to endanger, persons or property on the Airport.
§ 70-4 SANFORD CODE § 70-11
27:22
§ 70-11. Conduct and use of Airport.
No person shall be intoxicated or disorderly, engage in any form of gambling
or commit any act of nuisance at the Airport, nor shall any person omit or
do any act if such act or omission endangers other persons or property.
§ 70-12. Airport property.4
No person shall destroy or disturb any building, equipment or flora at the
Airport, nor alter or erect any building or sign, nor abandon any personal
property at the Airport, nor use or confiscate materials or property of others
without the written consent of the Airport Manager or the Town Council.
§ 70-13. Damage to Airport property.5
Any person liable for causing damage to Airport property shall be required
to pay full amount of such damage upon demand of the Airport Manager
and/or the Town Council. Any person failing to do so may be deprived of
the use of the Airport and its facilities until full reimbursement has been
made. tenants, lessees and grantees shall be held fully responsible for all
damage to buildings, equipment, real property and appurtenances in the
ownership of the Airport caused by negligence, abuse or carelessness on the
part of their employees, servants, agents, or customers. Any damage to, or
malfunctioning of, buildings, structures, utilities, or other Airport property
shall be reported at once to the Airport Manager.
§ 70-14. Weapons, firearms and explosives.
No person, except those duly authorized by law, shall carry any weapon,
firearm, or explosive on the Airport, except encased sporting guns for air
shipment.
§ 70-15. Restricted areas.
No person shall enter upon the air operating areas, utility and service areas,
or any other areas designated as restricted except persons authorized by
the Airport Manager or passengers under appropriate supervision while
enplaning or deplaning.
§ 70-16. Inspections.
A. All hangars and other buildings or structures on Town-owned land at
the Airport shall be subject to semiannual inspections, both exterior
and interior, by the Airport Manager, or his designee, and the Town's
regular code enforcement inspection team to determine compliance
with all applicable laws and codes, requirements of applicable Airport
rules and regulations, and specific lease agreement requirements.
4. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
5. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 70-11 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-16
27:23
§ 70-17. Structural or decorative changes to Airport facilities.6
No person, tenant, lessee or grantee shall make any alterations of any
nature to any building, ramp, or other space nor erect any structure on the
Airport without prior written permission from the Airport Manager or the
Town Council, except as may be authorized in existing contracts or leases.
§ 70-18. Storage.7
No person, tenant, lessee, or grantee shall store or stock material or
equipment in such manner as to constitute a hazard to personnel or
property; therefore, written permission must be obtained from the Airport
Manager or the Town Council. The following information must be included
on the request form: how, what, when, where and how long.
§ 70-19. Smoking.
No person shall smoke on the ramp, in any hangar or shop, service area,
fuel storage area or in any area where smoking is specifically prohibited,
or within 50 feet of any fueling operation, unless in locations approved in
writing by the Airport Manager.
§ 70-20. Business or commercial activity.
No personnel shall engage in any business or commercial activity of any
nature on the premises of the Airport except with the written approval
of the Airport Manager and under such terms and conditions as may be
prescribed by the Minimum Operating Standards for Sanford Airport. No
soliciting of any nature may be conducted without written permission of the
Airport Manager.
§ 70-21. Operation of motorized equipment.
No person shall operate motorized equipment on the Airport operating
areas unless operated in accordance with the following restrictions:
B. Such inspections shall be conducted approximately May 1 and
November 1 of each year. The Airport Manager, or his designee, shall
cause a letter to be sent to the owner and/or tenant of each such
hangar, building or structure approximately one month in advance
reminding them of the upcoming inspection, provided that failure to
send or receive the letter shall not be grounds to deny the inspection. If
necessary, given the security issues surrounding the Airport, the
Airport Manager, or his designee, shall be authorized to break any locks
or other obstructions blocking inspection without cost or expense to the
Town, but, if that is necessary, he shall cause the same to be locked
after the inspection and so notify the hangar or building owner so that a
key can be provided.
6. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
7. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 70-16 SANFORD CODE § 70-21
27:24
§ 70-22. Parking.
No person shall park a vehicle on the Airport premises unless authorized by
the Airport Manager and then only in the areas specifically established for
parking in the manner and for the amount of time prescribed by signs, lines
or other means.
§ 70-23. Towing regulations.
The Airport Manager may remove any vehicle which is disabled, abandoned,
or parked in violation of these rules and regulations, or which presents an
operational problem, at the owner's expense and without liability on behalf
of the Town of Sanford.
§ 70-24. Regulations.9
A. No vehicle shall be operated on or along a ramp, taxiway, or runway
except by persons authorized by the Airport Manager under conditions
he may prescribe except lights, flags.
B. Only vehicles authorized by the Airport Manager may park within the
air operating area, and when parking adjacent to a runway on Airport
property, all vehicles must park at least 200 feet to the outside, unless
such runway is officially closed by the Airport Manager or maintenance
requirements dictate otherwise.
C. If a license is required by law, the vehicle shall be so licensed.
D. No person shall operate a vehicle in a reckless or negligent manner, or
without caution, or in a manner which endangers, or is likely to
endanger, persons or property.
E. Pedestrians and aircraft shall at all times have the right-of-way over
vehicular traffic. All vehicles shall pass to the rear of taxiing aircraft
whenever possible.
F. No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of speed limits prescribed
by signs located in appropriate areas.
G. No person shall operate or cause to operate any type of recreation or
off-the-road vehicle (reference to but not limited to bicycles,
motorbikes, snowmobiles, go-carts, dune buggies, etc.) on air operating
areas except as directed in writing by the Airport Manager or the Town
Council.8
A. Aeronautical activities. All aircraft operations shall be conducted in
conformity with the current regulations and directives of the Federal
Aviation Administration, the Civil Aeronautics Board, the Maine
8. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
9. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 70-21 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-24
27:25
Department of Transportation, and, to the extent applicable, with the
orders issued by the Town Council and the Airport Manager.
B. Closing of the field. Whenever the Airport Manager or the Town Council
believe Airport facilities to be unsafe for landing or takeoffs, it shall be
within their authority to close the Airport.
C. Refusal of use of the Airport. The Airport Manager or the Town Council
may restrict any flight or other operation at the Airport and may refuse
takeoff clearance to any aircraft for any reason they believe justifiable
in the interest of public safety and welfare.
D. Careless or negligent operation. No person shall operate any aircraft
while under the influence of intoxicants, narcotics, or other drugs, or
operate an aircraft in a manner to endanger life or property.
E. Aircraft equipment. No aircraft may land or take off unless it is
equipped with brakes or other means of preventing movement on the
ground.
F. Disabled aircraft. All disabled aircraft and parts thereof at the Airport
shall be removed promptly by the owner after official notice by
appropriate authorities. The Airport Manager or authorized
representative shall have the right, without any liability for loss or
damage which may result therefrom, to cause the immediate removal of
a disabled aircraft or part thereof to a safe place on the Airport, at the
owner's expense, whenever the aircraft constitutes a hazard to persons
or property. The Airport Manager may cause any such aircraft or part
thereof not removed by the owner to be removed from the Airport at the
owner's expense without liability for any loss, provided that he shall
have first given seven days' written notice of his intention to do so,
directed to the owner's last known address.
G. Demonstrations. No experimental flights or parachute jumping shall be
permitted unless authorized by the Airport Manager and the Federal
Aviation Administration.
H. Engine run-up. No engine run-up shall be conducted which will
constitute a hazard or nuisance to other aircraft, persons, or property.
I. Starting aircraft engines. No aircraft shall be started or run unless a
qualified airman is in the aircraft and at the controls. Landing gear
must be adequately blocked or braked to prevent inadvertent
movement of the aircraft. Adequate fire extinguishers must be
available.
J. Taxiing and moving aircraft. No aircraft shall be taxied into or out of a
hangar. All taxiing must be done at safe and reasonable speeds.
K. Parking the aircraft. No person shall park aircraft in any area other
than that designated by the Airport Manager.
§ 70-24 SANFORD CODE § 70-24
27:26
§ 70-25. Hours of service.
See the Minimum Operating Standards for the Sanford Airport.
§ 70-26. Lease or contract.
See the Minimum Operating Standards for the Sanford Airport.
§ 70-27. Facilities for the public.
See the Minimum Operating Standards for the Sanford Airport.
§ 70-28. Construction requirements.
See the Minimum Operating Standards for the Sanford Airport.
§ 70-29. Bond.
See the Minimum Operating Standards for the Sanford Airport.
§ 70-30. Financial ability.
See the Minimum Operating Standards for the Sanford Airport.
§ 70-31. Insurance.
See the Minimum Operating Standards for the Sanford Airport.
§ 70-32. Personnel and equipment.
See the Minimum Operating Standards for the Sanford Airport.
§ 70-33. Exceptions.
Where the terms of any bona fide contract, currently in force, conflict with
those rules and regulations, the terms of the contract shall prevail but only
until such contract expires or any terms therein are renegotiated, at which
L. Repair of aircraft. No person shall repair aircraft, aircraft engines, or
related apparatus in any area other than that designated by the Airport
Manager.
M. Fueling of aircraft. Aircraft fueling shall be conducted in accordance
with accepted standards and requirements established by the National
Fire Protection Association. No smoking will be permitted within 50
feet of the fueling area.
N. Bomb or sabotage threat. Persons having knowledge of an aircraft
carrying, or suspected of carrying, explosive materials shall notify the
FAA-FSS and the Airport Manager or his authorized representative
immediately. All measures necessary to protect life and property will be
invoked by the Airport Manager.
§ 70-24 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-33
27:27
time any conflicting terms shall be revised so as to be consistent with those
rules and regulations and with the Minimum Standards.
§ 70-34. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted
of a violation of any provision of these rules and regulations shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $100.
§ 70-35. Repealer; amendments. [Amended 2-5-2008]
These rules and regulations supersede all rules and regulations or parts
of rules and regulations relative to the Airport, specifically except the
Minimum Operating Standards for the Airport. Any additions, deletions
and/or changes to these rules and regulations shall be completed through
the legislative procedure of the Town Council, except as to the Minimum
Operating Standards for the Airport.
§ 70-33 SANFORD CODE § 70-35
27:28
ARTICLE III
Lease and Use of Property and Facilities
[Adopted 6-21-2005; amended in its entirety 1-17-2017 by Order
No. 17-11.11]
§ 70-36. Airport point of contact; intent.
§ 70-37. Objective, policy and application.
A. The City of Sanford is the owner, operator and sponsor of the Sanford
Seacoast Regional Airport, hereinafter referred to as "Airport." The
point of contact for the Airport is the Airport Manager:
Airport Manager's Office
9 Presidential Lane
Sanford, Maine 04073
Office: 207-324-3172
Fax: 207-324-3094
B. It is the intent of the City of Sanford to make the Airport available for
the use and benefit of the public and make it available to all types,
kinds, and classes or aeronautical activity on reasonable terms and
without unjust discrimination.
A. Objective.
(1) The Airport, as a federally obligated Airport, agrees to make
available the opportunity to engage in commercial aeronautical and
nonaeronautical activities by persons, firms, or legal entities that
meet reasonable minimum standards and procedures as set forth in
this article, hereinafter referred to as "standards." The objectives
of these standards are to:
(a) Promote safety in all Airport activities;
(b) Maintain a high quality of service for all Airport users;
(c) Protect the public from unlicensed and unauthorized products
or services;
(d) Enhance the availability of services for all Airport users; and
(e) Promote the orderly development of Airport land.
(2) The intent herein is to categorically identify those minimum
standards and procedures by which all persons, firms or other legal
entities conducting commercial (revenue producing) or
noncommercial aeronautical activities at the Airport shall conduct
their respective operations.
§ 70-36 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-37
27:29
B. Policy.
(1) In exchange for the opportunity to engage in an aeronautical
activity, persons, firms, or entities engaged in aeronautical activity
agree to comply with the standards developed by the Airport. All
applicants shall meet the standards, as now in existence or as may
hereafter be modified or amended, as recited herein and which
pertain to their respective category.
(2) Present commercial operators and noncommercial lessees
conducting operations on the Airport, prior to the effective date of
these standards, may be allowed to continue operations without
fully complying with the portions of these standards relating to the
number of categories and the physical requirements of land and
buildings so long as such operations are in the public interest, and
do not conflict with any FAA or Maine DOT requirement, or if the
owner determines that it would be an extreme hardship, financial
or otherwise for such an operator to fully comply with said portions
of these standards. It is the responsibility of the operator to
determine there is extreme hardship, financial or otherwise, and
provide documentation of this to the Airport with a request for
exemption from applicable elements of the standards.
(3) All commercial operators and noncommercial lessees will be
subject to applicable federal, State and local laws, codes,
ordinances, and other regulatory measures.
(4) All commercial operator's sublessees and noncommercial
sublessees, also known as "subtenants," are subject to the
provisions of these standards as well as all applicable federal, State
and local laws, codes, ordinances, and other regulatory measures.
Any reference to "operator" or "lessee" is understood to include any
and all sublessees.
(5) No person(s), firm or legal entity shall act as a commercial operator
or noncommercial lessee on the Airport until such time as that
person(s), firm or legal entity has applied for and received
permission to so act, and has entered into and executed a lease/
contract/operating rights agreement with the owner.
(6) No lease/contract/operating rights agreement executed under
these standards shall be transferable without first obtaining the
prior written approval of the owner.
(7) It is the owner's intention not to approve any application, or enter
into any lease/contract/operating rights agreement, which offers
more favorable terms and conditions for the same or similar rights
to any one commercial operator or noncommercial lessee more
than another.
(8) All leases/contracts/operating rights agreements for commercial
operations shall contain, inter alia, a covenant reciting the
§ 70-37 SANFORD CODE § 70-37
27:30
§ 70-38. Minimum standards for specific activities.
commercial operator's obligation to pay, as applicable, an amount
for the basic annual rental of agreed premises and, as applicable
based on the type of operation being conducted and if specified in
a lease and operating rights agreement, and/or an amount equal
to certain percentage of its gross annual income or revenue for
operating rights granted. Such stipulations and covenants will be
recited in the applicable lease/contract/operating rights
agreement.
(9) The owner shall review these standards annually and shall
recommend such revisions or amendments as shall be deemed
necessary under the use circumstances surrounding the Airport to
properly protect the health, safety, and interest of the public. Upon
approval of any such amendments, the commercial operators and
noncommercial lessees secured hereunder shall be required to
conform to such amended standards.
(10) All leases and/or operating rights agreements entered into by the
owner shall be subordinate to the provisions of any existing or
future agreement between the commercial operator or
noncommercial lessee and the United States, relative to the
operation or maintenance of the Airport, the execution of which has
been or may be required as a condition precedent to the
expenditure of federal funds for the development of the Airport.
(11) It is specifically understood and agreed that nothing contained
herein shall be construed as granting or authorizing the granting of
an exclusive right within the meaning of 49 U.S. C. §§ 40103(e) and
47107(a)(4).
C. Application.
(1) The implementation and application of these standards shall be
accomplished by the City of Sanford, acting through its duly
elected City Council and its duly appointed Airport Manager.
(2) These standards shall be published. The standards shall be
appended to all existing and future leases/contracts and operating
rights agreements and shall be considered a part of all leases/
contracts and/or operating rights agreements which the City of
Sanford has now or does in the future enter into.
D. Related materials:
(1) Order 5190.6B, Airport Compliance Manual.
(2) Advisory Circular (AC) 150/5190-7, Minimum Standards for
Commercial Aeronautical Activities.
(3) AC 150/5190-6 - Exclusive Rights at Federally Obligated Airports.
§ 70-37 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-38
27:31
A. A fixed base operator (FBO) is defined as an entity engaging in an
activity which involves, makes possible, or is required for the operation
of aircraft, or which contributes to, or is required for the safety of such
aircraft operations. The purpose of such activity may be to secure
earnings, income, compensation or profit, whether or not such
objective(s) are accomplished. Authorized activities by a commercial
operator shall be strictly limited to any one or a combination of the
following aeronautical services performed in full compliance with the
specific standards for that activity as set forth herein:
Category Title
I Line services (aircraft fuels and oil dispensing)
II Flight training
III Aircraft charter and air taxi
IV Aircraft sales (new and/or used)
V Aircraft rentals
VI Airframe and power plant repair facilities
VII Aircraft painting and/or repair or initial outfitting of
interiors
VIII Specialized aircraft repair service - radios, propellers,
instruments, and accessories
IX Aircraft parking and storage
X Specialized Aeronautical Service Operator (SASO)
XI Flying clubs
XII Independent operators
XIII Any other activities not specifically provided for in these
minimum standards
B. An entity wishing to engage in activities which involve multiple FBO
categories must meet the minimum requirements for all categories in
question.
(1) I: Line services (aircraft fuels and oil dispensing).
(a) Statement of concept. An aircraft fuel and oil service FBO
provides aviation fuels, lubricants and other services
supporting both based and itinerant aircraft operations.
(b) Required leasehold/building and/or hangar size. The operator
shall lease from the owner an area of not less than 10,000
square feet of ground space. The operator shall acquire or
erect on aforementioned leasehold a building to provide at
least 6,500 square feet of floor space for aircraft storage and at
least an additional 750 square feet of floor space for office
space, a customer/pilot lounge, and restrooms, which shall be
properly heated, cooled, and lighted. The operator shall also
§ 70-38 SANFORD CODE § 70-38
27:32
provide telephone facilities and wireless high-speed Internet
for customer use.
(c) Personnel requirements. The operator shall employ and train
sufficient employees to meet the standards and procedures set
forth in this category. The employees of the operator shall be
trained to use fire extinguishers and spill response equipment,
such as absorbents and containment devices established in the
Airport's Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) and
Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasure Plan (SPCCP).
(d) Hours of operation requirements. The operator shall have the
premises open and services available year round with hours as
negotiated and determined in the lease agreement, but in any
case open during daylight hours, seven days a week for aircraft
fueling and dispensing. During hours of darkness, the operator
shall provide an on-call service and respond within two hours
of the request. The operator shall arrange for an employee to
be in attendance in the office at all times during the required
operating hours.
(e) Equipment requirements.
[1] Aircraft fuel and oil dispensing operations.
[a] The operator shall furnish and maintain an adequate
supply of recognized AVGAS, Jet-A fuel, oils and
lubricants to meet public demand. Specific grade and
quantities shall be negotiated as part of the lease
agreement.
[b] In conducting refueling operations, every operator
shall install and use adequate grounding and/or
bonding locations in accordance with current National
Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards to
eliminate the hazards of static electricity and shall
provide fire extinguishers or other equipment,
approved by the NFPA, of such types and in such
numbers as are commensurate with the hazards
involved in refueling and serving aircraft.
[c] The operator shall handle and dispose of, away from
the Airport, all used or unused oil, solvents, and other
hazardous/nonhazardous materials and waste in
accordance with federal, State and local
requirements.
[2] Aircraft fueling systems. The operator shall provide
metered, filter-equipped dispensers, fixed or mobile, for
dispensing required grades of fuel. All dispensers must be
inspected at least annually by a person qualified by NFPA
standards to conduct and record said inspection. Separate
§ 70-38 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-38
27:33
dispensing pumps and meters are required for each grade
of fuel and such facilities are to be in accordance with
applicable NFPA standards.
[3] Aircraft general services. The operator shall provide line
service that does not require a certified mechanical rating,
and cabin services, to general aviation aircraft as can be
performed efficiently on the ramp or apron parking area,
but only within the premises leased to the operator or
identified in an operating rights agreement. The operator
shall procure and maintain tools, jacks, and such
equipment and trained personnel as necessary to provide
for aircraft towing for moving and parking aircraft and
assisting in the removal of disabled aircraft, inflating
aircraft tires, changing engine oil, washing aircraft in
designated areas, performing lavatory service on jet
aircraft, and for recharging and energizing aircraft
batteries and starters. All equipment shall be maintained
and operated in accordance with federal, State and local
industrial codes.
(f) Insurance requirements. The operator shall obtain and
maintain at all times insurance policies of the types and in the
amounts required by the owner as specified in Appendix B of
these standards10 and more particularly in the lease and
operating rights agreement.
(2) II: Flight training.
(a) Statement of concept. A flight-training FBO engages in
instructing pilots in dual and solo flight training, in fixed and/or
rotary wing aircraft, and provides such related ground school
instruction as is necessary and preparatory to taking the
written examination and flight check ride for the category or
categories of pilot licenses and ratings involved.
(b) Required leasehold/building and/or hangar size. The operator
shall lease from the owner an area of not less than 10,000
square feet of ground space. The leasehold must have airside
and landside access for customers. The operator shall acquire
or erect on aforementioned leasehold a building to provide at
least 2,750 square feet of floor space for aircraft storage and at
least an additional 750 square feet of floor space for office, a
classroom, a briefing room with a telephone and a computer
with high-speed Internet access for students and pilots,
complimentary wireless high-speed Internet access for
students and pilots, a customer/pilot lounge and restrooms,
which shall be properly heated, cooled, and lighted.
10.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 70-38 SANFORD CODE § 70-38
27:34
(c) Personnel requirements. The operator shall have in his/her
employ, and on duty during the appropriate business hours,
trained personnel in such numbers as are required to meet the
minimum standards set forth in this category of services in an
efficient manner, but never fewer than two persons, each
possessing a current, effective FAA commercial pilot license
with an appropriate instructor rating for the types of training
offered as well as a current medical certificate.
(d) Hours of operation requirements. The operator shall have the
premises open and services available year round with
operating hours as negotiated and required in the lease
agreement. The operator shall arrange for an employee to be in
attendance in the office at all times during the required
operating hours.
(e) Equipment requirements.
[1] The operator shall have available for in-flight training use,
either owned or under written lease to the operator, not
fewer than three properly certified, airworthy aircraft
equipped for pilots with student, private, instrument, and
commercial FAA certificates. At least one of these aircraft
must be certified four-place aircraft and one aircraft must
be IFR certified. If the aircraft required under this section
are no longer airworthy, the FBO must notify the Airport
Manager of the aircraft's status in a timely manner in
writing along with a timeline for returning the aircraft to
an airworthy condition or acquiring a replacement
airworthy aircraft.
[2] For a flight-training FBO offering instrument ratings, the
operator shall have available for use an FAA approved
flight-training device (FTD).
[3] The operator must offer for sale current aeronautical
publications as appropriate and necessary for student,
private, instrument and commercial pilots.
[4] The operator shall provide adequate mock-ups, pictures,
slides, programs or other visual aids necessary to provide
proper ground school instruction.
(f) Insurance requirements. In addition to the standard insurance
requirements specified in these standards for flight training,
the operator is required to notify the customer as to whether or
not any of the operator's insurance coverage applies to or
protects the customer while using the operator's aircraft.
(3) III: Aircraft charter and air taxi.
§ 70-38 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-38
27:35
(a) Statement of concept. An unscheduled, or scheduled air
charter or air taxi FBO engages in the business of providing air
transportation (persons or property) to the general public for
hire, on an unscheduled or scheduled basis, under 14 CFR Part
135, Operating Requirements: Commuter and On Demand
Operations and Rules Governing Persons on Board Such
Aircraft.
(b) Required leasehold/building and/or hangar size. The operator
shall lease from the owner an area of not less than 10,000
square feet of ground space. The operator shall acquire or
erect on aforementioned leasehold a building to provide at
least 2,750 square feet of floor space for aircraft storage. The
operator would additionally have to possess 1) direct landside
and airside access and at least an additional 500 square feet of
floor space which shall be properly heated, cooled, and lighted
for office space, a customer/passenger lounge with telephone
facilities and complimentary wireless high-speed Internet for
customer use, and restrooms; or, 2) a written agreement with
an existing FBO that meets the requirements of Item 1). Such
an agreement between an existing FBO and Category III FBO
operator shall be subject to the written approval of the Airport
Manager and a copy of the final written agreement shall be
provided to the Airport Manager.
(c) Personnel requirements. The operator must be certified by the
FAA under F.A.R. Part 135 and provide a copy to the Airport
within 10 days upon request. The operator shall have in his/her
employ and on duty during the appropriate business hours
trained personnel in such numbers as are required to meet the
standards set forth in this category in an efficient manner but
never less than one pilot appropriately rated by the FAA to
provide the services offered by the operator.
(d) Hours of operation requirements. The operator shall have the
premises open and services available as negotiated and
required in the lease agreement. The operator shall provide oncall
service during hours other than the aforementioned.
(e) Equipment requirements. The operator shall have available for
use, either owned or under written lease to the operator,
airworthy aircraft that shall be suitably equipped for such
operations as specified in the lease and operating rights
agreement for the purpose of aircraft charter or air taxi
operations.
(f) Insurance requirements. The operator shall obtain and
maintain at all times insurance policies of the types and in the
amounts required by the owner as specified in Appendix B of
these standards11 and more particularly in the lease and
operating rights agreement.
§ 70-38 SANFORD CODE § 70-38
27:36
(4) IV: Aircraft sales (new and/or used).
(a) Statement of concept. An aircraft sales FBO engages in the
sale of new or used aircraft through franchises, licensed
dealerships or distributorships (either on a retail or wholesale
basis) or otherwise, and provides such repairs, services, and
parts as necessary to meet any guarantee or warranty on new
or used aircraft sold by the FBO.
(b) Required leasehold/building and/or hangar size. The operator
shall lease from the owner an area of not less than 12,000
square feet of ground space to provide for outside display and
storage of aircraft and on which shall be erected a building to
provide at least 6,000 square feet of floor space for aircraft
storage and at least an additional 500 square feet of floor space
for office space, a customer lounge, and restrooms, which shall
be properly heated, cooled, and lighted; and shall provide
telephone facilities and complimentary wireless high-speed
Internet for customer use. The leasehold must have airside and
landside access for customers.
(c) Personnel requirements.
[1] The operator shall have in his/her employ, and on duty
during the appropriate business hours, trained personnel
in such numbers as are required to meet the minimum
standards set forth in an efficient manner, but never less
than one person having a current, private pilot certificate
and minimum hour requirement as specified by FAA for
type and category of aircraft to be demonstrated for sale.
[2] An operator engaging in the sale of used aircraft must
conform to the provisions of FAA regulations, part 47,
Subpart C, and must possess a valid Dealers Aircraft
Registration Certificate, FAA Form 8050. A copy of each
valid certificate must be sent to the Airport within 10
calendar days upon request.
(d) Hours of operation requirements. The operator shall have the
premises open and services available year round with
operating hours as negotiated and required in the lease
agreement. The operator shall arrange for an employee to be in
attendance in the office at all times during the required
operating hours.
(e) Equipment requirements.
[1] The operator shall provide current, up-to-date
specifications and price lists for types and models of
aircraft sold.
11.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 70-38 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-38
27:37
[2] The operator shall provide necessary and satisfactory
arrangements for repair and servicing of aircraft, but only
for the duration of any sales guarantee or warranty period.
[3] Servicing facilities may be provided through written
agreement with a repair shop operator at the Airport.
(f) Insurance requirements. The operator shall obtain and
maintain at all times insurance policies of the types and in the
amounts required by the owner as specified in Appendix B of
these standards and more particularly in the lease and
operating rights agreement.
(5) V: Aircraft rentals.
(a) Statement of concept. An aircraft rental FBO engages in the
rental of aircraft (fixed or rotary wing) for operation by student
pilots or other pilots not employed by the operator.
(b) Required leasehold/building and/or hangar size. The operator
shall lease from the owner an area of not less than 10,000
square feet of ground space for storage and display of aircraft.
The leasehold must have airside and landside access for
customers. The operator shall acquire or erect on
aforementioned leasehold a building to provide at least 3,000
square feet of floor space for aircraft storage and at least an
additional 500 square feet of floor space for office space, a
customer/pilot lounge, and restrooms, which shall be properly
heated, cooled, and lighted. The operator shall also provide
telephone facilities and complimentary wireless high-speed
Internet for customer use.
(c) Personnel requirements. The operator shall have in his/her
employ, and on duty during the appropriate business hours,
trained personnel in such numbers as are required to meet the
minimum standards set forth in this category of services in an
efficient manner, but never less than one person possessing a
current, effective FAA commercial pilot license with an
appropriate instructor rating for the rental aircraft as well as a
current medical certificate.
(d) Hours of operation requirements. The operator shall have the
premises open and services available year round with hours as
negotiated and required in the lease agreement. The operator
shall arrange for an employee to be in attendance in the office
at all times during the required operating hours.
(e) Equipment requirements. The operator shall have available for
rental, either owned or under written lease to the operator, not
fewer than three properly certified and currently airworthy
aircraft suitably equipped for pilots with student, private,
commercial or instrument FAA certificates. Two of these
§ 70-38 SANFORD CODE § 70-38
27:38
aircraft must be certified four-place aircraft; one aircraft must
be IFR equipped and certified. The operator shall have on
hand, at all times, proper checklists and operating manuals for
each and every aircraft available for rental.
(f) Insurance requirements. In addition to the standard insurance
requirements specified in these standards, for rental activities,
the operator is required to notify the customer as to whether or
not any of the operator's insurance coverage applies to or
protects the customer while using the operator's aircraft.
(6) VI: Airframe and power plant repair facilities.
(a) Statement of concept. An aircraft airframe and power plant
repair and maintenance FBO engages in the maintenance and
repair of aircraft and/or rotorcraft, power plants, propellers
and/or rotors, accessories, and the sale of aircraft parts and
accessories.
(b) Required leasehold/building and/or hangar size. The operator
shall lease from the owner an area of not less than 10,000
square feet of ground space. The operator shall acquire or
erect on aforementioned leasehold a building to provide at
least 6,500 square feet of floor space for airframe and power
plant repair service, including sufficient hangar space to
provide housing for any aircraft being serviced, all meeting
with federal, State, and local industrial code requirements and
at least an additional 500 square feet of floor space for office
space, a customer/pilot lounge, and restrooms, which shall be
properly heated, cooled, and lighted. The operator shall also
provide telephone facilities and complimentary wireless highspeed
Internet for customer use.
(c) Personnel requirements. The operator shall have in his/her
employ, and on duty during the appropriate business hours,
trained personnel in such numbers as are required to meet the
minimum standards set forth in this category of services in an
efficient manner, but never less than one person currently
certified by the FAA as an airworthiness inspector with ratings
appropriate to the work being performed. Maintenance
support must be available at other times with proper
coordination.
(d) Hours of operation requirements. The operator shall have the
premises open and services available year round with
operating hours as negotiated and required in the lease
agreement, but at a minimum Monday through Friday during
regular business hours.
(e) Equipment requirements. The operator shall provide adequate
shop space to house all equipment, and shall keep on hand at
all times a stock of batteries, filters, plugs, and miscellaneous
§ 70-38 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-38
27:39
hardware and electrical components necessary for the types
of repairs and maintenance performed as well as adequate
equipment and machine tools, jacks, lifts and testing
equipment to perform annual inspections as required for FAA
certification on single engine and light multi-engine, general
aviation aircraft. The operator shall also have on hand in good
working order the equipment and trained personnel required
for aircraft towing and commonplace aircraft emergency
services, such as flat tires and dead batteries.
(f) Insurance requirements. The operator shall obtain and
maintain at all times insurance policies of the types and in the
amounts required by the owner as specified in Appendix B of
these standards12 and more particularly in the lease and
operating rights agreement.
(7) VII: Aircraft painting and/or repair or initial outfitting of interiors.
(a) Statement of concept. An aircraft painting and/or repair or
initial outfitting of interiors FBO engages in the business of
providing a shop for the painting of aircraft and/or repair,
rehabilitation, and renovation of aircraft interiors.
(b) Required leasehold/building and/or hangar size. The operator
shall lease from the owner an area of not less than 10,000
square feet of ground space. The operator shall acquire or
erect on aforementioned leasehold a building to provide at
least 8,000 square feet of floor space for specialized aircraft
repair service, including sufficient hangar space to provide
housing for any aircraft being serviced, all meeting with
federal, State, and local industrial code requirements and at
least an additional 500 square feet of floor space for office
space, a customer/pilot lounge, and restrooms, which shall be
properly heated, cooled, and lighted. The operator shall also
provide telephone facilities and complimentary wireless highspeed
Internet for customer use.
(c) Personnel requirements. The operator shall have the
appropriate personnel available as negotiated and required in
the operating agreement. The operator shall arrange for an
employee to be in attendance in the office at all times during
the required operating hours.
(d) Hours of operation requirements. The operator shall have the
premises open and services available year round with hours as
negotiated and required in the operating agreement.
(e) Equipment requirements.
12.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 70-38 SANFORD CODE § 70-38
27:40
[1] The operator shall provide adequate shop space to house
all equipment, and shall keep on hand at all times
adequate equipment and tools to perform aircraft painting
and/or repair or initial outfitting of interiors.
[2] The operator shall outfit the building for painting services
with such setup, separation, and ventilation in accordance
with federal, State and local codes and requirements.
[3] The operator shall handle and dispose of, away from the
Airport, all used or unused oil, paints, solvents, and other
hazardous/nonhazardous materials and waste in
accordance with federal, State and local requirements.
(f) Insurance requirements. The operator shall obtain and
maintain at all times insurance policies of the types and in the
amounts required by the owner as specified in Appendix B of
these standards13 and more particularly in the lease and
operating rights agreement.
(8) VIII: Specialized aircraft repair service: radios, propellers,
instruments, and accessories.
(a) Statement of concept. An FAA-authorized repair station for
avionics sales and service FBO engages in the business of
providing a shop for the repair of aircraft radios, instruments,
and accessories for general aviation aircraft. This category
shall include the sale of new or used aircraft radios,
instruments, and accessories.
(b) Required leasehold/building and/or hangar size. The operator
shall lease from the owner an area of not less than 10,000
square feet of ground space. The operator shall acquire or
erect on aforementioned leasehold a building to provide at
least 6,500 square feet of floor space for specialized aircraft
repair service, including sufficient hangar space to provide
housing for any aircraft being serviced, all meeting with
federal, State, and local industrial code requirements and at
least an additional 500 square feet of floor space for office
space, a customer/pilot lounge, and restrooms, which shall be
properly heated, cooled, and lighted. The operator shall also
provide telephone facilities for customer use.
(c) Personnel requirements. An operator engaged in service,
repair or maintenance of aircraft shall be in possession of an
airframe and power plant certified repair station license as
granted by the Federal Aviation Administration and provide a
copy to the Airport within 10 days upon request. The operator
shall arrange for an employee to be in attendance in the office
at all times during the required operating hours.
13.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 70-38 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-38
27:41
(d) Hours of operation requirements. The operator shall have the
premises open and services available as negotiated and
required in the lease agreement.
(e) Equipment requirements. The operator shall provide adequate
shop space to house all equipment, and shall keep on hand at
all times adequate equipment and machine tools, jacks, lifts
and testing equipment to perform specialized aircraft repair
services.
(f) Insurance requirements. The operator shall obtain and
maintain at all times insurance policies of the types and in the
amounts required by the owner as specified in Appendix B of
these standards14 and more particularly in the lease and
operating rights agreement.
(9) IX: Aircraft parking and storage.
(a) Statement of concept. An aircraft parking and storage FBO
engages in the transient and/or based parking or storage of
aircraft at the Airport.
(b) Required leasehold/building and/or hangar size.
[1] The operator shall lease from the owner an area of not less
than 7,875 square feet (63 feet by 125 feet) of ground
space for aircraft tie-downs and storage, parking and other
uses in accordance with the services to be offered, and on
which shall be erected a minimum of four nested Thangars,
or a single, large storage hangar with not less
than 6,500 square feet of floor space or its equivalent. The
operator shall provide a paved taxilane to accommodate
aircraft movement from the operator's facilities to the
existing Airport taxiway system, as appropriate. An
operator providing more than four hangar spaces shall
provide restroom facilities for tenants.
[2] Ramp space is for use by the general public only unless
specifically leased to the operator. The operator shall not
be permitted to use any portion of public ramp space for
his/her business.
(c) Personnel requirements. The operator shall have the
appropriate personnel available as negotiated and required in
the operating agreement.
(d) Hours of operation requirements. The operator shall maintain
hangars and tie-down spots available for the customer's
aircraft storage and removal seven days a week, 24 hours per
day.
14.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 70-38 SANFORD CODE § 70-38
27:42
(e) Equipment requirements. Not applicable.
(f) Insurance requirements. The operator shall obtain and
maintain at all times insurance policies of the types and in the
amounts required by the owner as specified in Appendix B of
these standards15 and more particularly in the lease and
operating rights agreement.
(10) X: Specialized aeronautical service operator (SASO).
(a) Statement of concept. A SASO provides a limited commercial
aviation related service not currently available to the public at
the time of application from an existing approved fixed base
operator. Examples of these specialized services may include:
flight training, aircraft airframe and power plant repair/
maintenance, aircraft charter, air taxi, air ambulance, aircraft
sales, avionics, instrument or propeller services, crop dusting,
banner tow, aerial photography, or any other single service
aviation activity determined by the City Council to be in the
best interest of the Airport and the flying public.
(b) Required leasehold size. The operator shall have a leasehold
sized to suitably accommodate its purpose. The leasehold size
will be negotiated and required in the lease agreement.
Sublease from an existing FBO is allowable in order to fulfill
leasehold size requirements.
(c) Required building and/or hangar size. The operator shall have
an appropriately sized building and/or hangar containing
elements to provide an appropriate level of service. The
building and/or hangar elements required will be negotiated
and included in the lease agreement. Sublease from an existing
FBO is allowable in order to fulfill building and/or hangar
element requirements.
(d) Personnel requirements. The operator shall have the
appropriate personnel available as negotiated and required in
the lease agreement.
(e) Hours of operation requirements. The operator shall have the
premises open and services available as negotiated and
required in the lease agreement.
(f) Equipment requirements. The operator shall have available for
use, either owned or under written lease to the operator,
airworthy aircraft that shall be suitably equipped for such
operations as specified in the lease and operating rights
agreement.
15.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 70-38 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-38
27:43
(g) Insurance requirements. In addition to the standard insurance
requirements specified in these standards, for flight training,
the operator is required to notify the customer as to whether or
not any of the operator's insurance coverage applies to or
protects the customer while using the operator's aircraft.
(11) XI: Flying clubs.
(a) Statement of concept. A flying club is a nonprofit entity formed
as an organization, corporation, association or partnership
with the purpose of providing its members with jointly owned
and operated aircraft for noncommercial use.
(b) Required leasehold size. The club may lease tie-down space for
outdoor storage in compliance with the Airport's Aircraft
Parking Policy, as may be amended from time to time. Any
aircraft utilized by the club and stored on the Airport premises
shall be either contained in a hangar or on a tie-down in a
location specified for aircraft parking on the Airport Layout
Plan and/or approved by the Airport Manager in writing.
(c) Required building and/or hangar size. The club may lease
hangar space at the Airport for the purpose of aircraft storage.
Such a lease agreement will be in line with private hangar
leases at the Airport.
(d) Personnel requirements. Each club must be a certified
nonprofit in the State of Maine. Each member must be a bona
fide owner of the aircraft or a stockholder in the corporation.
The club may not derive greater revenue from the use of its
aircraft than the amount necessary for the actual use of
operation, maintenance and replacement of the aircraft. The
club will file and keep current with the Airport a complete list
of the club's membership and investment share held by each
member.
(e) Hours of operation requirements. Not applicable; flying clubs
are not authorized to provide commercial services to the
public.
(f) Equipment requirements.
[1] The club will file annually and keep current with the
Airport a complete list of the club's aircraft.
[2] The club's aircraft will not be used by other than bona fide
members for rental and by no one for hire, charter or air
taxi. Student instruction can be given by a lessee based on
the Airport who provides flight training or by a FAAcertified
flight instructor who is a bona fide member of the
club, but only at no cost to other bona fide members of the
club.
§ 70-38 SANFORD CODE § 70-38
27:44
(g) Insurance requirements. The operator shall obtain and
maintain at all times insurance policies of the types and in the
amounts required by the owner as specified in Appendix B of
these standards16 and more particularly in the lease and
operating rights agreement.
(12) XII: Independent operators.
(a) Statement of concept. Individual operators may perform a
single-service aviation support activity on the Airport only if
the service is not available from an existing fixed base operator
or permitted SASO and only with permission of the City of
Sanford in the form of an operating rights agreement. An
example of such activity may be, but is not limited to, certified
FAA check airmen performing check rides or specialized
mechanic services such as those for a jet not offered by an
existing on-Airport FBO. For all operations currently existing
and in operation at the Airport, independent operators must
obtain a sublease for operating rights from the established
commercial operator or otherwise fulfill the requirements of
that category or categories of operation, as applicable. Such
subleases must obtain prior written approval from the Airport
Manager. A copy of each executed sublease shall be provided
to the Airport Manager within 14 calendar days of its
execution.
(b) Required leasehold/building and/or hangar size.
[1] The operator shall lease from the owner an area of not less
than one annual aircraft tie-down, and/or lease or sublease
on the Airport an aircraft storage hangar capable of
storing at least one aircraft. This requirement may be
waived with prior approval from the Airport Manager
under certain circumstances where deemed appropriate.
[2] Ramp space not specifically leased to the operator is for
use by the general public only. The operator shall not be
permitted to use any portion of public ramp space for his/
her business.
[3] A monthly, quarterly, or annual fee, as appropriate, and/or
percentage of gross revenues obtained from the operation
will be negotiated prior to allowing this type of operation.
(c) Personnel requirements. The operator shall have the
appropriate personnel available as negotiated and required in
the operating rights agreement.
(d) Hours of operation requirements. The operator shall have the
appropriate personnel and services available during certain
16.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 70-38 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-38
27:45
§ 70-39. Policy for through-the-fence operations.
hours as negotiated and required in the operating rights
agreement.
(e) Equipment requirements. The operator shall have the
appropriate equipment available as negotiated and required in
the operating rights agreement.
(f) Insurance requirements. The operator shall obtain and
maintain at all times insurance policies of the types and in the
amounts required by the owner as specified in Appendix B of
these standards and more particularly in the operating rights
agreement.
(13) XIII: Any other activities not specifically provided for in these
minimum standards, including nonaeronautical activities, will be
subject to negotiation.
A. Through-the-fence operations occur when an entity on property
adjoining the Airport is provided direct access for aircraft from the
adjoining property to the Airport facilities. Unauthorized access to the
Airport from adjacent properties is expressly prohibited. The Airport is
under no obligation to allow through-the-fence operations. If, however,
the Airport decides to allow a through-the-fence operation, a signed
Airport access agreement is required. This agreement shall give the
Airport the legal right to require the party granted access to conform to
all applicable grant assurances and specifies, at a minimum:
(1) Specific rights of access.
(2) Specific operating rights as contained in § 70-38, if applicable.
(3) Payment provisions for use of Airport.
(4) Incorporation of Airport policy documents, including but not
limited to these standards.
(5) Default and termination procedures.
(6) Insurance and Indemnity provisions.
(7) The Airport sponsor is under no obligation to accept sale or
assignment of the agreement.
(8) Federal grant assurances supersede the access agreement in all
cases.
(9) Expiration date.
B. Such an agreement shall contain terms that do not provide unfair
advantage to the through-the-fence operator over similarly situated on-
Airport commercial operators or noncommercial lessees, as applicable.
§ 70-38 SANFORD CODE § 70-39
27:46
§ 70-40. Basic terms and conditions for leases, contracts and
operating rights agreements.
The following terms and conditions shall be basic to all leases/contracts/
operating rights agreements now in existence or to be entered into in the
future.
Through-the-fence operations must not adversely affect the safety,
utility, or efficiency of the Airport.
A. General terms.
(1) Any lease/operating rights agreement shall be subordinate to the
provisions of any existing or future agreement between the owner
and the United States, relative to the operation or maintenance of
the Airport, the execution of which has been or may be required as
a condition precedent to the expenditure of federal funds for the
development of the Airport.
(2) The owner reserves the right, but shall not be obligated to the
lessee to maintain and keep in repair the landing area of the
Airport, and all publicly owned facilities on the Airport, together
with the right to direct and control all activities of the owner in this
regard.
(3) In addition to the requirements of the FAA and the Maine DOT, the
owner may establish and implement such rules and regulations as
may be required for:
(a) The safe and orderly operation of the Airport;
(b) The safe and orderly operation of aircraft in the Airport traffic
area and airspace surrounding the Airport; and
(c) The safe and orderly operation of aircraft and vehicles on the
ground.
(4) The operator, his/her agents and employees will not discriminate
against any person or class of persons by reason of race, color,
sexual orientation, creed or national origin in providing any
services or in the use of any of its facilities provided for the public,
in any manner prohibited by Appendix D to 14 CFR Part 152,
Assurances. The operator further agrees to comply with such
enforcement procedures as the United States might demand that
the owner take in order to comply with these assurances.
(5) AC 150/5190-5, Exclusive Rights and Minimum Standards for
Commercial Aeronautical Activities, states "an aircraft owner, who
is entitled to use the landing area of an Airport, may tie down,
adjust, repair, refuel, clean, and otherwise service his/her own
aircraft, provided the service is performed by the aircraft owner or
his/her employees with resources supplied by the aircraft owner."
§ 70-39 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-40
27:47
Level of maintenance and repairs performed shall comply with 14
CFR Part 43, Maintenance, Preventive Maintenance, Rebuilding,
and Alteration.
(6) The Airport Manager shall be kept informed, promptly in writing, of
the type, registration, aircraft owner's name, address, e-mail
address, and phone number for all aircraft stored in or on premises
for more than 30 calendar days per year.
(7) All nonairworthy aircraft not in an enclosed structure shall be
removed from the Airport on 30 days' written notice from the
owner to the lessee at the lessee's expense unless a waiver is
requested and granted for insurance purposes.
(8) In the event of any conflict between the terms of these Minimum
Standards and Procedures, and the provisions of any lease of a
portion of the Airport property, the more stringent requirement in
either document shall be controlling.
(9) The owner reserves the right to further develop, improve and
maintain the Airport and its facilities as it sees fit, regardless of the
desires or view of the operator/lessee/applicant and without
interference or hindrance. If the physical development of the
Airport requires the relocation of the operator/lessee/applicant, the
owner agrees to provide a new location.
B. Terms for facilities.
(1) Unless otherwise leased by the owner, all lessees shall provide the
following, as applicable:
(a) Design plans and specifications are subject to review by the
owner for compliance with federal, State of Maine, and City
standards, ordinances, regulations and laws. No construction
of any kind shall be done at the Airport without the prior
written approval of the owner, and no such approval shall be
granted unless such construction and design is consistent with
the latest approved Airport Layout Plan (ALP) for the
development at the Airport. Construction shall be completed
within one year of the date of such written approval.
(b) Aircraft hangars, office space, storage facilities, restrooms,
customer lounge, and other facilities, as required.
(c) Adequate auto parking space within the lease area to
accommodate all of the operator's employees and customers.
(d) A paved aircraft apron which meets appropriate FAA
specifications within the leased area; and a paved taxiway
within and without the leased area to accommodate aircraft
movement from the tenant's facilities to the existing Airport
taxiway system.
§ 70-40 SANFORD CODE § 70-40
27:48
(2) The lessee shall maintain all buildings and land on Airport property
to the following standards, or as directed by the Airport Manager:
(a) Exterior buildings, signs and other structures shall be
maintained in accordance with Airport standards and be in
good condition. Prior to the construction or display of any
exterior signing, written approval must be obtained from the
owner. All signs shall comply with the City's sign code.17
(b) Open storage areas shall be screened from public view.
(c) Nonpaved areas may be landscaped with lawns, mulch, shrubs,
etc., as approved prior to installation by the Airport Manager.
Such approval will not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned,
or delayed, provided that it does not interfere with the safety,
utility, or efficiency of the Airport.
(d) Lawns shall be cut to present a neat appearance.
(e) Trash is not allowed on Airport property. Place trash and
cigarette cans where needed.
(f) Absolutely no activities shall take place on Airport property to
attract wildlife of any kind, including but not limited to bird or
animal feeding, installation of bird baths, or installation of bird
or animal feeders.
(g) Pavements shall be joint-sealed and painted in accordance with
FAA and MaineDOT standards.
(h) The lessee is responsible for snow and ice control on leased
property. Only snow and ice control equipment and trained
operators, as approved by the Airport Manager, are allowed on
Airport property. Agreements may specify snow removal
procedures for each leasehold.
(i) All used or unused oil, solvents, and other hazardous/
nonhazardous materials and waste shall be handled and
disposed of, away from the Airport, in accordance with federal,
State of Maine and City requirements. The piling or other
inappropriate storage of crates, boxes, barrels, and containers
will not be permitted within leased premises.
(3) The lessee shall comply with the Airport's stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP).
(4) The owner reserves the right to take any action it considers
necessary to protect the 14 CFR Part 77, Objects Affecting
Navigable Airspace, and FAA Order 8260.3B, United States
Standard for Terminal Instrument Procedures imaginary surfaces
against obstructions, together with the right to prevent the lessee
17.Editor's Note: See § 280-14-13, Signs.
§ 70-40 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-40
27:49
from erecting, or permitting to be erected, any building or other
structure on the Airport which, in the opinion of the owner, would
limit the usefulness of the Airport or constitute a hazard to aircraft.
(5) The owner reserves the right to, without obligation to the operator/
lessee/applicant, keep the Airport landing area, and publicly owned
facilities in good repair.
(6) Ramp space other than ramp space specifically leased to or defined
under a management agreement with the lessee shall be for use by
the general public only. No lessee shall be permitted to use any
portion of public ramp space for his/her use exclusively or to use
any of such ramp space as parking or tie-down area.
C. Terms for operator services.
(1) The operator shall furnish services on a fair, equal, and
nondiscriminatory basis to all users.
(2) The operator shall charge fair, reasonable, and nondiscriminatory
prices for each unit of sale or service, provided that the operator
may be allowed to make reasonable and nondiscriminatory
discounts, rebates, or other similar types of price reductions to
volume purchasers.
(3) The operator shall provide, by means of an office, a telephone, and/
or a current and updated website with e-mail contact information, a
point of contact for the public desiring to utilize the operator's
services.
D. Policy for insurance.
(1) Each operator and lessee shall protect the general public, the
customers or clients and the owner from any and all lawful
damages, claims, or liability, and they shall provide the types of
insurance required in the applicable category(s) and written in
such amounts designated in this article and more particularly
described in Appendix B18 as amended from time to time but in no
event less than the amounts required the owner in the operator or
lessee's negotiated lease agreement.
(2) The owner shall be an additional named insured in any such policy,
and a certificate of insurance evidencing the same and the required
coverage shall be delivered to the owner prior to the
commencement of any lease of Airport property.
(3) The certificate of insurance shall provide that the insurance
company, in writing, will notify the owner 30 days in advance of any
cancellation of such insurance.
18.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 70-40 SANFORD CODE § 70-40
27:50
§ 70-41. Application procedures.
(4) Insurance policies shall remain in full force and effect during the
term of the lease/contract between the lessee and the owner, and
any renewal policies shall be filed with the owner not less than 30
days before the expiration date of such policies.
A. Any person(s), firm or legal entity wishing to obtain the right to operate
and/or establish leasehold on the Airport shall make written application
to the owner in the manner and form heretofore prescribed.
B. Application for permission to lease and/or use Airport land or any
facilities thereon shall be accomplished in the manner and form as is
published by the owner and contained in Appendix C.19
C. It is the intent of the owner to examine each applicant and operator/
lessee. Each applicant and operator/lessee shall provide satisfactory
evidence to the owner of their technical and financial abilities,
including the ability to meet the insurance requirements as stated
herein.
D. Upon consideration of the application, the owner shall determine
whether or not the applicant meets the standards and qualifications as
herein set out and whether or not such application should be granted in
whole or part, and if so, upon what terms and conditions. The owner will
review and act on all applications within 90 days from the receipt.
E. The following list contains examples of reasons why an application may
be denied; the following list is not exhaustive:
(1) The applicant does not meet the qualifications, standards and
requirements established by these minimum standards and
procedures.
(2) The applicant's proposed operations or construction cannot be
incorporated into the Ultimate Airport Layout Plan and approved
by FAA, the MDOT and the owner because:
(a) It is a potential safety hazard to the Airport; or
(b) There is insufficient land or building space available; or
(c) It will result in a congestion of aircraft or buildings, or will
unduly interfere with the operation of any present FBO on the
Airport, such as problems in connection with aircraft traffic or
service, or preventing free access and egress to the existing
FBO, or will result in depriving, without the proper economic
study, an existing FBO of portions of its leased area in which it
is operating.
19.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 70-40 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-41
27:51
§ 70-42. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AERONAUTICAL ACTIVITY — Any activity which involves, makes possible,
or is required for the operation of aircraft, or which contributes to or is
required for the safety of such operations.
(3) The granting of the application will require the expenditure of
owner funds, labor or materials on the facilities described in or
related to the application, or the operation will result in a financial
loss to the owner.
(4) Any party applying, or interested in the business, has supplied false
information, or has misrepresented any material fact in the
application or in supporting documents, or has failed to make full
disclosure on the application.
(5) Any party applying, or having an interest in the business, has a
record of violating the rules, or the rules and regulations of any
other Airport, civil air regulations, FAR, or any other rules and
regulations applicable to this or any other Airport.
(6) Any party applying, or having an interest in the business, has
defaulted in the performance of any lease or other agreement with
the owner or any lease or other agreement at any other Airport.
(7) Any party applying, or having an interest in the business, is not
sufficiently credit worthy and responsible in the judgment of the
owner to provide and maintain the business to which the
application relates and to promptly pay amounts due under the
FBO lease.
(8) The applicant does not have the finances necessary to conduct the
proposed operation for a minimum period of six months.
(9) The applicant has been convicted of any crime, or violated any City
ordinance rule or regulation, which adversely reflects on its ability
to conduct the FBO operation applied for.
F. The owner shall, after review and hearing, reserve the right to approve
or disapprove the subject application.
G. Each successful applicant shall, within 30 calendar days after having
received written approval of his/her application, enter into a written
lease/contract/operating rights agreement with the owner, in a form
and manner prescribed by the owner.
H. It is the intention of the owner to enter into and execute a lease/
contract/operating rights agreement with the approved applicant
within the 30 calendar days after such application is approved.
§ 70-41 SANFORD CODE § 70-42
27:52
AERONAUTICAL USE — All activities that involve or are directly related
to the operation of aircraft, including activities that make the operation of
aircraft possible and safe. Services located on the Airport that are directly
and substantially related to the movement of passengers, baggage, mail,
and cargo are considered aeronautical uses.
AERONAUTICAL USERS — Individuals or businesses providing services
involving operation of aircraft or flight support directly related to aircraft
operation are considered to be aeronautical users.
AIRCRAFT — Any machine supported for flight in the air by buoyancy or
by the dynamic action of air on its surfaces, especially powered airplanes,
gliders, and helicopters.
AIRPORT — The Sanford Seacoast Regional Airport (SFM), Sanford, Maine.
COMMERCIAL OPERATOR — Any Airport tenant who fulfills the
requirements of these standards and the appropriate requirements of
Categories I through XII or other specific requirements. Also referred to as
"Operator" or "FBO."
COMMERCIAL OPERATOR SUBLESSEE — Any person or entity which has
entered into a sublease with a commercial operator and who fulfills the
appropriate requirements of the appropriate FBO category or other specific
requirements included in an operating rights agreement. By fulfilling said
requirements, a commercial tenant lessee may qualify to engage in any
aeronautical activity except the sale of aviation petroleum products.
FIXED-BASE OPERATOR — A fixed-base operator (FBO) is a commercial
operator providing aeronautical services as described in Categories I
through XII to the public; also referred to as "commercial operator" or
"operator."
FLYING CLUB — A nonprofit or not-for-profit entity (e.g., corporation,
association, or partnership) organized for the express purpose of providing
its members with aircraft for their personal use and enjoyment only.
NONAERONAUTICAL USE — All uses of the Airport other than those
deemed as aeronautical uses are considered nonaeronautical. Aviationrelated
uses that do not need to be located on an Airport are considered
nonaeronautical uses. Nonaeronautical uses include public parking, rental
cars, ground transportation, as well as terminal concessions such as food
and beverage and news and gift shops. Federal law and policy on
reasonableness of fees and other terms of Airport access do not apply to
nonaeronautical uses.
COMMERCIAL AERONAUTICAL ACTIVITIES — Any activity by an
operator or its sublessee intended to result in a monetary gain.
A.
NONCOMMERCIAL AERONAUTICAL ACTIVITIES — Any activity by a
lessee or its sublessee which is conducted for their own benefit, without
the intent of monetary gain.
B.
§ 70-42 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-42
27:53
NONCOMMERCIAL LESSEE — Any person or entity that has entered into a
lease for real property with the City of Sanford at the Airport; also referred
to as "lessee" or "tenant."
NONCOMMERCIAL SUBLESSEE — Any person or entity which has entered
into a sublease with a noncommercial lessee.
OWNER — The City of Sanford, Maine, of which the Sanford Seacoast
Regional Airport is a department.
SELF-FUELING and SELF-SERVICE — Self-fueling as stated in AC 150/
5190-5, Exclusive Rights and Minimum Standards for Commercial
Aeronautical Activities, means the fueling or servicing of an aircraft (e.g.,
changing the oil, washing) by the owner of the aircraft with his or her
own employees and using his or her own equipment. Self-fueling and other
self-services cannot be contracted out to another party. Self-fueling implies
using fuel obtained by the aircraft owner from the source of his/her
preference. As one of many self-service activities that can be conducted
by the aircraft owner or operator by his or her own employees using his
or her own equipment, self-fueling, differs from using a self-service fueling
pump made available by the Airport, an FBO, or an aeronautical service
provider. The use of a self-service fueling pump is a commercial activity and
is not considered self-fueling as defined herein. In addition to self-fueling,
other self-service activities that can be performed by the aircraft owner
with his or her own employees includes activities such as maintaining,
repairing, cleaning, and otherwise providing service to an aircraft, provided
that the service is performed by the aircraft owner or his/her employees
with resources supplied by the aircraft owner.
§ 70-42 SANFORD CODE § 70-42
27:54
Chapter 74
ALCOHOL AND ENTERTAINMENT
§ 70-42 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 70-42
27:55

ARTICLE I
Special Amusements
[Adopted 3-7-1978; amended 11-16-1993]
§ 74-1. (Reserved)20
§ 74-2. Purpose. [Amended 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
The purpose of this article is to regulate, pursuant to 28-A M.R.S.A. § 1054
et seq., the issuance of special amusement permits for music, dancing or
entertainment in facilities licensed by the State to sell alcoholic beverages,
and to regulate, pursuant to the City of Sanford's home rule authority, the
issuance of special amusement permits for dance halls or nightclubs that
admit patrons over and under the age of 21.
§ 74-3. Definitions. [Amended 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
In general, all words, phrases, and terms used in this article shall have their
customary and usual meanings; as used in this article, the following words,
phrases, and terms shall have the meaning indicated.
DANCE HALL or NIGHTCLUB — Any commercial premises a primary
function of which is to offer patrons an opportunity to engage in social
activities such as dancing, the enjoyment of live or prerecorded music, or
the enjoyment of entertainment provided by dancers or other performers,
provided that it shall not include events sponsored by accredited
educational institutions and held under the direct supervision of school
authorities.
ENTERTAINMENT — Any amusement, performance, exhibition or diversion
for patrons or customers of the licensed premises, whether provided by
professional entertainers or by full-time or part-time employees of the
licensed premises whose incidental duties include activities with an
entertainment value.
§ 74-4. Permit required.
A. A licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on his or
her licensed premises shall not permit any live music, dancing or
entertainment of any kind on the premises until a special amusement
permit has been first approved by the City Council. A business shall not
operate as a dance hall or nightclub that admits persons over or under
the age of 21 until the business has first obtained a special amusement
permit approved by the City Council. [Amended 5-15-2018 by Order
No. 18-116-01]
B. Applications for all special amusement permits shall be made in writing
to the City Clerk on forms provided by the City Clerk and shall meet the
20.Editor’s Note: Former § 74-1, Title, was repealed 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01. Said
order also amended the title of Ch. 74.
§ 74-1 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 74-4
27:57
§ 74-5. Conduct constituting offenses by licensees.
requirements set forth in Chapter 149, Article I, Business Licensing.
[Amended 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
C. No permit shall be issued for any thing, or act, or premises if the
premises and building to be used for the purposes do not fully comply
with all ordinances, articles, bylaws, or rules and regulations of the
municipality.
D. The fee for a special amusement permit shall be established under
Chapter 149, Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this Code for special
amusement permits, plus the cost of advertising for a public hearing.
[Amended 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
E. The municipal officers shall, prior to granting a permit and after
reasonable notice to the municipality and the applicant, hold a public
hearing at which the testimony of the applicant and that of any
interested members of the public shall be taken.
F. The municipal officers shall grant a permit unless they find that
issuance of the permit will be detrimental to the public health, safety or
welfare or would violate municipal ordinances, or rules and regulations,
articles, or bylaws.
A. Tumultuous conduct. The licensee shall not knowingly allow on any
licensed premises any person or persons to disturb, tend to disturb, or
aid in disturbing the peace of others of ordinary sensibilities or to be
disorderly by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct or
to permit or gather a crowd, or audience, or patrons to witness any
entertainment, amusement, or show so as to create a dangerous
condition because of fire or other risks in derogation of the public
health, comfort, convenience, safety or welfare.
B. Riots. The licensee shall not allow on any licensed premises any public
entertainment or amusement or show of any kind which tends to or is
calculated to cause or promote any riot or disturbance.
C. Unnecessary noise. The licensee shall not allow on any licensed
premises the making, creation, or maintenance of excessive or
unnecessary or unnatural or unusually loud noise which disturbs,
annoys, injures or prejudices or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace, or safety of individuals of ordinary sensibilities or the public in
general, or the property rights of others, and which noises affect and
are a detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare,
or the prosperity of the residents of the municipality.
D. Nuisances. The licensee shall not allow any licensed premises to be so
conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact under any
ordinance or any sections of any ordinances, articles, bylaws or rules
and regulations of the municipality or under any statutes of the State of
Maine.
§ 74-4 SANFORD CODE § 74-5
27:58
§ 74-6. through § 74-9. (Reserved)22
E. Prostitution and public indecency. The licensee shall not allow on any
licensed premises or aid in or offer or agree to or allow in or near such
licensed premised any prostitution, or prostitutes, or any public
indecency under any or in derogation of any statutes of the State of
Maine, or any meretricious display, or lewd act, or act of moral
perversion, or knowingly receive or offer or agree to receive any person
at such licensed premises for the purpose of performing a lewd act, or
an act of prostitution or moral perversion, or public indecency, or
knowingly permit any person to remain on such licensed premises for
any such purpose, or to aid, abet, allow, permit, or participate in the
commission of any of such acts.
F. Solicitation of drinks. The licensee shall not allow on any licensed
premises any person to frequent or loiter with the purpose of soliciting
any other person, customer, or patron to purchase any drink of any
kind.
G. Gambling. The licensee shall not allow on any licensed premises the use
or occupancy thereof for gambling or games of chance as prohibited by
the statutes of the State of Maine or ordinances, articles, bylaws or
rules and regulations of the municipality.
H. Obscenity. The licensee, on any licensed premises, shall not:
(1) Knowingly disseminate, distribute or make available to the public
any obscene material;
(2) Knowingly make available to the public any obscene performance;
(3) Knowingly engage in commerce and/or for commercial gain with
materials depicting and describing explicit sexual conduct, nudity,
or excretion utilizing displays, circulars, advertisements, or any
other public sales efforts that promote such commerce primarily on
the basis of their prurient appeal;
(4) Provide service to patrons in such a manner as to expose to public
view:
(a) The licensee's or any of his agents' or employees' genitals,
public hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair
region;
(b) Any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of
or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal
region or pubic hair region; or
(c) Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof;
or
(5) Knowingly promote the commission of any of the above-listed acts
of this section.21
§ 74-5 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 74-10
27:59
§ 74-10. Admission charge. [Amended 5-15-2018 by Order No.
18-116-01]
A licensed hotel, Class A restaurant, Class A tavern or restaurant or malt
liquor licensee, as defined in 28-A M.R.S.A., which has been issued a special
amusement permit may charge admission in designated areas, provided
that such areas must be so designated in the application and approved by
the City Council.
§ 74-10.1. Termination of dances. [Added 5-15-2018 by Order No.
18-116-01]
All dances shall be terminated at 1:00 a.m.; provided, however, that upon
application and investigated by the City, permission may be granted to
continue a dance until the time specified in the application.
§ 74-10.2. Time limit for ticket sales and admissions. [Added
5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
No ticket shall be sold or accepted for admission to a dance or special
amusement after 12:00 midnight.
§ 74-10.3. Admission of minors. [Added 5-15-2018 by Order No.
18-116-01]
§ 74-10.4. Live entertainment regulated. [Added 5-15-2018 by
Order No. 18-116-01]
A. It shall be unlawful after 9:00 p.m. to allow any person to attend or take
part in any dance or remain in any dance hall if such person is under 16
years of age, unless such person is in the company of at least one of his
or her parents or a legal guardian.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any misrepresentation or
false statement relative to his or her age or the age of any other person
for the purpose of obtaining admission to a dance hall or obtaining
permission to remain in a dance hall in violation of this section.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself or herself
to be a parent or legal guardian of any person in order that such person
may obtain admission to a dance hall or be permitted to remain therein
in violation of this section.
A. No licensee shall allow entertainment on the licensed premises,
whether provided by professional entertainers, employees of the
licensed premises or by any person, when the entertainment involves:
21.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection I, Definitions, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01.
22.Editor’s Note: Former §§ 74-6, Inspections, 74-7, Denial, suspension or revocation of
permit, 74-8, Rules and regulations, and 74-9, Permit and appeal procedures, were
repealed 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01.
§ 74-10 SANFORD CODE § 74-10.4
27:60
§ 74-11. (Reserved)23
(1) The performance of acts or simulates acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or
any sexual acts which are prohibited by law.
(2) The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the
breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals.
(3) The actual or simulated displaying of genitals, pubic hair, buttocks,
anus or any portion of the female breasts at or below the areola
area thereof.
(4) The allowing by any licensee of any person to remain in or upon the
licensed premises who exposes to public view any portion of their
genitals or anus.
(5) The allowing by any licensee of any person to remain in or upon the
licensed premises who prostitutes.
B. For the purposes of this section, the term "displaying" or "expose" shall
mean unclothed or uncostumed and not covered by a fully opaque
material.
23.Editor’s Note: Former § 74-11, Violations and penalties, was repealed 5-15-2018 by Order
No. 18-116-01.
§ 74-10.4 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 74-11
27:61

ARTICLE II
Bottle Clubs
[Adopted 11-20-1984; amended 11-16-1993]
§ 74-12. Hours. [Amended 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
The licensee, its principal officers, employees or guests shall not permit the
consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day and during such hours the premises is
closed.
§ 74-13. Minors not permitted on premises.
No person under the age of 21 years shall be permitted in or to remain
within a bottle club.
§ 74-14. Sale of alcoholic beverages; illegal activities.
The licensee, its principal officers and employees shall not allow any
alcoholic beverages to be sold on the premises of a bottle club, nor shall
they knowingly permit any illegal activities to take place therein.
§ 74-15. Right of entry. [Amended 5-15-2018 by Order No.
18-116-01]
Any law enforcement officer of the City or member of the Fire Department
shall be permitted to enter any licensed premises during business hours
or during the hours during which operation of a bottle club is prohibited
for the purpose of making inspection or maintaining order. It shall be the
duty of every licensee and the principal officer thereof to afford free access
to every part of such establishment and to render all aid and assistance
necessary to enable the persons to make a full, thorough, and complete
examination thereof to determine compliance with this Code and the laws
of the State.
§ 74-16. License required. [Amended 5-15-2018 by Order No.
18-116-01]
No person, firm, or corporation shall keep, maintain, operate, or otherwise
furnish, either to its members and guests or to the general public, any
premises for use as a bottle club without first obtaining a bottle club
license for such purpose from the City. Any person carrying out such activity
without a license is in violation of these provisions. Failure to comply with
any of these requirements shall be deemed a violation of this article and is
adequate grounds for the denial, revocation, or suspension of a bottle club
license.
§ 74-12 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 74-16.1
27:63
§ 74-16.1. Procedures and fees. [Added 5-15-2018 by Order No.
18-116-01]
License applications under this article shall be processed according to the
procedures established in this article and Chapter 149, Licensing. A license
may be issued to a bottle club after the annual fee required has been paid
through the City Clerk's office. The fee for a bottle club license shall be
established under Chapter 149, Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this Code, for
bottle clubs.
§ 74-17. Application for license.
Application for a bottle club license shall be filed in accordance with 28
M.R.S.A. Ch. 1.24 In addition to the requirements of that chapter, an
applicant for a bottle club shall furnish the Clerk with the following:
§ 74-18. Denial, suspension or revocation of license.
In addition to the standards set forth in municipal codes, a license may be
denied, suspended or revoked upon a determination that:
§ 74-19. Hearings. [Amended 2-5-2008; 5-15-2018 by Order No.
18-116-01]
Hearings and notices of hearings for both original applications and
renewals under this article shall be conducted by the City Council in
accordance with the applicable procedures for issuance of licenses by the
A. An affidavit which identifies all principal officers and their places of
residence at the present time and for the immediately preceding three
years.
B. A description of the premises for which a license is desired which shall
set forth such other material information, description, or plan of that
part of the premises where it is proposed to consume or keep liquor as
the Clerk or the City Council may require. [Amended 5-15-2018 by
Order No. 18-116-01]
A. Any principal officer or employee has not attained the age of 21 years;
B. Any principal officer has been convicted of violating any of the laws of
this state or the United States with respect to manufacture,
transportation, importation, possession or sale of intoxicating liquor
within a period of five years from the date of hearing, or otherwise had
a disqualifying criminal conviction;
C. Any principal officer is a law enforcement official;
D. Failure to possess a food service establishment license; and
E. Any violation of this article.
24.Editor's Note: Title 28 was repealed by L. 1987, c. 45. See now Title 28-A.
§ 74-16.1 SANFORD CODE § 74-19
27:64
state to sell intoxicating liquors to be consumed on the premises, and in no
case shall an original license be issued with a notice of public hearing to
abutters and notice by publication.
§ 74-20. Statutory requirements.
Except to the extent that this article contains a contrary provision, all
provisions of 28 M.R.S.A.25 shall be additional to the provisions of this
article.
§ 74-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOTTLE CLUB — Any person operating on a regular basis a premises for
social activities in which members or guests provide their own alcoholic
beverages and where no alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises. A
bottle club maintains suitable quarters for the use of members on a regular
basis or charges an admission fee to members or to the general public. A
bottle club is not a public place, as defined in 17 M.R.S.A. § 2003.26
CLUB MEMBER — A person who, whether as a charter member or admitted
in accordance with the bylaws of the club, has become a bona fide member
and who maintains membership in good standing by payment of dues in
a bona fide manner in accordance with the bylaws and whose name and
address are entered on the list of members, and no person who does not
have full club privileges shall be considered a bona fide member.
PREMISES — Includes all parts of the contiguous real estate occupied by
a licensee over which the licensee has direct or indirect control or interest
and which the licensee uses in the operation of the licensed business and
which have been approved by the Commission as proper places therein for
the exercise of the license privilege.
25.Editor's Note: Title 28 was repealed by L. 1987, c. 45. See now Title 28-A.
26.Editor's Note: Section 2003 of Title 17 was repealed by L. 1981, c. 481. See now 17
M.R.S.A. § 2003-A.
§ 74-19 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 74-21
27:65

ARTICLE III
B.Y.O.B. Functions
[Adopted 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
§ 74-22. Permit required.
No person, firm, or corporation may conduct a B.Y.O.B. function until such
person, firm, or corporation first obtains a permit for such purpose from the
City. Licenses under this article shall not be issued unless the City Clerk
receives affirmation from the Inspection Team that the applicant's proposed
facility meets all applicable requirements. Any person carrying out such
activity without a permit is in violation of this article and is adequate
grounds for the denial, revocation, or suspension of a permit.
§ 74-23. Procedures and fees.
Permit applications under this article shall be processed according to the
procedures established in this article and Chapter 149, Licensing. A permit
may be issued after the annual fee required has been paid through the City
Clerk's office. The fee shall be established under Chapter 149, Licensing,
§ 149-1.4, Fees, of this Code, for B.Y.O.B. functions.
§ 74-22 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 74-23
27:67
Chapter 78
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 178.
§ 74-23 SANFORD CODE § 74-23
27:68
ARTICLE I
Proximity to Dwellings
[Adopted 4-11-1977 as § 5.3 of the 1977 Code; amended in its
entirety 2-5-2008]
§ 78-1. Permit required; abatement of nuisance; penalty.
No person or persons owning or having care of any domestic fowls, swine,
cows or other animals, with the exception of dog or cats, shall keep the
same in any building or dwelling house within the compact area of the City
of Sanford without having first obtained a permit from the City Council. It
shall be the duty of the Board of Health of the City of Sanford, on receiving
notice of the violation of this section, to have said nuisance abated at once.
Any person who violates the provisions of this section, after receiving notice
to abate the same by the Board of Health, shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $20 for each offense.
§ 78-2. Failure to act by Health Officer.
If after due notice to the Health Officer of any violation of § 78-1 said officer
does not enforce the provisions of said section, it shall be deemed a cause
for his removal by the City Council, and said Health Officer shall also be
liable by punishment of a fine not exceeding $20 for each offense for his
failure to act.
§ 78-1 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 78-2
27:69

ARTICLE II
Canine Control
[Adopted 4-11-1977 as Ch. 12, Art. II of the 1977 Code]
§ 78-3. Leash required; exemptions. [Amended 5-21-2013]
§ 78-4. Reclaiming impounded canines; confinement period;
impoundment fee. [Amended 5-21-2013]
§ 78-5. (Reserved)28
A. When off the premises of the canine's owner or handler, any canine
within the City of Sanford/Springvale must be controlled by a leash,
cord, chain, or otherwise of not more than eight feet in length.
B. Exceptions. The following canines shall be exempt from this section:
(1) A canine within the confines of a City dog park.
(2) A registered canine service animal when in the service of its owner/
caregiver.
(3) A law enforcement service dog performing its duties.
A. If a canine is legally impounded by the Animal Control Officer in
compliance with Maine Revised Statutes Annotated, Title 7, Parts 827
and 9, and the canine's owner is unknown or unavailable to take
immediate possession of the canine, the canine shall be placed in a
shelter designated by the City. The Animal Control Officer will make a
reasonable attempt to determine the ownership of the impounded
canine and make notification, if possible, within three days of the
impoundment. Failure to give such notice shall in no way impose any
liability upon the City.
B. Maine State Law requires that the canine be confined at the shelter for
a period of not less than six days. Any canine not reclaimed by the
owner within six days shall be considered abandoned by the owner and
become the property of the designated shelter, which may at its
discretion humanely euthanize the canine or place the canine for
adoption to any person deemed to be a responsible and suitable owner.
C. The owner of an impounded canine must pay an impoundment fee to the
Police Department prior to reclaiming the canine from the City
designated shelter. The shelter will not release the canine without proof
that this fee has been paid. The fee shall be $15 per dog for a first
offense; $25 per dog for a second offense within one year; and $50 per
dog for a third and subsequent offense within one year.
27.Editor's Note: Maine Revised Statutes Annotated, Title 7, Part 8, was repealed by L. 1987,
c. 383, § 2.
28.Editor’s Note: Former § 78-5, Impoundment of dogs, was repealed 5-21-2013. See now §
78-4.
§ 78-3 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 78-6
27:71
§ 78-6. (Reserved)29
§ 78-7. (Reserved)30
§ 78-8. Prosecution in lieu of impoundment; penalty.
Instead of seizing and impounding the dog, the City of Sanford may
prosecute the owner of any dog running at large, and any person under
conviction thereof shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $10 plus the
cost of prosecution.
§ 78-9. Interference with Dog Control Officer.
No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest any Dog Control Officer in
the performance of any duty of such officer or seek to release any dog in the
custody of a Dog Control Officer, except as herein provided.
§ 78-10. Records.
It shall be the duty of a Dog Control Officer to keep, or cause to be kept, an
accurate and detailed record of the licensing, impoundment and disposition
of all dogs coming into his custody.
§ 78-11. Notice issued on complaint.
On complaint being made to the Dog Constable or Dog Constables that any
dog within the compact portion of the City, as defined by 7 M.R.S.A. §§ 3401
to 3405,31 has unreasonably disturbed the peace and quiet of any persons
whomsoever, by biting, chasing or continued barking or howling or in any
other manner, or has unreasonably destroyed the property of any persons,
the Dog Constable shall issue notice to the owner of said dog ordering that
said dog be kept under proper control and not permitted to run at large
upon any street or upon the property of other than the owner or that such
dog shall be forthwith removed beyond the compact section of the City or
that such dog be destroyed.
29.Editor’s Note: Former § 78-6, Reclaiming impounded dogs, was repealed 5-21-2013. See
now § 78-4.
30.Editor’s Note: Former § 78-7, Impoundment fees, was repealed 5-21-2013. See now § 78-4.
31.Editor's Note: Section 3401 of Title 7 was repealed by L. 1975, c. 140; Sections 3402, 3404
and 3405 of Title 7 were repealed by L. 1987, c. 383; and Section 3203 of Title 7 was
repealed by L. 1977, c. 696.
§ 78-6 SANFORD CODE § 78-11
27:72
ARTICLE III
Canine Waste
[Adopted 11-20-1984]
§ 78-12. Duty to dispose of waste.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person who owns, possesses or
controls a dog to fail to immediately remove and dispose of any feces left by
his/her dog on any sidewalk, street or publicly owned property.
§ 78-13. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article may be enforced by any designated
representative of the Health Officer or of the Chief of Police.
§ 78-14. Violations and penalties.
Effective January 1, 1985, violation of this article shall be punished by a civil
penalty not to exceed $50 for each occurrence.
§ 78-15. Exemption.
This regulation shall not apply to a dog accompanying any handicapped
person who, by reason of his/her handicap, is physically unable to comply
with the requirements of this article.
§ 78-12 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 78-15
27:73

ARTICLE IV
Animal Control
[Adopted 11-19-1991]
§ 78-16. Rabies shots for cats.
§ 78-17. Nuisances.
§ 78-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating this article shall be guilty of a
civil offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $100 a day, plus appropriate
injunctive relief.
A. All cats over six months of age, routinely kept within the City, must be
vaccinated against rabies and shall receive so-called booster
vaccinations no less than every two years thereafter.
B. No cat may be released from any pound, shelter or veterinarian's office
without prior proof of such vaccination.
A. No person, firm, or corporation shall keep or allow to be kept on his or
its property any animal(s) creating a nuisance as defined herein.
B. A "nuisance" is defined as failing properly to control or dispose of such
animal's wastes or to control such animal's actions to avoid
unreasonably intruding on the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of persons
residing on adjacent properties.
§ 78-16 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 78-18
27:75

ARTICLE V
Removal of Defecation from Public Property
[Adopted 11-21-1995; amended in its entirety 5-21-201332]
§ 78-19. Prohibited acts; exception.
§ 78-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article or § 78-3 shall be guilty of
a civil violation and subject to a fine as follows:
A. An owner or person having custody of any canine shall not permit said
canine to defecate on any public property, including public streets,
highways, alleys, sidewalks, parks, or any other public grounds, within
the City unless said defecation is removed immediately and not
disposed of in City waste receptacles.
B. This requirement shall not apply to a canine accompanying any disabled
person, who, by reason of his/her disability, is physically unable to
comply with the requirements of § 78-19A.
A. First offense: $50.
B. Second offense within one year: $100.
C. Third offense within one year: $200.
32.Editor’s Note: The provisions of the revised §§ 78-19 and 78-20 were originally adopted as
§§ 78-5 and 78-6 but were renumbered by the City.
§ 78-19 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 78-20
27:77

ARTICLE VI
Feeding of Ducks and Wild Animals
[Adopted 11-21-1995]
§ 78-21. Purpose and authority.
The following regulations are adopted and promulgated for the protection
of residents, sanitation of landscaping, and the purity of the water and parks
of the City of Sanford, such action being undertaken pursuant to the powers
vested in the City.
§ 78-22. Prohibited acts.
No persons shall feed ducks or any wild animals on City property.
§ 78-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
violation and subject to a fine of not more than $200.
§ 78-21 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 78-23
27:79

ARTICLE VII
Wolf Hybrids
[Adopted 5-21-2013]
§ 78-24. Permanent identification of wolf hybrids (7 M.R.S.A.
§ 3921-A).
The Commissioner shall adopt rules to establish methods of identifying
wolf hybrids through tattooing, the placement of a microchip under the
animal's skin or any other method determined by the Commissioner as
adequately providing a permanent means of identification on the body of
the animal. Rules adopted pursuant to this section are routine technical
rules as defined in Maine Revised Statutes Annotated, Title 5, Chapter 375,
Subchapter 2-a. A person may not own or keep a wolf hybrid under 7
M.R.S.A. § 3921-B, Subsection 2, or under 12 M.R.S.A. § 12152 unless the
animal has identification in compliance with the rules adopted under this
section.
§ 78-25. Prohibition on keeping a wolf hybrid; exception (7 M.R.S.A.
§ 3921-B).
A. Prohibition. Except as provided in Subsection B, a person may not keep
a wolf hybrid in the State unless that person hold a valid permit to
possess wildlife in captivity issued by the Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife under 12 M.R.S.A. § 12152.
B. Exception. A person keeping a wolf hybrid as a pet and in compliance
with all applicable provisions in the Part on June 1, 2011, may continue
to keep that wolf hybrid as long as the following conditions are met:
(1) The wolf hybrid has been spayed or neutered; and
(2) The owner continues to license the wolf hybrid in accordance with
7 M.R.S.A. § 3922, Subsection 3-B.
C. Restrictions on transfer.
(1) A person keeping a wolf hybrid under Subsection B may transfer
ownership of the wolf hybrid to a person:
(a) Holding a permit to possess wildlife under 12 M.R.S.A. § 12152
and authorized to accept wolf hybrids in compliance with rules
adopted under 12 M.R.S.A. § 12160, Subsection 2;
(b) Who operates an animal refuge in another state that is licensed
to accept wolf hybrids; or
(c) Who has had direct contact with the wolf hybrid, is familiar
with the wolf hybrid's behavior and has been advised of the
reporting requirement under Subsection D and licensing laws
under 7 M.R.S.A. § 3922.
§ 78-24 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 78-25
27:81
(2) A person transferring ownership of a wolf hybrid under this
subsection shall within 10 days of the transfer notify the
Department and provide the name and address of the person
accepting the transfer.
D. Duty to report death. The owner of a wolf hybrid kept under Subsection
B shall notify the Department of the wolf hybrid's death on a form
prescribed by the Department within 30 days of the wolf hybrid's death.
E. Violation. A person who violates this section commits a civil violation for
which a fine of $2,500 may be adjudged.
§ 78-25 SANFORD CODE § 78-25
27:82
ARTICLE VIII
Residential Domesticated Chickens
[Adopted 9-2-2014 by Order No. 14-123.1333]
§ 78-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the
owner or any other person whose personal presence and attention would
reasonably control the conduct of the animal, either by leash, cord, chain or
otherwise.
CHICKEN PEN — A wire enclosure connected to a henhouse for the purpose
of allowing chickens to leave the henhouse while remaining in an enclosed,
predator-safe environment.
DOMESTICATED ANIMAL — Includes but is not limited to dogs, cats,
ferrets, wildlife hybrids or livestock.
HENHOUSE — A structure for the sheltering of female chickens. An
existing shed or garage can be used for this purpose if it meets the
standards contained in Chapter 280, including the required distance from
property lines.
OWNER or KEEPER — Any person or persons, firm, association or
corporation owning, keeping, controlling, or harboring a dog or other
animal. The owner or keeper may be a minor child.
§ 78-27. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide standards for the keeping of
domesticated chickens. It is intended to enable residents to keep a small
number of female chickens on a noncommercial basis while limiting the
potential adverse impacts on the surrounding neighborhood. The City
recognizes that adverse neighborhood impacts may result from the keeping
of domesticated chickens as a result of noise, odor, unsanitary animal
living conditions, unsanitary waste storage and removal, the attraction of
predators, rodents, insects, or parasites, and nonconfined animals leaving
the owner's property. This article is intended to create licensing standards
and requirements that ensure that domesticated chickens do not adversely
impact the neighborhood surrounding the property on which the chickens
are kept.
33.Editor's Note: This order was originally adopted as Art. VII, §§ 78-24 through 78-37, and
was redesignated as Art. VIII, §§ 78-26 through 78-39, because the Code already contained
Art. VII, §§ 78-24 and 78-25.
§ 78-26 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 78-28
27:83
§ 78-28. Permit required; permits nontransferable; permit term.
An annual permit is required for the keeping of any domesticated chickens
in the City of Sanford. Additionally, a building permit is required for the
construction of a henhouse and chicken pen.
§ 78-29. Permit fees.
The fee for an annual permit to keep chickens is $25. The fee to construct
a henhouse or chicken pen shall be for all other structures as set forth in
Chapter 280, Attachment 2, Building Permit Fee Schedule.
§ 78-30. Number and type of permitted chickens.
§ 78-31. Noncommercial use only; slaughtering prohibited.
Chickens shall be kept as pets and for personal use only; no person shall sell
eggs or engage in chicken breeding or fertilizer production for commercial
purposes. The slaughtering of chickens is prohibited.
§ 78-32. Enclosures.
A. The annual permit to keep chickens is personal to the permittee and
may not be assigned. In the event the permittee is absent from the
property for longer than 60 days, the permit shall automatically
terminate and become void.
B. The first permit year shall be September 1, 2014, through December
31, 2014. Thereafter the permit year shall be January 1 through
December 31.
A. The maximum number of chickens allowed is six per lot regardless of
how many dwelling units are on the lot.
B. Only female chickens are allowed. There is no restriction on chicken
species.
A. Chickens must be kept in an enclosure or fenced area at all times.
During daylight hours, chickens may be allowed outside of their chicken
pens in a securely fenced yard. Chickens shall be secured within the
henhouse during non-daylight hours.
B. Enclosures must be clean, dry, and odor-free, kept in a neat and
sanitary condition at all times, in a manner that will not disturb the use
or enjoyment of neighboring lots due to noise, odor or other adverse
impact.
C. The henhouse and chicken pen must provide adequate ventilation and
adequate sun and shade and both must be impermeable to rodents, wild
birds, and predators, including dogs and cats.
D. Henhouses.
§ 78-28 SANFORD CODE § 78-32
27:84
(1) A henhouse shall be provided and shall be designed to provide safe
and healthy living conditions for the chickens while minimizing
adverse impacts to other residents in the neighborhood.
(a) The structures shall be enclosed on all sides and shall have a
roof and doors. Access doors must be able to be shut and
locked at night. Opening windows and vents must be covered
with predator- and bird-proof wire of less than one-inch
openings.
(b) The materials used in making the structure shall be uniform for
each element of the structure such that the walls are made of
the same material, the roof has the same shingles or other
covering, and any windows or openings are constructed using
the same materials. The use of scrap, waste board, sheet metal,
or similar materials is prohibited. The henhouse shall be wellmaintained.
(c) The structure shall be painted; the color shall be uniform
around the structure and shall be in harmony with the
surrounding area.
(2) Henhouses shall only be located in rear yards, as defined in
§ 280-5.34 For a corner lot or other property where no rear yard
exists, a side yard may be used as long as the setbacks generally
applicable in the zoning district are met. In no case may a henhouse
be placed in the front yard.
(3) Henhouses and chicken pens shall be located at least 25 feet from
all residences on same and abutting lots.
E. Chicken pens.
(1) An enclosed chicken pen must be provided consisting of sturdy
wire fencing buried at least 12 inches in the ground. The pen must
be covered with wire, aviary netting, or solid roofing. The use of
chicken wire is not permitted.
(a) Odors from chickens, chicken manure, or other chicken-related
substances shall not be perceptible at the property boundaries.
(b) Perceptible noise from chickens shall not be loud enough at the
property boundaries to disturb persons of reasonable
sensitivity.
(2) Lighting. Only motion-activated lighting may be used to light the
exterior of the henhouse.
34.Editor's Note: See now § 280-2-2.
§ 78-32 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 78-33
27:85
§ 78-33. Predators, rodents, insects and parasites.
The property owner shall take necessary action to reduce the attraction of
predators and rodents and the potential infestation of insects and parasites.
Chickens found to be infested with insects and parasites that may result in
unhealthy conditions to human habitation shall be removed by the Animal
Control Officer.
§ 78-34. Feed and water.
Chickens must be provided with access to feed and clean water at all
times; such feed and water shall be unavailable to rodents, wild birds and
predators.
§ 78-35. Waste storage and removal.
Provision must be made for the storage and removal of chicken manure. All
stored manure shall be covered by a fully enclosed structure with a roof or
lid over the entire structure. No more than three cubic feet of manure shall
be stored. All other manure not used for composting or fertilizing shall be
removed. In addition, the henhouse, chicken pen and surrounding area must
be kept free from trash and accumulated droppings. Uneaten feed shall be
removed in a timely manner.
§ 78-36. Application for permit; issuance of permit.
§ 78-37. Denial, suspension or revocation of permit.
§ 78-38. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other enforcement action which the City may take,
violation of any provision of this article shall be a civil violation and a fine
not exceeding $100 may be imposed. Each day that a violation continues
will be treated as a separate offense.
A. Every applicant for a permit to keep domesticated chickens shall
complete and file an application on a form prescribed by the Code
Enforcement Officer;
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit if the applicant has
demonstrated compliance with the criteria and standards in this article.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall deny a permit if the applicant has
not demonstrated compliance with all provisions of this article.
B. A permit to keep domesticated chickens may be suspended or revoked
by the Code Enforcement Officer where there is a risk to public health
or safety or for any violation of or failure to comply with any of the
provisions of this article or with the provisions of any other applicable
ordinance or law. Any denial, revocation or suspension of a permit shall
be in writing and shall include notification of the right to and procedure
for appeal.
§ 78-33 SANFORD CODE § 78-39
27:86
§ 78-39. Removal of chickens; disposal of dead chickens.
A. In addition to the penalty stated in § 78-38, any violation of the
provisions of this article or of the permit shall be grounds for an order
from the Code Enforcement Officer to the Animal Control Officer to
remove the chickens and the chicken-related structures to be removed
by the owner at the owner's expense. The Health Officer or Animal
Control Officer may also order the removal of the chickens upon a
determination that the chickens pose a health risk.
B. If a chicken dies, it must be disposed of promptly in a sanitary manner.
§ 78-39 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 78-39
27:87

ARTICLE IX
Kennels
[Adopted 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
§ 78-40. License required.
No person, firm or corporation may operate a kennel until such person,
firm, or corporation first obtains a license for such purpose from the City.
Licenses under this article shall not be issued unless the City Clerk receives
affirmation from the Inspection Team that the applicant's proposed
operation meets all applicable requirements. Any person carrying out such
activity without a license is in violation of these provisions. Failure to
comply with any of these requirements shall be deemed a violation of this
article and is adequate grounds for the denial, revocation, or suspension of
a license.
§ 78-41. Procedures and fees.
License applications under this article shall be processed according to
the procedures established in this article, Chapter 149, Licensing, and 7
M.R.S.A. §§ 3931 through 3950-A. A license may be issued after the fee
required has been paid through the City Clerk's Office. The fee for a license
shall be established under Chapter 149, Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this
Code, for kennels.
§ 78-40 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 78-41
27:89
Chapter 83
(RESERVED)
Chapter 90
BUILDING AND BUILDING REGULATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards — See Ch. 116.
Fees — See Ch. 120.
Fire protection — See Ch. 128.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 265.
Shoreland zoning — See Ch. 270.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 275.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 78-41 SANFORD CODE § 78-41
27:90
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 90-1. Use of fire-resisting material required in certain areas.
The outer walls and roofs of all business blocks to be built or rebuilt shall
be of fire-resisting material in the following districts: both sides of Main
Street from Roberts Street to Winter Street; both sides of School Street
from Washington Street to Bodwell Street; both sides of Washington Street
from Main Street to Church Street, all in the City of Sanford.
§ 90-2. Definitions.
In general, all words, phrases, and terms used in this chapter shall have
their customary and usual meaning; as used in this chapter, the following
words, phrases, and terms shall have the meaning indicated:
BUILDING — Anything constructed with a roof and walls, built for
permanent use.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — Has the same meaning as "Code Enforcement
Officer" and "Code Official."
DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Including, but not limited to, materials that are
created by site preparation, clearing land, or erection or destruction of a
building or structure. It also includes, but is not limited to, brush, tree
limbs, stumpage, building material, and the waste products of the building
activity, such as: clay, brick, masonry, concrete, plaster, glass, wood, and
wood products, asphalt, rubber, metal; and plumbing, electrical and heating
fixtures, appurtenances thereto and parts thereof.
DWELLING — Any house, building or part thereof which is occupied or
intended to be occupied, in whole or in part, for living and sleeping by one
or more occupants. A dwelling may include one or more dwelling units or
rooming units, or a combination of both.
DWELLING PREMISES — The land and auxiliary buildings thereon used or
intended to be used in conjunction with a dwelling.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms forming a single unit including food
preparation, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities used or intended to be
used by two or more persons living in common or by a person living alone.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room used, or intended to be used for living,
sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes and excludes bathrooms, toilet rooms,
laundries, pantries, halls, closets, heater rooms, utility rooms, and attics.
Basements or cellar areas are not habitable rooms except as permitted in
this chapter.
INFESTATION — The presence within a dwelling or on premises of a
dwelling of rodents, vermin, or other pests, as determined through actual
observation of them or by evidence of their presence.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling
units, rooming units, or combination of both.
§ 90-1 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 90-2
27:91
OCCUPANT — Any person, including an owner or operator, residing in or
having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care, management, or control of
any dwelling or part thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let
or offered for occupancy.
OWNER — Any person or persons who alone, jointly, severally, or jointly and
severally with others:
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling, or part thereof, containing three or
more rooming units in which space is rented or offered for rent by the owner
or the operator to be occupied or intended to be occupied by three or more
persons who are not related by blood or marriage to the owner or operator.
ROOMING UNIT — One or more rooms forming a single unit used, or
intended to be used, for living and sleeping purposes, but not designed for
food preparation, by two or more persons living in common or by a person
living alone.
SIGNIFICANT CODE VIOLATION — Any of the following:
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected of more than one member
which requires a fixed location on the ground or attached to something
having a fixed location on the ground.
SUPPLIED — Installed, furnished, or provided by the owner at their
expense.
Shall have legal or record title to any dwelling, dwelling unit, or
dwelling premises;
A.
Shall have charge, care, or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit, or
dwelling premises as an agent of the owner, executor, administrator,
trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner;
B.
Shall have an equitable interest in a dwelling, dwelling unit, or dwelling
premises under a contract or a bond for a deed with the person having
legal or record title.
C.
A. Inadequate or blocked ingress or egress;
B. Overcrowded conditions as described in codes referenced in § 90-13;
Unsanitary conditions as described in codes referenced in § 90-13,
including but not limited to vermin infestation;
C.
D. Inadequate or defective smoke or fire detection systems;
E. Inadequate or defective plumbing or electrical systems;
F. Substantially damaged or defective structural elements; and
Intentional denial of heat or electricity to the legal occupant of a
dwelling unit by the owner of the dwelling unit.
G.
§ 90-2 SANFORD CODE § 90-3
27:92
§ 90-3. Penalties.
A. Penalties. Monetary penalties shall be accessed on a per-day basis for
each day on which a violation exists.
(1) The minimum penalty for a specific significant code violation is
$100 per day, and the maximum penalty is $2,500 per day. The
minimum penalty for failure to correct such significant code
violation after written notice by the City to do so is $500 per day,
and the maximum penalty is $5,000 per day. The minimum penalty
for failure to correct such significant code violation after a second
written notice by the City is $1,000 per day, and the maximum
penalty is $10,000 per day.
(2) The penalty for violating the occupant load limit, as determined
under MUBEC or this chapter is $250 for the first violation; $500
for the second violation; $1,000 for the third and subsequent
violations. Violations shall be calculated on a rolling twelve-month
basis.
(3) Pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452, the minimum penalty for a
specific violation other than a violation described in Subsection
A(2) is $100 per day, and the maximum penalty is $2,500 per day.
(4) In addition to penalties, the violator may be ordered to correct or
abate the violations. When violations occur in a shoreland area, as
defined in the Code, or when the court finds that the violation was
willful, the violator shall be ordered to correct or abate the
violation unless the abatement or correction results in:
(a) A threat or hazard to public health or safety;
(b) Substantial environmental damage; or
(c) A substantial injustice.
(5) If the City is the prevailing party in any legal action to enforce this
chapter, the municipality must be awarded reasonable attorney
fees, expert witness fees and costs, unless the court finds that
special circumstances make the award of these fees and costs
unjust.
(6) In setting a penalty, the following shall be considered:
(a) Prior violations by the same party;
(b) The degree of environmental damage that cannot be abated or
corrected;
(c) The extent to which the violation continued following a City
order to stop; and
§ 90-3 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 90-3
27:93
§ 90-4. Fees for reinspection.
Following the issuance of a notice of violation and an order to correct
violations, the Building Official will reinspect once for no fee in order
to determine whether the violations have been fixed in compliance with
this chapter. If the violations have not been fixed in compliance with this
chapter, the violator shall be assessed a fee as set forth in the fee schedule
for each subsequent reinspection.35 Failure to pay the assessment for
reinspection shall create a lien on the property of the violator and lien shall
be collected and enforced pursuant to the General Provisions of this Code.
(d) The extent to which the City contributed to the violation by
providing the violator with incorrect information or by failing
to taken timely action.
(7) The maximum penalty may exceed the limits described in
Subsection A(1), (2) and (3), but may not exceed $25,000 per day,
violation or judgment against the same party within the past two
years for a violation of the same law or ordinance.
(8) If the economic benefit resulting from the violation exceeds the
applicable penalties under this section, the maximum penalty
under this subsection may not exceed an amount equal to twice the
economic benefit, which includes, but is not limited to, the cost
avoided or enhanced value accrued at the time of the violation as a
result of the violator's noncompliance with the applicable legal
requirements.
(9) In addition to the other penalties in this section, the Building
Official may suspend a contractor's, owner's, or developer's right to
obtain building permits or work on any project in the City if the
Building Official determines that a contractor's, owner's, or
developer's violation or violations of any provision in this chapter or
Code create such a threat to life or safety that a structure must be
posted against occupancy or that the violation or violations render
a structure uninhabitable. The suspension authorized by this
subsection shall be lifted when the Building Official determines
that the violation or violations have been fixed.
(10) Penalties assessed pursuant to this section shall be paid to the City
of Sanford.
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Fees.
§ 90-3 SANFORD CODE § 90-4
27:94
ARTICLE II
Building Code
§ 90-5. Permits and permit fees.
§ 90-6. Certificate of occupancy.
§ 90-7. Violations.
A. No person, firm, or corporation may commence work on any of the
following without first obtaining a permit from the Building Official:
(1) Constructing, enlarging, altering, repairing, moving, converting,
demolishing, or changing the use of any building or structure;
(2) Installing, removing, or altering plumbing or plumbing fixtures, or
subsurface wastewater disposal systems or components;
B. Emergency work may be undertaken without first obtaining a permit,
and a permit must be obtained on the next day the office is open
following commencement of such work.
C. Fees for permits and inspections under this article shall be as set forth
in the permit fee schedule adopted by the City Council.
D. For permit fees based on the cost of work or square feet of the area of
the work, whichever has a greater value, after calculation. If the
proposed project cost submitted by the applicant is less than that as
would be indicated by national standards, the City of Sanford reserves
the right to determine the proposed project cost based on those
standards and assess the permit fee accordingly.
E. Except for emergency work, the fee for any permit obtained after work
has been commenced shall be double the fee otherwise provided for in
the fee schedule pursuant to this section.
F. The Code Enforcement Director shall adopt a policy authorizing refunds
of any fee under this section, where appropriate.
A. No person, firm, or corporation having ownership or interest in a
building, structure, or property shall allow any building, structure, or
property to be used or occupied without a certificate of occupancy.
B. No final certificate of occupancy shall be issued where any condition of
the building, structure, or property is not in compliance with any
section of the Code, except where phased occupancy is specifically
provided for in approved permits or plans.
A. Any person, firm, or corporation who owns, occupies, or controls a
building, structure, or premises shall be guilty of an offense and subject
to the penalties and remedies provided in this chapter and 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4452 if that person, firm, or corporation does any of the
following:
§ 90-5 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 90-7
27:95
§ 90-8. Enforcement.
In addition to the remedies otherwise provided, the following specific
remedies shall also be available.
§ 90-9. Appeals.
(1) Violates a provision of this article, or any codes adopted pursuant
to this article;
(2) Allows a violation to occur or remain at any building, structure, or
premises that any person, firm or corporation owns, occupies, or
controls;
(3) Fails to comply with any lawful order issued pursuant to this
article; or
(4) Builds inconsistently with any approved permit or plan.
B. The imposition of a penalty for a violation does not excuse that violation
or allow it to continue.
A. The Building Official may issue a stop-work order, prohibiting that any
additional work be completed until any violations are remedied. A fee to
remove any stop-work order shall be set forth in the fee schedule
adopted pursuant to this article.
B. Where any establishment exceeds the posted occupant limit, the
Building Official, the Fire Chief, and/or their designees, may order any
performance, presentation, spectacle, or entertainment to be stopped
until the condition is corrected.
C. Where any violation of any provision of the Code, including failure to
comply with any subdivision or site plan approved by the Planning
Board, or condition imposed by the Zoning Board of Appeals, shall be
found to exist and after the issuance of a notice of violation by the
Building Official, the Building Official shall notify the City Manager,
who may then institute any and all actions and proceedings, either legal
or equitable, including seeking injunctions of violations and the
imposition of fines that may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the
provisions of this chapter in the name of the City. The City Manager
shall inform the City Council before instituting action in court, but need
not obtain the consent of the City Council, and the City Manager may
institute any action for injunctive relief without first informing the City
Council in circumstances where immediate relief is needed to prevent a
serious public harm.
D. For the purposes of eliminating violations and recovering penalties
without court action, the City Manager may enter into administrative
consent agreements in the name of the City.
§ 90-7 SANFORD CODE § 90-9
27:96
§ 90-10. Liability.
§ 90-11. through § 90-12. (Reserved)
A. An aggrieved party may appeal from a final decision made pursuant to
this article to the Board of Appeals within 30 days from the action of the
Building Official.
B. The Board of Appeals shall have no authority to waive requirements of
the code.
C. The order of the Building Official shall not be stayed during any such
appeal.
A. Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any responsible
party from liability, or lessen such liability, for damages to persons or
property caused by a defect in work performed pursuant to this article.
B. No officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this article
when acting for the City in the discharge of their duties shall render
themselves personally liable for any damages that may occur to any
person or property as a result of their acts in the discharge of their
duties.
C. The City shall not be rendered liable for any damage to persons or
property arising out of any permit, inspection, or other action taken
pursuant to this article.
§ 90-9 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 90-11
27:97

ARTICLE III
Building Standards
§ 90-13. Adoption of standardized codes.
A. Adopted codes shall be enforced by the Building Official, which shall be
accomplished through inspections performed by Building Officials and
code enforcement officers, pursuant to 25 M.R.S.A. § 2373.
B. The City hereby adopts the following codes by reference, pursuant to
30-A M.R.S.A. § 3003:
(1) The Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code ("MUBEC"), as
required by 10 M.R.S.A. § 9724.
(2) State of Maine Plumbing Code, including the State of Maine
Internal Plumbing Rules and the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules, as amended from time to time by the
State of Maine.
(3) (Reserved)
(4) (Reserved)
(5) International Property Maintenance Code of the International Code
Council (2015 Edition). The following sections of the International
Property Maintenance Code of the International Code Council
(2015 Edition) are hereby deleted, modified, or amended by the
City of Sanford as follows:
(a) Section 101.1: Insert "the City of Sanford" for "[Name of
Jurisdiction]."
(b) Section 102.3: Delete entire section and replace with the
following: "Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure or
building, or change of occupancy, shall be done in accordance
with the procedures and provisions of the City Code and the
standards adopted by reference therein."
(c) Section 103: Delete title and replace with the following:
"Department of Code Enforcement."
(d) Section 103.1 General: Delete entire section and replace with
the following: "The Building Officials, Code Enforcement
Officers, and his/her designees shall be known as the 'Code
Official.'"
(e) Section 103.3 Deputies: Delete entire text.
(f) Section 103.5: Delete entire section and replace with the
following: "The fees for activities and services performed by
the Department in carrying out its responsibilities under this
code shall be in such amount as the municipal officers may
§ 90-13 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 90-13
27:99
establish from time to time in the fee schedule of the City of
Sanford."
(g) Section 106.3 Prosecution of violations: Delete entire section
and replace with the following: "Any person failing to comply
with a notice of violation and/or order, if the notice is not
complied with, the Code Official shall notify the City Manager,
who may then institute any and all proceedings, either legal or
equitable, including seeking injunctions of violations and the
imposition of fines that may be appropriate or necessary to
enforce the provisions of this code in the name of the City. The
City Manager shall inform the City Council before instituting
action in court, but need not obtain the consent of the City
Council, and the City Manager may institute any action for
injunctive relief without first informing the City Council in
circumstances where immediate relief is needed to prevent a
serious public harm. For the purposes of eliminating violations
and recovering penalties without court action, the City
Manager may enter into administrative consent agreements in
the name of the City."
(h) Section 106.4 Violation penalties: Delete entire section and
replace with the following: "Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code, or who fails to comply therewith, or with
any of the requirements thereof, shall be penalized not less
than $100 nor more than $2,500 for a specific violation, and
other remedies, injunctive relief, and costs as set forth in
accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day during which
a violation of said code continues, 10 days after notification by
the Code Official, shall constitute a separate offense."
(i) Section 106.5 Abatement of violation: Delete "legal officer of
the jurisdiction" and replace with "Code Official or Legal
Department."
(j) Section 111: Delete entire section.
(k) Section 302.4: Insert "10 inches (254 mm)" for [jurisdiction to
insert height in inches].
(l) Section 302.8: Add "Exception: Operational farm tractors
exempted from registration."
(m) Section 304.14: Insert "May 1 to October 1" for "[DATE] to
[DATE]."
(n) Section 304.18: Delete entire section.
(o) Section 602.3: Insert "October 1 to May 1" for "[DATE] to
[DATE]."
§ 90-13 SANFORD CODE § 90-13
27:100
(p) Section 602.4: Insert "October 1 to May 1" for "[DATE] to
[DATE]."
(q) Section 604.1: Facilities required: Delete entire text and
replace with "Every occupied building shall be provided with
an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of
this section and National Fire Protection Association 70:
National Electrical Code, 2014 and Section 605."
(r) Section 605.1 Installation. Delete entire text and replace with
"Electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly
installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner in
compliance with National Fire Protection Association 70:
National Electrical Code, 2014."
(s) Section 605.3 Luminaires. Delete entire text and replace with
"Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen,
bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall
contain not less than one covered electrical luminaire.
Bathrooms may not have pull cord luminaires. Pool and spa
luminaires over 15 V shall have ground-fault circuit-interrupter
protection.
(t) Section 702.1 General: Delete "International Fire Code" and
replace with: "National Fire Protection Association Life Safety
Code as per Chapter 128 of the City Code."
(u) Section 702.2 Aisles: Delete "International Fire Code" and
replace with: "National Fire Protection Association Life Safety
Code as per Chapter 128 of the City Code.
(v) Section 704.1 General: Delete "International Fire Code" and
replace with: National Fire Protection Association Life Safety
Code as per Chapter 128 of the City Code."
(w) Section 704.1.1 Insert "Automatic sprinkler systems:
Inspection, testing and maintenance of automatic sprinkler
systems shall be in accordance with applicable National Fire
Protection Association Life Safety Code as per Chapter 128 of
the City Code."
(x) Section 704.2 Smoke alarms: Delete entire section and
subsections and replace with "Single or multi-station smoke
alarms shall be installed and maintained in accordance with
the applicable National Fire Protection Association Life Safety
Code as per Chapter 128 of the City Code."
(y) Section 704.3: Insert "Carbon monoxide alarms: Single or
multi-station carbon monoxide alarms shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with applicable National Fire
Protection Association Codes as per Chapter 128 of the City
Code."
§ 90-13 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 90-13
27:101
§ 90-14. through § 90-19. (Reserved)
§ 90-20. Burner installation.
In addition to the permitting requirements pursuant to this chapter, any
person who installs or services oil or gas burner equipment must have a
license from the Maine Fuel Board. Any alterations, installations, addition
of controls, or other work on oil burners must be done by a person having
such a license.
§ 90-21. Demolition requirements.
(z) Section 704.4: Delete entire text.
(aa) Section 704.3: Insert "Carbon monoxide alarms: Single or
multi-station carbon monoxide alarms shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with applicable National Fire
Protection Association Codes as per Chapter 128, Fire
Prevention, Article VI, Adoption of Codes, of the Ordinances of
the City of Sanford."
A. No demolition permit shall be issued unless and until:
(1) The applicant provides documentation of meeting the State
Asbestos Management Regulations.
(2) A permit to demolish or remove a structure shall expire 30 days
after the date of its issuance, provided that, for good cause, the
Building Official may extend the permit for a period of not more
than 15 days.
(3) Except in an emergency, the person to whom a permit is issued
shall notify all residential and business occupants within a 150-foot
radius of the building being demolished, 48 hours in advance of the
demolition commencing describing precautions to minimize lead
exposure.
(4) Temperature and weather permitting, the person to whom a permit
is issued shall dampen or cause to be dampened all debris resulting
from the demolition operation to the extent necessary to prevent
dust therefrom circulating in the surrounding area.
(5) Temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control measures
in keeping with applicable best management practices shall be in
place on the premises as necessary during and after the completion
of the demolition activity.
(6) All foundations and building underpinnings shall be removed and
disposed of in their entirety, except when it is documented by a
licensed professional that the foundation may be reused or when
practical difficulty prevents the foundation's removal. Practical
difficulty does not include reasons of convenience.
§ 90-13 SANFORD CODE § 90-21
27:102
ARTICLE IV
Housing Standards
§ 90-22. Properties unfit for human habitation; posting against
occupancy.
Any dwellings, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or any structure
or portion thereof being used for human habitation which is in violation
of the provisions of this article to the extent that it is unfit for human
habitation according to the standards contained herein or other applicable
standards may be condemned for habitation and posted against occupancy
by the Building Official. Properties unfit for human habitation shall include
but are not limited to:
§ 90-23. Notice of condemnation and posting; order to vacate.
§ 90-24. Property not to be occupied again for habitation.
No property which has been condemned and posted against occupancy shall
again be used for the purpose of habitation until the Building Official shall,
in writing, approve of the property's use and shall likewise authorize the
removal of the posted notice.
A. Properties which are either damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary,
unsafe, or vermin-infested in such a manner as to create a serious
hazard to the health, safety, and general welfare of the occupants or the
public;
B. Properties which lack plumbing, ventilation, lighting, or heating
facilities or equipment adequate to protect the health, safety and
general welfare of the occupants or the public;
C. Properties which, because of their general condition, state of the
premises, number of occupants, or location, are so unsanitary, unsafe,
overcrowded or otherwise dangerous or detrimental that they create a
serious menace to the occupants or the public;
D. Properties in or on which the owner, operator, or occupant has failed to
comply with notices or orders issued under the provisions of this
chapter;
E. Properties which are disorderly houses.
A. The Building Official shall give notice in writing to the property owner
or operator of such condemnation and posting, and in the event such
property is occupied, shall give like notice to the occupants, which shall
also include a reasonable time limit within which such property shall be
vacated.
B. The Building Official shall also give notice to the City Manager of the
action.
§ 90-22 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 90-25
27:103
§ 90-25. Notice not to be removed; property not to be used or let;
exception.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to deface or remove
any such posted notice without the prior approval of the Building Official.
It shall also be a violation of this article for any person to occupy or let
to another for occupancy any property which has been condemned and
posted as provided above without receiving the prior written approval of the
Building Official.
§ 90-26. Property to be secured if not improved.
If the owner or operator of any property which has been condemned as unfit
for habitation does not proceed to make the necessary corrections to bring
the property into compliance with the provisions of this chapter, such owner
or operator shall proceed to make the property safe and secure so that no
danger to life or property or fire hazard shall exist. If the owner or operator
fails to do so within a reasonable amount of time, the City may take all
reasonable steps to make the property safe and secure and recoup the cost
from the owner or operator. If the City takes steps to make the property safe
and secure, the City shall also collect an administrative fee, as set forth in
the fee schedule as amended from time to time.
§ 90-27. Restriction on conveyance of property; exception.
§ 90-28. Appeals.
An appeal from any final decision of the Building Official, if available by
statute or otherwise by law, under the provisions of this article may be taken
by the aggrieved party to the superior court in accordance with Rule 80B of
the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
A. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to sell, transfer, or
otherwise dispose of any property against which an order has been
issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this article unless
any person shall first furnish to the grantee a true copy of any such
order and shall at the same time notify the Building Official in writing of
the intent to so transfer either by delivering the notice to the Building
Official and receiving a receipt therefor or by registered mail, return
receipt requested, giving the name and address of the person to whom
the transfer is proposed. In the event of a violation of this section, such
person shall be subject to penalties pursuant to the Code in addition to
any penalty which may be imposed for failure to comply with any order
of the Building Official.
B. No contract or agreement between owner and/or operator and
occupant relating to compliance with the terms of this article shall be
effective in relieving any person of responsibility for compliance with
the provisions of this article as set forth herein.
§ 90-25 SANFORD CODE § 90-29
27:104
§ 90-29. Personal nonliability.
No officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this article and
acting for the City in the discharge of their duties shall render themselves
personally liable for any damage that may occur to any person or property
as a result of their acts in the discharge of their duties. Any suit brought
against any officer or employee because of any act performed by them
under the provisions of this article shall be defended by the Corporation
Counsel until the final determination of the proceedings therein.
§ 90-30. Violations.
§ 90-31. Enforcement.
In addition to the remedies otherwise provided, the following specific
remedies shall also be available:
A. Any owner, occupant, or operator of a building, structure, or premises
shall be guilty of an offense and subject to the penalties and remedies
provided in this chapter and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 if that person does
any of the following:
(1) Violates a provision of this article, or any Codes adopted pursuant
to this article;
(2) Allows a violation to occur or remain at any building, structure, or
premises that they own, occupy, or control; or
(3) Fails to comply with any lawful order issued pursuant to this
article.
B. The imposition of a penalty for a violation does not excuse that violation
or allow it to continue.
A. Where any building, structure, or property is required to be secured by
this article, the Building Official may secure the building and charge the
owner, occupant, and/or operator a penalty of $500, plus
reimbursement of the actual costs of securing where:
(1) The owner, occupant, and/or operator has been given notice of the
requirement to secure and has failed to do so within a reasonable
time; or
(2) The building, structure, or property poses an imminent threat to
the public if not secured before notice and an opportunity to
correct can be given.
B. The City Manager is authorized to institute, or cause to be instituted by
the Corporation Counsel, in the name of the City any and all actions,
legal or equitable, that may be appropriate or necessary for the
enforcement of the provisions of this article.
§ 90-29 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 90-31
27:105
Chapter 96
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 96-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Town of Sanford Cable
Television Franchising Ordinance."
§ 96-2. Franchise required; qualifications of grantee; term.
A. Franchise required. No person firm, company, corporation or
association shall construct, install, maintain or operate within any
public street in the Town, or within any other public property of the
Town, or within privately owned area within the corporate limits of the
Town, any equipment of facilities for the distribution of television
signals or radio signals or other intelligences, either analog or digital,
over a broadband telecommunications network to any subscriber unless
a franchise authorizing the use of the streets or properties of areas has
first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and unless
such franchise agreement is in full force and effect; provided that a
cable television company holding a valid cable television franchise from
an adjoining Maine municipality may serve up to and including 11
subscribers without the necessity of obtaining a franchise from the
Town.36
B. Review of qualifications. Specific permission to operate a cable
television system under the provisions of this chapter may be granted
by the Town Council to any applicant ("grantee") after satisfactory
review of its legal, character, financial and technical qualifications and
the adequacy and feasibility of the grantee's construction
arrangements, all demonstrated by the grantee to be adequate to
protect the general public health, safety and welfare, and approval of
the grantee's qualifications as part of a public proceeding affording due
process.37
C. Duration of franchise. Upon filing by the grantee of a proper acceptance
and such other bond and insurance as the Town Council may reasonably
require, the franchise shall take effect as provided herein and shall
continue in full force and effect for a maximum term of 10 years.38
36.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 226, § 226-13, Use of public ways for cable television systems.
37.Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
38.Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 90-31 SANFORD CODE § 96-3
96:106
§ 96-3. Application for franchise or renewal.39
Applications for a franchise or renewal shall be filed with the Town Clerk for
referral to the Town Council for action. Any such application for a franchise
or a franchise renewal shall contain the following information:
§ 96-4. Procedural requirements.40
Before the Town solicits cable television franchise proposals or entertains
applications for renewals, the following procedures shall be required:
A. Filing fee of $25.
B. Name and address of the applicant.
C. Description of proposed operation, including but not limited to hours of
operation, operating staff, maintenance procedures and its proposed
rules or operation for public access.
D. A statement of all television and radio services to be provided.
E. A statement setting forth a description of any special services to be
made available to the public, including municipal and educational
channels.
F. A statement detailing the corporation organization of the applicant,
identifying the number of stockholders of the company and any intracompany
relationships with parent or subsidiary companies, and a
statement setting forth in writing any and all understandings between
the applicant and any other person, firm, or organization.
G. A statement detailing the applicant's financial statement for the two
previous fiscal years.
H. A written statement detailing the type of network proposed by the
applicant, including but not limited to network configuration, network
capacity, two-way capability and proposed dates of commencement of
construction and operation of said network.
I. A written statement as to whether the applicant or any of its officers,
directors or holders of 10% or more of its voting stock have in the past
10 years been convicted of any crime other than a routine traffic offense
and the disposition of each such case.
A. The Town Council shall provide public notice and hold a public hearing
to determine special local needs or interest in cable television
programming and services and shall provide for a period of public
comment on the same;
39.Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
40.Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 96-3 CABLE TELEVISION § 96-4
96:107
§ 96-5. Financial reports.
The holder of any cable television franchise shall file annually with the
Town, not later than three months after the end of its fiscal year, two copies
of its report to stockholders and an income statement identifying expenses
and income applicable to its operations and the franchise fee required by its
franchise agreement.
§ 96-6. Performance bond.
The cable operator shall maintain during the term of the franchise
agreement a faithful performance bond running in favor of the Town with a
corporate surety licensed to do business in the State of Maine conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the cable company and providing for
recovery jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond
for any damages suffered by the Town as a result of any cost incurred by
the Town for the removal or abandonment of any property of the cable
television company plus a reasonable allowance for attorney fees and costs
in prosecuting the same. The amount of the bond shall not be less than
$5,000, and written evidence of the same shall be filed with the Town.
§ 96-7. Compliance with regulations.
The cable operator shall at all times comply with all applicable federal, state
and local laws, ordinances and regulations.
Chapter 101
CEMETERIES
B. Any and all franchise applications and renewal applications and related
documents shall be public records, and the Town Council shall provide
reasonable notice to the public that such records are available and open
to inspection at Town offices during normal business hours;
C. Prior to granting any franchise or franchise renewal, the Town Council
shall provide for a public hearing on the same; and
D. The Town Council shall assess such fees as are reasonably necessary to
defray costs of public notice, advertising and other expenses incurred
by the Town in acting upon franchise applications.
§ 96-4 SANFORD CODE § 96-7
96:108
ARTICLE I
Oakdale Cemetery
[Adopted 12-29-200941]
§ 101-1. Oakdale Cemetery established.
All land purchased from Oakdale Cemetery Association situated on Berwick
Road in the Town of Sanford shall be held for a perpetual burying place of
the human dead and shall be known as the Oakdale Cemetery.
§ 101-2. Board of Trustees.
A. Members; appointment; term.
(1) The general care and management of the property expenditures,
business and prudential affairs of said cemetery shall be in a Board
of three Trustees, to include the following members: a member of
the Town Council, to be appointed annually by the Town Council at
the first regular meeting in January, or as soon thereafter as may
be, the Town Manager or the Town Manager's designee, and the
Town Treasurer.
(2) Said Board shall, on or before the first regular meeting of
December in each year, make to the Town Council a full report of its
doings.
B. Organization of Trustees. The Board of Trustees immediately after the
first regular meeting of the Town Council shall organize by choosing
from their number a Chairperson and a Secretary. The Town Treasurer
shall serve as the Treasurer of the organization.
C. Grants, donations, bequests.
(1) The Board of Trustees, when so authorized by statute, may accept
and hold any grant, donation, or bequest of money or property, in
trust, for and in behalf of the Town of Sanford, and apply the
income thereof and the principal when so stated, to the
improvement and embellishment of said cemetery; or for the
erection, repair, preservation or renewal of any monument or other
structure; or for the planting or cultivation of trees, shrubs or
plants in or around any lot or lots; or for improving said grounds in
any other manner or form consistent with the purposes for which
said cemetery is established, and in accordance with the terms of
such grant, donation or bequest.
(2) And whenever any such grant, donation or bequest, or any deposit
of money, shall be made to said Trustees, by the owner of any lot or
lots, in said cemetery, for the annual or perpetual care, repair,
preservation or embellishment of such lot or lots, or the erections
41.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. I, Oakdale Cemetery, adopted
4-11-1977 as Ch. 3 of the 1977 Code, as amended.
§ 101-1 CABLE TELEVISION § 101-2
96:109
§ 101-3. Officers.
thereon, said Trustees may give to such owner or his legal
representative, when so authorized by statute, an agreement or
obligation in such form and upon such conditions as they or the
statute may establish, binding themselves and their successors for
and in behalf of the Town of Sanford, to preserve and keep in repair
said lots or lot forever, or for such period as may be agreed upon.
Any sums of money so received shall be invested by them in such
manner as the laws of the State provide for investing such funds.
D. Grants, donations, bequests; income. The income of such funds or fund
and the principal, when so stated, shall be expended by said Board of
Trustees in such manner as shall, in their opinion, best promote the
purposes for which said grant donation, bequest or deposit was made.
E. Property held, how applied. All personal property now belonging to said
cemetery, and the proceeds of all sales of lots, now held, or hereafter to
be acquired, by said cemetery, together with all donations, bequests,
and all other incomes of whatever nature, shall be forever devoted and
applied, in accordance with the provisions of this article, to the
preservation, improvement, embellishment, protection and
enlargements of said cemetery, and to the necessary incidental
expenses thereof and to no other account.
F. Payment procedure. All bills against said cemetery shall be examined
and approved by at least two members of the Board of Trustees before
payment.
G. Chairman. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the Trustees.
A. Secretary. The Secretary shall keep a correct record of all the doings of
the Board of Trustees and attend to all necessary correspondence.
B. Treasurer. The Treasurer shall receive all money due and payable on
account of the cemetery.
C. Treasurer; financial statement. The Treasurer shall make out and
submit to the Board of Trustees a statement of the financial condition of
the cemetery, which statement shall contain a detailed account of
receipts and expenditures, made for and in behalf of the cemetery,
whenever requested so to do by said Board.
D. Treasurer; annual statement. The Treasurer shall, annually, on June 30,
make out a statement of all receipts and expenditures, and submit the
same to the Town Council.
E. Treasurer; payroll. The Treasurer shall carefully examine the
Superintendent's time book, and make up therefrom the payroll of all
the employees of the cemetery; and, upon approval of said payroll by
the Trustees, the Treasurer shall pay the same.
§ 101-2 SANFORD CODE § 101-3
96:110
§ 101-4. Superintendent.
F. Town Treasurer; statement. It shall be the duty of the Town Treasurer
to furnish the Board of Trustees, for the report required in § 101-3C, an
itemized statement of the current receipts and expenditures of the
Town Treasurer's office, for and in behalf of Oakdale Cemetery, for the
month ending as aforesaid; which statement shall include, under the
appropriate heads, any interest or other income, due from the Town to
said cemetery account, by reason of any loan or invested fund.
G. Purchase Committee. The Trustees shall designate not less than two of
their number to act as a committee for purchasing all necessary
supplies for the cemetery.
A. Appointment; general duties. The Board of Trustees, at its organization
or as soon thereafter as may be, shall appoint some suitable person as
Superintendent of the cemetery, who, under the direction of the
Trustees, shall have entire charge of the cemetery grounds. The
Superintendent shall keep the avenues, paths and lots in a neat and
satisfactory condition, and, upon approval of the Trustees, shall engage
and discharge workmen, and order and arrange their respective duties.
B. Enforcement duty. It shall be the Superintendent's duty at all times, in
connection with the Trustees, to see that the provisions of this article
are faithfully and impartially enforced.
C. Rules and regulations. The Superintendent shall see that all rules and
regulations of the cemetery are observed by persons employed in the
cemetery, either by the Superintendent or by owners of lots; and that all
regulations in regard to interments and the construction of tombs,
monuments, foundations, care and improvement of lots be complied
with, and cause all contracts made with owners to be fulfilled.
D. Actuarial duties; records; other.
(1) The Superintendent shall perform the duties of actuary by keeping
in books or cards provided for that purpose regular and accurate
records of all interments, with proper indices of the same, for
immediate reference, by lot owners and others, at any time. The
Superintendent shall, ex officio, be an undertaker and have all the
powers of the same.
(2) The Superintendent shall keep a record in a book, or on cards
properly ruled, according to the plan of said cemetery, giving the
number, section, name of purchaser, price and date of every lot
sold, transferred or exchanged.
(3) The Superintendent shall hold the office at the pleasure of the
Board of Trustees. Subject to the provisions of this article, the
Trustees may require the Superintendent to perform such other
duties as they deem advisable.
§ 101-3 CABLE TELEVISION § 101-5
96:111
§ 101-5. Cemetery funds.
§ 101-6. Purchase and sale of lots.
A. Perpetual care fund. All sums received from bonds given by the Town or
Board of Trustees for the perpetual care of lots, tombs and other
structures upon any lots shall be known as the "perpetual care fund,"
and the income from the same shall be exclusively expended by the
Trustees in maintaining, according to the terms of the various bonds
given therefor, a perpetual care of said lots, tombs, and other
structures.
B. General fund. The Town Treasurer shall open a cemetery account
known as the "general fund" in a book kept for that purpose, in which
shall be entered all moneys received for and on account of the
cemetery, not including the above-mentioned funds, and all moneys so
received shall be and are hereby constituted a general fund, to be used
for the purpose of paying current expenses, as well as improving and
ornamenting said cemetery.
C. Treasurer; report. The Town Treasurer shall, annually, make a report to
the Town Council, giving a detailed statement of all receipts from and
expenditures and investments of the above-mentioned funds received
or made by him for the fiscal year.
A. Price, certificate for sale, deed. The Trustees are authorized to
determine the price and sale of lots in the cemetery, fixing such price as
in their judgment the location, surroundings and condition of the same
seem to warrant. The Town Treasurer, upon receipt of a certificate
signed by the Trustees, giving the name or names of the purchasers, the
section, number and price of the lot or lots, shall make out and deliver
to such person or persons (on payment of the specified price) a deed.
B. Purchase of lots. The Trustees are hereby authorized to purchase
outright or by exchange for other lots, on behalf of the Town, any
unoccupied lot or lots, at such price or prices as may be agreed upon by
the owner or owners and the Trustees.
C. Single graves; condition of sale.
(1) The Trustees are hereby authorized to set apart any unoccupied
tract or tracts of land in the cemetery, for the purpose of selling the
right of burial, in single graves, to persons who do not desire to
purchase regular lots. And said Trustees are hereby empowered to
adopt and regulate the price for such graves as in their judgment is
just and proper. It shall be conditioned in the same of every such
grave that if any person purchasing such a grave shall thereafter
purchase any lot or lots in the cemetery, the body buried in such
grave will be removed therefrom to the lot or lots purchased, when
desired, and the price paid for the grave, less the charge for two
interments, shall be credited on the lot or lots so purchased. After
§ 101-5 SANFORD CODE § 101-6
96:112
§ 101-7. Grading of lots.
§ 101-8. Annual and perpetual care of lots.
such removal, the space so vacated and the right to occupy the
same shall revert to the Town.
(2) Single graves may be purchased in the section or sections set apart
for that purpose, by the Trustees, at such price as they may
determine.
D. Single graves; perpetual care. The price for a single grave shall include
perpetual care.
A. Uniform grade. The grade of all lots hereafter sold or exchanged shall
be at a uniform grade unless otherwise determined by the Trustees. All
lots shall be graded by the Town under the direction of the Trustees at
such a price as may be agreed upon.
B. Restriction against; penalty. The grading of any lot in the cemetery or
any changing of a grade once established by the Town, except by an
employee of the cemetery acting under the direction of the
Superintendent, is prohibited; and any lot owner, or his representative,
who violates this section shall be liable to a fine of not less than $25 for
each offense, to be recovered by complaint or an action of debt, in the
name of the Trustees, for the use of the cemetery.
A. Determination of cost; satisfactory condition. The Trustees are
authorized to agree upon such a price for perpetual, annual or special
care of any lot or lots by the Town, as in their judgment would be just
and proper, between the Town and the owners of such lots. They may
refuse to grant perpetual care upon any lot until it is put in a condition
satisfactory to them.
B. Classification of care. There shall be the following classifications for the
perpetual care by the Town of lots, monuments, or other structures
upon lots.
(1) One.
(a) Shall include keeping the sward or turf even and in good
condition, the grass properly cut and the trees and shrubbery
trimmed.
(b) It may also include, if agreed upon:
[1] The necessary watering of the lot;
[2] The planting and care of flowers and shrubs; or
[3] Top dressing the land when necessary.
§ 101-6 CABLE TELEVISION § 101-8
96:113
(2) Two. May embrace any or all the divisions enumerated in
Classification One, as well as the proper care of all granite, stone,
marble, bronze or other structures on the lot at the time the care is
assumed, or any future erections that may be expressly specified,
but not the replacing of the same.
(3) Three. Assuming the same care as in Classification Two, and, in
addition, replacing when necessary such granite, stone, marble,
bronze or other structures.
C. Annual care; special care.
(1) The Trustees or Superintendent may contract with lot owners or
their representatives, for the care of lots by the year, on such terms
as may be agreed upon, to be known as "annual care." It may
embrace any or all of the provisions designated in Classification
One.
(2) Special or extra care may be contracted for in writing by any lot
holder, in addition to the perpetual or annual care mentioned in this
and the preceding subsection.
D. Neglect of lots. If any lot or structure or growth thereon shall, by reason
of the neglect or absence of the owner, become unsightly or
inconvenient, the Trustees shall have the right, at their discretion, after
due notice to said owner or the designated representative, to put said
lot or structure in proper condition and repair, and make a reasonable
charge for the same; or any structure or growth thereon or any part of it
may be removed, if deemed advisable, and the expense of the same
shall be charged to the owner or owners of said lot or lots. And the
Trustees shall not consent to the transfer of such lot or lots until the
expense for such repairs has been paid.
E. Perpetual care bond. Upon the receipt of a certificate from the Trustees
setting forth the section, number and lot, owner's name and residence,
together with this class of care and the price for the same, the Town
Treasurer shall issue to the party or parties therein named, a bond for
perpetual care of lots, upon the payment of the price agreed upon in
such certificate.
F. Trusts and conveyances. Upon receipt of a properly executed deed to
the Town of Sanford by any lot holder or holders in Oakdale Cemetery,
conveying in trust any lot or lots in said cemetery as a place of
interment for the grantor and such persons as the grantor may
designate to be buried therein accompanied by a certificate from the
Trustees, for the time being, of said cemetery, giving the section,
number and lots, the name and residence of the grantor, together with
the class of perpetual care and the price for the same, the Town
Treasurer and said Trustees, for the time being, for and in behalf of the
Town of Sanford may accept the conveyance of such lot or lots, for the
uses and upon the trusts which may be set forth in said conveyance, and
may bind the Town to keep and perform the agreements, uses and
§ 101-8 SANFORD CODE § 101-8
96:114
§ 101-9. Boundary markers; trees and shrubs.
§ 101-10. Monuments.
trusts, as are contained in the deed of conveyance of such lot or lots, in
accordance with the laws of the State of Maine.
G. Entry privilege for upkeep of lots. No person, except a lot owner, his
legal representative or an employee of the cemetery acting under the
direction of the Superintendent or Trustees, shall enter Oakdale
Cemetery for the purpose of caring for lots, unless by special
permission or vote of the Trustees.
H. No personal interest or compensation allowed. No Trustee,
Superintendent or employee of this cemetery shall be allowed to be
personally interested in or receive compensation for the care of any lot,
but any and all receipts for such care, unless otherwise provided, shall
go into the general fund provided in § 101-5B.
A. Boundary markers; lot numbers. Each lot shall be bounded or
designated by posts or markers at each corner, set level with the
ground, the same to be furnished by the Trustees on or before the sale
of the lot. The number of the lot shall be cast or cut in a post or marker
set for that purpose.
B. Removal of trees, shrubs, etc. If any tree, shrub, hedge or plant situated
on any lot by means of its roots, branches or otherwise becomes
unsightly or obnoxious to adjacent lot owners, or detrimental or
inconvenient to avenues or paths, it shall be the duty of the Trustees to
enter upon such lot and remove the same in whole or in part, at their
discretion.
C. Cultivation of trees, shrubs, etc. The owner of any lot shall have a right
to cultivate shrubs and plants on the same, subject to the regulations of
the cemetery, but they shall not be cultivated without first obtaining
permission from the Trustees.
A. Right to erect, restriction. The owner of any lot shall have the right to
erect any proper stones or a monument thereon. Only one monument
shall be allowed on a lot and this must be located at the center, unless
special permission is given by the Trustees for placing it otherwise. No
monument will be allowed on any lot platted for less than five burials
unless by special vote of the Trustees.
B. Tombs; vaults; mausoleums. Tombs, vaults or mausoleums can be
constructed only in such places and upon such lots and of such a design
as shall be approved by the Trustees. Complete plans and specifications
of the same must be furnished when application for permission to build
is made. No bodies shall be placed therein except in hermetically
sealed, single apartments, in a manner satisfactory to the Trustees.
§ 101-8 CABLE TELEVISION § 101-10
96:115
§ 101-11. Foundations.
§ 101-12. Undertakers.
C. Materials allowed. No monument or headstone, and no portion of any
vault, tomb, or mausoleum above the ground, shall be constructed of
any other material than cut marble or stone or real bronze. No artificial
material will be allowed.
A. Reservation of right to construct foundations. As a guarantee of good
work, for the general welfare of the cemetery, and as a protection to lot
holders, the Town reserves the right to excavate for and build all
foundations for monuments, headstones, etc. The Trustees may,
however, if deemed advisable, authorize, under their supervision, the
construction of such foundations by other parties than the Town.
B. Foundation specifications.
(1) No stone, tablet, tomb, vault or other super-structures shall be
erected in Oakdale Cemetery until a suitable foundation is laid.
(2) All foundations for monuments, shall be not less than four feet
deep. For all other structures, the depth of the foundation shall be
at the discretion of the Trustees. Cement shall be used throughout
for monument foundations.
A. Restriction on removal or deposit for burial; penalty. No person, except
a licensed undertaker or the Superintendent acting as such, shall
remove to or deposit for burial in Oakdale Cemetery any body of a
deceased person; and any person violating this subsection shall be
liable to a fine of not less than $50 for each offense, to be recovered as
in § 101-7B.
B. Notification requirements; record.
(1) It shall be the duty of every undertaker, who shall hereafter remove
to Oakdale Cemetery any body of a deceased person for burial or
for deposit in the receiving tomb, to first notify the Superintendent
of the burials, upon a blank for that purpose, furnished by the
Superintendent of the cemetery, giving the name, age, late
residence and nature of the disease of which such person died; and,
if buried, the section, number and name of the lot owner upon
whose lot such burial is made; and, if the body is placed in the
receiving tomb to await burial, it shall be so stated upon such
return.
(2) In addition to the above, the date of such deposits and when such
body will be removed for burial, the number and lot holder's name
to which it is to be removed shall be given. And the Trustees shall
cause a record of every such notice and return to be kept at the
Superintendent's office, for the use and information of the
cemetery.
§ 101-10 SANFORD CODE § 101-12
96:116
§ 101-13. Burials or interments.
§ 101-14. Receiving tomb.
C. Hours for burial and deposit. No body of a deceased person shall
hereafter be removed to Oakdale Cemetery, either for burial or deposit
in the receiving tomb, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m., without permission of the Trustees.
A. Conformance with law; fees. No burial shall be permitted in any lot in
the cemetery until the laws regarding burials in force in the Town of
Sanford have been complied with, and all burial fees paid.
B. Permission required. No body shall be buried in any lot in the cemetery
for hire nor except on the written permission of the lot owner or his
designated representative filed in the office of the Superintendent 12
hours before such interment. The Trustees, at their discretion, may
permit such interment when unable to get the permission above
mentioned.
C. Burial on Town-owned lots; failure to purchase. Burials are prohibited
upon any lot the title to which is in the Town of Sanford, but the
Trustees, by written consent, may allow burials to be made, for a stated
period, on such lots when the persons or person interested shall
contract to purchase the lot or lots so buried upon. And it shall be
stipulated in such contract that if such person or persons shall fail to
purchase within the time specified, the Trustees may, after 30 days from
the date of a notice to that effect to the person or persons interested,
cause such body or bodies to be removed to a single grave section, at
the expense of the person or persons for whom such burials were made.
A. Contagious remains; public vault. The remains of a person dying of
cholera, scarlet fever, diphtheria, small pox, typhus or yellow fever, or
any other recognized contagious disease, shall not be allowed in the
public vault, unless same is sealed in an airtight receptacle.
B. Contagious remains, restriction on removal. Should the remains of any
person dying of any disease mentioned in the preceding section, be
buried in any lot or section of Oakdale Cemetery, such remains shall not
be removed within two years from the date of such interment.
C. Temporary winter placement. Persons not owning lots may, during the
winter months on payment of such sum as may be determined upon by
the Trustees, have a body placed in the receiving tomb for a term not
exceeding three months. All bodies deposited in the receiving tomb
shall be removed therefrom on or before the fifteenth day of May,
annually, unless allowed to remain longer by special permission of the
Trustees.
§ 101-12 CABLE TELEVISION § 101-15
96:117
§ 101-15. Visitors' unruly conduct; penalty.
Any person who shall be found within the limits of the grounds making
unseemly noise, discharging firearms, driving at a rapid rate on the avenues
throwing stones or other missiles, or otherwise conducting themselves in a
manner unsuitable to the purposes to which the grounds are dedicated or
in violation of any ordinance or regulation of the cemetery shall be liable to
a fine of not less than $10.
§ 101-16. Rules and regulations; violations and penalties.
§ 101-17. Special area for servicemen.
The Trustees shall set aside a section of the cemetery for the burial of
servicemen of all wars who have no relatives who might provide a plot for
the interment of their remains. The area has previously been selected and
some veterans already interred therein. The Trustees shall establish rules
and regulations to govern under which conditions of burials therein will be
authorized.
A. Rules and regulations. The Trustees are hereby empowered to adopt
such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the government of
said cemetery, as long as the same are not inconsistent with the
ordinances of the Town and the laws of the State.
B. Enforcement; penalty. Whoever violates any provisions of this article,
unless otherwise provided by this article or the laws of this State shall
be punished, upon conviction, by a fine not exceeding $500, the same to
be recovered as provided in § 101-7B.
§ 101-15 SANFORD CODE § 101-17
96:118
Chapter 105
CHARTER IMPLEMENTATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter Adoption of Code — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 105-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide, pursuant to § 1-1 of the Code and
with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3004, enacting ordinances implementing or clarifying
the intent of the Sanford Charter as amended from time to time. No
ordinance shall violate the intent of said Charter but shall provide as an
instrument to perfect the regulation of governance for all of Sanford. Any
future amendment or revision of the Charter shall supersede any conflicting
ordinance, and such conflict will be immediately addressed by the City
Council.
§ 105-2. Petition for Overrule of Action of Council.
All ordinances, resolutions or orders, except those enacted pursuant to
Section 214.1 of the Charter, making appointments or removals, or
regulating exclusively the internal procedure of the Council, shall be subject
to overrule by a citizen referendum as follows:
A. After the adoption of an ordinance, resolution or order by the Council,
the voters may file a petition requesting that such ordinance, resolution
or order be put to a referendum vote.
B. For purposes of Section 1302 of the Charter, a written request for blank
petition forms to put an ordinance, resolution, or order of the City
Council to a referendum vote must be submitted to the City Clerk in
writing by five or more registered voters within 14 days of the City
Council's final approval of the ordinance, resolution, or order. The City
Clerk will issue petition blanks as soon as practicable. Said voters shall
be referred to as the "Overrule Committee." All copies of the petition
shall be uniform in size and style and shall include the complete text of
the ordinance, resolution or order adopted by the Council and the
names of the Overrule Committee.
C. The Overrule Committee shall have 30 days from the date of issuance of
appropriate petition blanks to cause the petition to be signed by 5% of
the registered voters of the City.
D. Each registered voter who signs a petition shall include a place of
residence, providing either the street and number or a description
sufficient to identify the place.
§ 101-17 CABLE TELEVISION § 105-2
96:119
Chapter 108
(RESERVED)
Chapter 114
DISORDERLY HOUSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 178. Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 114-1. Purpose.
The City Council has determined that it is in the public interest to address
the problems surrounding real properties whose owners, occupants, or
visitors disturb the peace and tranquility of the community, and the ability of
E. Each petition shall have attached to it, when filed with the City Clerk,
an affidavit executed by the circulator of the petition stating that he/she
personally circulated the attached petition; that it was at no time in the
hands of any person other than the circulator; the number of signatures
thereon; that all the signatures were affixed in the circulator's
presence; that the circulator believes them to be the genuine signatures
of the persons whose names they purport to be; and that each signer
had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance,
resolution or order adopted by the Council. Within 10 days after the
circulation period ends, the City Clerk shall certify to the City Council
as to whether the petition has been signed by not less than 5% of the
registered voters of the City. Should less than 5% of the registered
voters of the City sign the petition, the petition shall have no further
force or effect.
F. The Council shall call a public hearing to be held within 30 days of
receipt of the City Clerk's certification and shall submit the ordinance,
resolution or order to a referendum vote at the next regular election at
least 30 days after the public hearing. The ordinance, resolution or
order shall remain in effect during this period. (NOTE: A continuation of
the proposed ordinance42 was adopted with amendments at the
November 12, 2013, meeting.
G. An ordinance, resolution, or order shall not be repealed unless a
majority of those voting thereon shall have voted in the affirmative and
provided that the total number of votes cast for and against equals or
exceeds 25% of the total number votes cast in Sanford in the last
previous gubernatorial election.
42.Editor's Note: The "proposed ordinance" refers to the ordinance that adopted this chapter.
§ 105-2 SANFORD CODE § 114-1
96:120
residents of reasonable sensibilities to peacefully enjoy their own premises
in a manner that is free from loud, offensive, riotous, or otherwise disruptive
behavior or nuisance. The City Council has determined that, in its judgment,
failure to address this problem through reasonable regulation and
enforcement will be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare.
Therefore, in the exercise of its Home Rule Authority under the laws of
Maine, the City Council hereby enacts this zoning ordinance as a
determination of local needs and preferences, and out of concern for the
health, safety, and welfare of the City of Sanford.
§ 114-2. Scope; disorderly houses prohibited.
§ 114-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISORDERLY CONDUCT —
A. This chapter shall apply to the owner(s) and occupants of all residential
properties in the City of Sanford.
B. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or shall allow another to
occupy a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or rooming unit
(hereinafter jointly and severally "building") which is a disorderly house
as defined herein.
Shall include:
Any criminal activity that threatens the health, safety, or welfare,
or the right to peaceful enjoyment of their premises by Sanford
residents;
(1)
(2) Any drug-related criminal activity;
At least three violations of the City of Sanford Noise Control
Ordinance43 within any thirty-day period; or
(3)
Any other action, incident or behavior perpetrated, caused, or
permitted by any owner, occupant or visitor of a building located
in the City of Sanford, Maine, that is so loud, untimely (as to
hour of the day), offensive, riotous, or tending to otherwise disturb
other persons of reasonable sensibility in their peaceful enjoyment
of their premises such that a report is made to law enforcement
officials and/or to the City of Sanford Code Enforcement Officer
complaining of such conduct, action, incident, or behavior.
(4)
A.
It is not necessary that any such conduct, action, incident or behavior
falling within the scope of Subsection A(1) through (4) above constitute
a criminal offense, nor that criminal charges be filed against any person
or legal entity in order for disorderly conduct to be found.
B.
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 178, Noise.
§ 114-1 CABLE TELEVISION § 114-3
96:121
DISORDERLY HOUSE — Any building where disorderly conduct occurs; or
building which:
§ 114-4. Notice of hot spot designation.
Whenever a building has been visited by the police two or more times
in a thirty-day period in response to "disorderly conduct" as cited in the
definition of "disorderly house" in § 114-3, the Police Department or any
other agent designated by the City Manager shall notify the owner of the
said visits, at the address listed on the City's tax rolls. The City is under
no obligation to provide a notice of hot spot designation prior to notice of
disorderly house designation.
The police have visited a minimum number of times in any thirty-day
period, as set forth in Subsection C below, in response to situations
which are created by the owner, tenants, or owner's or tenants'
cohabitees, guests or invitees and which would have a tendency to
unreasonably disturb the community, the neighborhood or an ordinary
individual in the vicinity of said building, including, but not limited
to, loud music; boisterous parties; sounds emanating from within the
structure which are audible outside the building; loud noise or fights
within the building or in its vicinity involving tenants of the building or
their invitees (excluding incidents involving domestic violence); tenants
or invitees of tenants being intoxicated on public ways in the vicinity
of the building; other similar activities in the building or outside the
building itself; or
A.
The police have visited three or more times in any thirty-day period
in response to situations which are created by the owner, tenants, or
owner's or tenants' cohabitees, guests or invitees and involve the arrest
of the owners or tenants or their invitees for activities which constitute
either a crime or civil infraction under either state or local law, or
create a reasonable suspicion that illegal drug use or sales under 17-A
M.R.S.A., Chapter 45, or prostitution or public indecency under 17-A
M.R.S.A., Chapter 35, has occurred.
B.
The following table delineates the number of police visits per dwelling
size which create a disorderly house under Subsection A above:
Units per Building
Number of Visits by Police in
Any 30-Day Period
5 or fewer 3
6 to 10 4
11 or more 5
C.
The reason for the police visit shall be documented. Such
documentation may include sworn affidavits by named citizens which
may be sufficient to create a reasonable suspicion said illegal activity
has occurred.
D.
§ 114-3 SANFORD CODE § 114-5
96:122
§ 114-5. Notice of disorderly house designation.
§ 114-6. Enforcement.
A. Whenever a building has been identified as a disorderly house by the
City, the City shall send written notification of the events which form
the basis for that designation to the owner at the address listed on the
City's tax rolls. Such notice shall be sufficient for all legal purposes. The
notice shall require the owner to meet with representatives of the City
(including the Police Department) within five business days from the
date of the written notification, or such other time as is agreed upon by
the Police Chief or his or her designee, to identify ways in which the
problems which have been identified will be eliminated.
B. At the time of said meeting, the owner shall be obligated to provide to
the City the following documentation:
(1) A copy of the names of all tenants or other persons authorized to
reside or presently residing in the building and the units they
occupy.
(2) Copies of all leases with tenants residing in the building.
(3) Contracts with any property manager or other person responsible
for the orderly operation of the building.
(4) Accurate and up-to-date disclosure of documentation of building
ownership.
C. During the owner's meeting with the City, the owner shall agree to take
effective measures to address the disorderly house, which measures
shall be memorialized in a written agreement at the conclusion of the
meeting with the City and shall be implemented within one week of said
meeting unless another date is agreed upon by the City or its
representatives. Failure to enter into such an agreement at the
conclusion of the meeting will be deemed a violation of this chapter, and
the City may file a complaint in the district court seeking all
compensatory and equitable relief permitted by law and may suspend
or revoke rental housing licenses held by the owner as set forth in
§ 149-5.
A. Authority to enforce. If the owner refuses to agree to take effective
measures to address the disorderly house; takes ineffective measures to
address the disorderly house as determined by the City; fails to
implement the agreement reached with the City to address the
disorderly house; or if in the discretion of the City, the disorderly house
requires immediate posting, the City may condemn and post the
building against occupancy, and/or may file a legal action against the
owner seeking any and all damages and remedies to which it is entitled
pursuant to state and local laws.
§ 114-5 CABLE TELEVISION § 114-6
96:123
§ 114-7. Cost of service for responses to disorderly houses.
§ 114-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or failing or
neglecting or refusing to obey any order or notice of the Police Department
issued hereunder shall be subject to penalties as provided by state and local
laws. In addition, violation of the provisions of this chapter is a civil penalty
pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452, enforced by the Police Department or
Code Enforcement Officer. In any such proceeding, the City may order that
the activity in violation of the code abate, pay a penalty between $100 and
$2,500 per violation, per day, and pay the court costs, attorneys and expert
witness fees incurred by the City.
B. Notice of suit. If the City pursues legal action against an owner or
landlord for a disorderly house violation, notice shall be provided to the
tenants by the City. Notice shall be made within a reasonable time
following the service of the complaint upon the property owner. If a
tenant list has been previously provided by a landlord, notice shall be
made by regular mail to all known tenants in the building. If no tenant
list has been provided, notice shall be made by regular mail to all
occupants in each unit of the building.
C. Condemnation. In the event that condemnation is required to address
one or more disorderly house violations, the City shall provide notice to
tenants of the building. Notice shall be made within a reasonable time
following the City's election to condemn the building. Notice shall be
made by regular mail to all known tenants or to all occupants in each
unit in the building; and by posting a copy of said notice at the
premises.
A. Whenever the Police Department is required to respond to verified
complaints of disorderly conduct at any designated disorderly house, in
any one-year period, the owner of the disorderly house shall pay the
cost of service for each such response as follows:
(1) For each such response for service, the owner shall pay $100,
which shall be in addition to any penalty to which the owner may be
subject.
B. Failure to pay the cost of service within 30 days after demand therefor
shall subject the owner to the penalties provided by state and local
laws.
C. Charges which become payable hereunder shall be treated as liens on
the property in question and shall be enforced in accordance with the
provisions of state and local laws.
§ 114-6 SANFORD CODE § 114-9
96:124
§ 114-9. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of this
chapter now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
Chapter 116
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 90. Fire protection — See Ch. 128.
§ 116-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BOARD — City of Sanford, Zoning Board of Appeals.
CITY — City of Sanford, Maine.
ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR — Electrical inspector of the City or any deputy,
assistant or acting inspector designated by the City Manager.
JOURNEYMAN ELECTRICIAN — Any person who customarily performs
the work of installing or repairing electrical wires, conduits, fixtures,
equipment and other appliances in the employment of a master electrician
and who holds a valid journeyman electrician's license issued to him by the
Electricians Examining Board pursuant to 32 M.R.S.A. § 1101 et seq., as
amended.
LIMITED LICENSE — A limited electrician's license to install and service
the electrical work related to a specific type of electrically operated
equipment or to specific electrical installations issued by the Electricians
Examining Board pursuant to 32 M.R.S.A. § 1101 et seq., as amended.
MASTER ELECTRICIAN — Any person who customarily performs the work
of installing or repairing electrical wires, conduits, apparatus, fixtures,
equipment, appliances, and other electrical equipment and holding a valid
master electrician's license issued by the Electricians Examining Board
pursuant to 32 M.R.S.A. § 1101 et seq., as amended.
§ 116-2. Permit required; exceptions.
§ 114-9 CABLE TELEVISION § 116-2
96:125
A. An electrical permit is required for the installation, alteration, or
addition of any electrical wiring, device, appliance or equipment within
or on any building, structure or premises within the territorial limits of
the City of Sanford.
B. An electrical permit is required before the electrical utility company
may activate the electricity to a new permanent service, new temporary
electrical service, and new underground secondary service. Any utility
corporation must require proof of permit prior to connecting power to
the installation.
C. Permits shall be issued only to a master electrician or a limited license
electrician limited to the specific electrical installations authorized by
such licenses. A permit may be issued to homeowners to do wiring in a
single-family residence, provided that the following conditions are met:
(1) The homeowner must obtain a permit and have all work inspected.
(2) The single-family home must be owned by the individual doing the
electrical work and be that person's bona fide personal abode or
will be in the event that it is to be constructed.
D. Emergency work may be undertaken without first obtaining a permit
and a permit must be obtained on the next day the office is open
following commencement of such work.
E. Exceptions.
(1) No permit shall be required to do minor repair work such as, but
not limited to, the following:
(a) The replacement of existing fuses and circuit breakers by
licensed electricians and bona fide single-family homeowners;
(b) The replacement of existing switches, sockets, and outlets by
licensed electricians and bona fide single-family homeowners;
(c) Repairs to entrance service equipment by the utility; and
(d) Repairs or installation of radio and low voltage equipment.
(2) No permit shall be required for the replacement of lamps or the
connection of portable devices to suitable receptacles which have
been permanently installed. A "suitable receptacle" is hereby
defined as one having the proper wiring and capacity to fulfill the
electrical requirements of the portable device.
(3) No permit shall be required for the installation, alteration or repair
of wiring, devices, appliances or equipment for the operation of
signals or the transmission of intelligence through the facilities of
any duly chartered telephone, telegraph or radio company.
(4) No permit shall be required for the installation, alteration or
repairing of electric wiring, devices, appliances and equipment
§ 116-2 SANFORD CODE § 116-2
96:126
§ 116-3. Application for permit; issuance; transferability.
§ 116-4. Fees.
§ 116-5. Term of permits.
Any permit issued under this chapter shall become invalid if the authorized
work is not commenced within six months after the issuance of the permit,
if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of six
months after the time of commencing the work, or if the authorized work
is not completed within 12 months. The Electrical Inspector shall have the
authority to extend a permit for the commencement of authorized work
beyond the six months or the completion of authorized work beyond the
installed by a public utility for the use of such public utility in
the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electrical
energy; nor for the work of such utilities in installing, maintaining
and repairing on the premises of customers, service connections,
meters and other apparatus and appliances remaining the property
of such utilities after installation; nor for work by a public utility in
connection with the lighting of public or private ways, alleys, parks
or squares.
A. Application for an electrical permit, describing the work to be done,
shall be made in writing on standard forms provided by the City to the
Electrical Inspector by the person installing the work. The application
shall state the name and address of the person for whom the work is to
be done and shall be accompanied by such plans and specifications as
may be necessary to determine whether the installation as described
will be in conformity with the requirements of this chapter, and if the
applicant has complied with the provisions of this chapter, a permit for
such installation shall be issued.
B. The electrical permit, when issued, shall be for the installation as
described in the application, and no major deviation shall be made from
the installation so described without the written approval of the
Electrical Inspector.
C. No permit issued under this chapter shall be transferable except with
the written approval of the Electrical Inspector.
A. An electrical permit shall be issued only when the proper fee has been
paid. Any person who commences any work for which a permit is
required without having first obtained a permit shall pay a belated fee
in addition to the customary fee for the permit. A belated fee shall not
be assessed for emergency work.
B. The fees for permits under this chapter shall be paid by the applicant
for such permits in accordance with a fee schedule established by the
City Council.
§ 116-2 CABLE TELEVISION § 116-5
96:127
12 months when such a request is determined reasonable by the Electrical
Inspector.
§ 116-6. Proof of licensure.
Any person performing electrical work as regulated by this chapter and 32
M.R.S.A. § 1101 et seq., as amended, shall carry his or her electrical license
issued by the Electricians Examining Board and upon request shall display
it to the Electrical Inspector. Failure to display a license after a reasonable
opportunity to do so shall be deemed evidence of a violation of this chapter.
§ 116-7. Installation without permit.
Whenever any electrical work or wiring is found to have been installed
without a proper permit having first been secured, or not to be in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the Electrical Inspector shall
order the person having charge of that installation to have it corrected
immediately. If that person refuses or neglects to do so, the Inspector may
apply to an appropriate court for injunctive relief.
§ 116-8. Enforcement.
In accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4171 et al., the Electrical Inspector
shall enforce the provisions of this chapter so that wires, conduits, fixtures,
apparatus, equipment and other appliances carrying or using electricity
for light, heat, power, transmission of sound and communications purposes
shall be so installed, constructed and guarded as to reduce as far as
practicable the danger to life and property.
§ 116-9. Authorized entry for inspection.
In accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4172, the Electrical Inspector may enter
any building within the municipality with the permission of any person
having control of such building, or may apply to a court to do so in order to
discharge his or her official duties, for the purpose of making any inspection
of original installations of electrical equipment, alterations or additions
to existing electrical equipment, reinspection or test of the installation
or maintenance of electric wiring, devices, appliances and equipment
contained therein.
§ 116-10. Orders to correct violations.
A. Whenever the Electrical Inspector determines that there has been a
violation of any provision of this chapter, an order to correct such
violation shall be issued to the person (hereinafter "violator") owning or
having any control of any land, building, structure, sign, licensed or
permitted business or operation which is in violation.
B. Any notice under this chapter shall describe the violation, including a
reference to the chapter section violated, specify that reasonable period
within which the violation must be corrected, and state the potential
§ 116-5 SANFORD CODE § 116-10
96:128
§ 116-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to penalties and fines
pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 et seq., and 32 M.R.S.A. § 1105 et seq.
Each day a violation continues for more than 10 days after notice has been
served shall be assessed a fine of not less than $100 and not more than
$2,500. Fines shall be assessed for specific violations for each day such
violations continue.
§ 116-12. Emergency disconnection order.
§ 116-13. Stop-work order.
Upon notice from the Electrical Inspector that any work on any building,
structure, equipment, etc., is being undertaken contrary to the provisions
of this chapter or in an unsafe and dangerous manner, such work shall be
immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and shall be
served in accordance with § 116-10, Orders to correct violations, and shall
state the conditions under which work may be resumed.
§ 116-14. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by an order of the Electrical Inspector may request a
hearing before the Board by filing a written petition for such hearing with
the Code Enforcement Office within 10 days of the date of service of order.
consequence if the violation is not corrected. The notice shall also
advise the violator of any right to appeal to the Board with respect to
the Electrical Inspector's determination that a violation exists for which
the violator is responsible.
C. The Electrical Inspector may, upon evidence of noncompliance with an
order or decision of the Board request that appropriate legal action be
instituted.
A. Whenever the Electrical Inspector determines that an existing
electrical service, conductors, fixtures, equipment and any other
aspects of electrical systems pose a danger to life or property because
of defectiveness or defective installation or upon making an inspection
of an original installation or alteration or addition to existing lighting,
heating or power systems is defective, the Electrical Inspector may
require that the electrical service be disconnected to the building or
premises or that the electrical current be disconnected from such
addition or alteration.
B. The electrical service or current-shall not be reconnected until such
defects are remedied to the satisfaction of the Electrical Inspector.
§ 116-10 CABLE TELEVISION § 116-15
96:129
§ 116-15. Most stringent standards to apply.
Electrical work must be performed in accordance with the more stringent
standards of this chapter and 32 M.R.S.A. § 1101 et seq. When the Electrical
Inspector finds that electrical work is being performed contrary to this
requirement, he or she shall issue a stop-work order and shall notify the
permit holder that future violations of this section shall result in the notice
of violation and/or the initiation of a land use complaint and 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 4452 et seq., as amended.
§ 116-16. Inspection of wiring before concealment.
§ 116-17. Application for inspection; examination of work.
The electrician making the installation or alteration shall notify the
Electrical Inspector when the installation is ready for inspection. Upon
application being made for the inspection of any electrical work for which
a permit has been issued, the Electrical Inspector shall make a careful
examination of all such work in order to determine whether it has been done
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The Inspector shall inspect
the installation within a reasonable time so as not to cause undue delay in
the progress of the construction contract or installation. The Inspector shall
determine whether the installation complies with all applicable statutes,
ordinances and rules.
§ 116-18. Notice of defects.
In any case where defective work is found, the Electrical Inspector shall
furnish to the person to whom the permit for the work was issued an oral or
written notice of defect indicating the defective work and the nature of such
defects. A written notice shall be at the request of the person to whom the
permit was issued and shall be the method by which a reinspection process
shall be initiated.
§ 116-19. Certificate of approval.
When the Electrical Inspector finds the work for which a permit was issued
was completed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, the
Electrical Inspector shall record such findings and, when required, shall
issue in writing a certificate of approval therefor, which shall identify the
A. An inspection is required before the electrical wiring is enclosed. It
shall be unlawful for any person to cover or conceal, or cause to be so
covered or concealed, any wiring for which a permit has been issued or
is required before such wiring has been inspected by the Electrical
Inspector.
B. All new work shall be inspected before it is concealed by wall or ceiling
paneling. The electrical permit holder or owner, or both, shall be held
responsible if the inspector has not been notified for an inspection. The
inspector may insist on exposing such concealed work.
§ 116-15 SANFORD CODE § 116-19
96:130
premises and the work covered by the permit and shall show that such work
has been properly completed.
§ 116-20. Installation standards.
All electrical installations shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter and the approved standards for safety to life and property. Unless
otherwise provided by this chapter, conformity with NFPA 70 (National
Fire Protection Association), National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition shall
be deemed as conforming with approved standards for safety to life and
property with the following amendments:
A. 200.6 Means of Identifying Grounded Conductors.
(D) Grounded Conductors of Different Systems. Where grounded
conductors of different systems are installed in the same raceway,
cable box, auxiliary gutter, or other type of enclosure, each
grounded conductor shall be identified by system. Identification
that distinguishes each system grounded conductor shall be
permitted by one of the following means:
(1) One system grounded conductor shall have an outer covering
conforming to 200.6(A) or 200.6(B).
(2) The grounded conductor(s) of other systems shall have a
different outer covering conforming to 200.6(A) or 200.6(B)
or by an outer covering of white or gray with a readily
distinguishable colored strip other than green running along
the insulation.
(3) Other and different means of identification as allowed by
200.6(A) or (B) that will distinguish each system grounded
conductor.
The means of identification shall be permanently posted where the
conductors of different systems originate.
B. 210.5 Identification for branch circuits.
(C) Identification of Underground Conductors. Underground
conductors shall be identified in accordance with 210.5(C)(1), (2)
and (3).
(3) Posting of Identification Means. The method utilized for
conductors originating within each branch-circuit panel board
or similar branch-circuit distribution equipment shall be
permanently posted at each branch-circuit panelboard or
similar branch-circuit distribution equipment.
C. 215.12 Identification for Feeders.
(C) Identification of Ungrounded Conductors.
(1) Feeders Supplied from More Than One Nominal Voltage
System.
§ 116-19 CABLE TELEVISION § 116-20
96:131
§ 116-21. Aluminum wire.
No copper-clad aluminum wire smaller than size No. 6 A.W.G. may be used
to conduct electricity. Sizes larger than No. 6 A.W.G. may be used with
mechanical lugs and connectors approved for this purpose by the Electrical
Inspector.
§ 116-22. Service entrance equipment.
All new single-family residences shall have an entrance switch rated no
smaller than one-hundred-ampere capacity and dwelling units may have an
entrance switch rated no larger than two-hundred-ampere capacity.
(b) Posting of Identification Means. The method utilized for
conductors originating with each feeder panel at each
branch-circuit panel board or similar branch-circuit
distribution equipment.
D. 334.10 Uses permitted.
(3) Other structures permitted to be of Types III, IV, and V construction
except as prohibited in 334.12.
E. 334.12 Uses not permitted.
(A) Types NM, NMC, and NMS cables shall not be permitted as
follows:
(2) Exposed in dropped or suspended ceilings I other than oneand
two-family and multifamily dwelling is hereby deleted.
F. 338.12 Uses not permitted.
(B) Underground Service-Entrance Cable.
(1) For interior wiring of branch circuits and feeders originating
and terminating within the same building.
(2) For aboveground installations except where USE cable
emerges from the ground and is terminated in an enclosure at
a location acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction and
the cable is protected in accordance with 300.5(D).
G. 702.4 Capacity and rating.
(B) System Capacity.
(2) Automatic Transfer Equipment. For other than single-family
dwellings, where automatic transfer equipment is used, an
optional standby system shall comply with (2)(a) or (2)(b).
A. For more than one family or multiple residences, an entrance switch
conforming to the National Electrical Code requirements shall be
considered the minimum.
§ 116-20 SANFORD CODE § 116-22
96:132
§ 116-23. Fustat plugs or circuit breakers required.
§ 116-24. Supports for aboveground wires required; building
owner's consent required.
§ 116-25. Maintenance of support structures.
Every person owning, leasing or operating wires as described in this
chapter shall, within 48 hours after notice served by the Inspector, make
such substitution or repairs of posts, supports, crossarms, or stays for the
safe carrying of such wires as may be required by the Inspector.
§ 116-26. Disposition of scraps; unused coils and loose ends.
No person shall permit pieces of wires to be left on the surface of any
street or sidewalk; nor permit unused coils or loose ends of wires to remain
attached to any crossarm or posts for more than 24 hours.
Chapter 120
FEES
B. In cases of multiple apartments where the main switch is deemed
inaccessible by the Fire or Electrical Inspector, an accessible location
will be required.
A. It is required on all new and alteration work to use tamperproof fustat
plugs or circuit breakers to eliminate overfusing on branch circuits.
B. The Electrical Inspector shall be authorized in cases of oversized fusing
to require that fustat or circuit breaker panels replace existing plug
fuse panels.
A. All wires when placed above the surface of the ground shall be
suspended from poles or buildings, or other supports to be maintained
by the persons using such wires.
B. No wire shall be suspended from or attached to any building for the
purpose of conducting electricity unless by permission of the owner of
such building.
§ 116-22 CABLE TELEVISION § 116-26
96:133

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 120-1. Applicability; purpose.
§ 120-2. (Reserved)
A. This article applies to all fees charged by the City of Sanford.
B. It is the intent and purpose to establish fees which bear a reasonable
relationship to the cost incurred by the City in the administration and
enforcement of the Code and other applicable laws and regulations.
(1) To accomplish such purpose:
(a) All fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid in
advance at the time of application therefor.
(b) All fees are nonrefundable regardless of whether a license or
permit is issued.
(2) No license or permit may be issued until all overdue property taxes,
overdue business taxes, overdue fees, or other fines, charges,
penalties or interest owing to the City have been paid, including
payment of the City's expenditure for notification of public
hearings, required by State or local regulation, payment of the
City's expenditure for background checks as required by State or
local regulation, and payment of the City's expenditure for
emergency services as may be necessary for the specific license or
permit.
§ 120-1 CABLE TELEVISION § 120-2
96:135

ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 120-3. Administrative fees.
Fee schedule, administrative:
Administration Fee
Statutory or Code
Reference
Copying and scanning Ch. 120
Letter: black/white $1 per sheet
Letter: color $1.50 per sheet
Engineering size $10 per sheet
Public hearing $85 per advertisement
per day
Ch. 149; Ch. 120
Notarize unrelated
document
Ch. 120
Resident $5 per document
Nonresident $10 per document
§ 120-4. (Reserved)
§ 120-3 CABLE TELEVISION § 120-4
96:137

ARTICLE III
Business Licensing
§ 120-5. Business license fees: Category 1.
Fee schedule, business license Category 1 (administrative approval):
Category 1 Licenses
(Administrative
Approval) Fee
Statutory or Code
Reference
Alcohol- and drug-free
house
$100 per year Ch. 149, Art. XIII
Auctioneer, nonresident
certificate
$10 per day or $25 for
3 days
§ 149-1.4
B.Y.O.B. function $25 per event Ch. 74, Art. III
Brewery, distillery,
winery
$100 per year Ch. 149, Art. VII
Closing-out sale $50 per 60 days Ch. 149, Art. VIII
Coin-operated
entertainment device,
electronic video
machine, arcade device
$50 per year Ch. 149, Art. III
Flea market $100 per year Ch. 256
Flea market vendor $25 per year Ch. 256
Kennel $50 per year Ch. 78, Art. IX; 7
M.R.S.A. §§ 3931
through 3950-A
Lodging establishment $50 per year Ch. 155
Massage therapist $50 per year Ch. 164
Off-premises catering
permit
$25 per application Ch. 149, Art. I
Pawnbroker $300 per year Ch. 193
Peddler $50 per year or $25 per
day
Ch. 149, Art. IX
Places of assembly $100 per year Ch. 149, Art. X
Rental housing See § 149-5.7 Ch. 149, Art. V
Residential care facility $50 per year Ch. 149, Art. XIV
Salvage collector $25 per year Ch. 213
Salvage dealer $500 per year Ch. 213
Secondhand dealer $200 per year Ch. 193
§ 120-5 CABLE TELEVISION § 120-5
96:139
Category 1 Licenses
(Administrative
Approval) Fee
Statutory or Code
Reference
Sport shooting ranges $100 per year Ch. 149, Art. XI
Tattoo artist, body
piercing
$200 per year Ch. 149, Art. XII
Taxicab See § 232-23 Ch. 232
Tobacco retailer $25 per year Ch. 215, Art. II
Vacant building See § 149-6.8 Ch. 149, Art. VI
Victualer $75 per year Ch. 209
Waste hauler $500 per year Ch. 220
Yard sale permit $10 per day Ch. 256
§ 120-6. Business license fees; Category 2.
Fee schedule, business license Category 2 (City Council approval):
Category 2 Licenses
(City Council
Approval) Fee
Statutory or Code
Reference
Beano-bingo
application
$100 per application Ch. 149, Art. I; 13-A
M.R.S.A. § 311 et seq.
Bottle club $100 per year Ch. 74, Art. II
Circus, carnival,
temporary exhibitions
$200 per day Ch. 149, Art. X
Games of chance
application
$65 per application Ch. 149, Art. I; 17
M.R.S.A. § 1831 et seq.
Liquor license
application and
transfers (Tier I)
$200 per application Ch. 149, Art. I; 28-A
M.R.S.A. §§ 653 et seq.
and 1051
Liquor license
application and
transfers (Tier II)
$400 per application Ch. 149, Art. I; 28-A
M.R.S.A. §§ 653 et seq.
and 1051
Medical marijuana
production facility
$1,500 per year Ch. 149, Art. IV
Mental health and
abuse clinics
$500 per year Ch. 149, Art. II
Special amusement
permit
$100 per year Ch. 74, Art. I
§ 120-7. (Reserved)
§ 120-5 SANFORD CODE § 120-7
96:140
ARTICLE IV
Building and Building Regulation
§ 120-8. Building permit fees.
Fee schedule, building permits:
Building Permits Fee
Statutory or Code
Reference
Application (minimum fee) § 90-5
Owner-occupied singlefamily
dwelling
$25
All other applicants $75
Zoning determination $75 § 90-5
Building The greater of: § 90-5
$0.25 per square
foot; or
$8 per $1,000 of
work
Demolition $10 per $1,000 of
work
§ 90-5
Sign $25 plus $1 per square
foot
§ 90-5
Curb cut $100 § 280-14.5
Parking lot/paving $100 § 90-5
Certificate of occupancy § 90-5
Business occupancy $150 per unit
Residential occupancy $50 per unit
Permit obtained after work
has commenced
2 times the fee § 90-5
§ 120-9. Electrical permit fees.
Fee schedule, electrical permits:
Electrical Permits Fee
Statutory or
Code
Reference
Application (minimum fee) $75 § 116-4
Amp service: § 116-4
Up to 199 amps $50
200 to 599 amps $75
§ 120-8 CABLE TELEVISION § 120-9
96:141
Electrical Permits Fee
Statutory or
Code
Reference
600 amps and up $85
Temporary service $50
Subpanel $25
Generator and transfer switch $25
Solar/wind, hydro/fuel cell
system
$85
Wiring/outlets: § 116-4
Each outlet (light switch,
receptacle)
$0.50 each (no fee
for up to 5 outlet
replacements)
Smoke detector $5 each
Ground-fault, arc-fault breakers
and devices
$5 each
Appliances: § 116-4
Electric range, countertop range,
oven, electric dryer
$10 each
Dishwasher, disposal, clothes
washer
$7.50 each
Mechanical: § 116-4
HVAC and gas/oil-fired boiler
wiring
$25
Electric/gas/oil water heater $25 each
Electric heater per thermostat $5 each
Miscellaneous: § 116-4
Mobile and modular homes
(prewired at factory) inspection
at interconnection of sections
$15
Swimming pool/hot tub/Jacuzzi $75 each
Each air conditioner, condenser,
mini split heat pump
$25 each
Electrical motors: § 116-4
Motor up to 9 horsepower $5 each
Motor greater than 9 horsepower $10 each
Alarm system (except fire alarm
and pull stations)
$35 § 116-4
Sign $45 § 116-4
§ 120-9 SANFORD CODE § 120-9
96:142
Electrical Permits Fee
Statutory or
Code
Reference
Hazardous or classified wiring
systems
$85 § 116-4
Reinspection fee for failed
inspection after 2 failed
inspections
$50 § 116-4
Permit obtained after work has
commenced (belated fee)
$100 plus fee § 116-4
§ 120-10. Plumbing permit fees.
Fee schedule, plumbing permits:
Plumbing Permits Fee
Statutory or Code
Reference
Application (minimum fee) $40 § 90-5
Each additional fixture $10 § 90-5
Hook-up to public sewer $10 § 90-5
Hook-up to existing
subsurface system
$10 § 90-5
Piping relocation with no new
fixtures
$10 § 90-5
Permit transfer $10 § 90-5
Surcharge fee $15 § 90-5
§ 120-11. Subsurface wastewater disposal system fees.
A. Fee schedule, disposal system permits:
Disposal System Permits Fee
Statutory or
Code
Reference
Complete disposal system and
variances:
§ 90-5
Engineered system $200
Nonengineered system $250
Primitive system $100
Separate grey waste disposal
field
$35
Seasonal conversion permit $50
§ 120-9 CABLE TELEVISION § 120-11
96:143
§ 120-12. (Reserved)
§ 120-13. Fire safety fees.
Fee schedule, fire safety:
Fire Safety Fee
Statutory or Code
Reference
State of Maine
construction permit
$0.05 per square foot
Fire alarm/sprinkler
system
$25 minimum
Commercial $8 per $1,000 of work
One- and two-family $8 per $1,000 of work
Fixed fire suppression
system
General plan review $75 plus puff test
Gas station plan review $200 plus puff test
Retest $75 per test
Disposal System Permits Fee
Statutory or
Code
Reference
First time system variance $20
Permits for separate parts of
disposal system:
§ 90-5
Alternative toilet (only) $50
Disposal field only (engineered
system)
$150
Disposal field only
(nonengineered system)
$150
Treatment tank only
(nonengineered system)
$150
Treatment tank (engineered
system)
$80
Holding tank $100
Other components (complete
pump station, piping, other)
$30
B. Late permit fee. A person who starts construction without first
obtaining a subsurface wastewater disposal permit shall pay double the
permit fee indicated in Subsection A listed above.
§ 120-11 SANFORD CODE § 120-13
96:144
Fire Safety Fee
Statutory or Code
Reference
Special event permit $75 per event
Fireworks permit $75 per event
Blasting permit $75 per job
§ 120-14. through § 120-15. (Reserved)
§ 120-16. Enforcement fees.
Fee schedule, enforcement:
Enforcement Fee
Statutory or Code
Reference
Stop-work order removal § 90-8
No work completed during stopwork
order
$150
Work completed in violation of
stop-work order
$300
Reinspection fee for failed
inspection after 2 failed
inspections:
§ 90-4
First $50
Second $100
Third and subsequent $200
Securing building $500 § 90-31
§ 120-13 CABLE TELEVISION § 120-16
96:145

ARTICLE V
Appeals
§ 120-17. Appeal fees.
Fee schedule, appeal applications:
Appeals Fee
Statutory or Code
Reference
Administrative appeal application Board of Appeals
Owner-occupied single-family
dwelling
$100
All other applicants $250
Variance application Board of Appeals
Owner-occupied single-family
dwelling
$50
All other applicants $150
Notice of nonenforcement of land
use violation
$100 Board of Appeals
§ 120-17 CABLE TELEVISION § 120-17
96:147
Chapter 125
FIREARMS AND FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets, sidewalks and public areas — See Ch.
226.
§ 125-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREWORKS —
§ 125-2. Prohibited acts.
Any:
(1) Combustible or explosive composition or substance;
(2) Combination of explosive compositions or substances;
Other article that was prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or
detonation, including blank cartridges or toy cannons in which
explosives are used, the type of balloon that requires fire
underneath to propel it, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman
candles, bombs, rockets, wheels, colored fires, fountains, mines,
serpents and other fireworks of like construction;
(3)
(4) Fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound; or
Tablets or other devices containing any explosive substance or
flammable compound.
(5)
A.
The term "fireworks" does not include toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns
or other devices in which paper caps or plastic caps containing 25/100
grains or less of explosive compound are used if they are constructed
so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place
for the explosion, toy pistol paper caps or plastic caps that contain less
than 20/100 grains of explosive mixture, sparklers that do not contain
magnesium chlorates or perchlorates or signal, antique or replica
cannons if no projectile is fired.
B.
A. Firearms. [Amended 8-19-2014 by Order No. 14-122.12]
(1) No person shall fire any cannon, gun, rifle, revolver, toy pistol or
firearm of any kind in the area beginning at the intersection of
Route 4 and Route 109 and extending in a northwesterly direction
along Route 109 to the intersection with Deering Neighborhood
§ 120-17 SANFORD CODE § 125-2
96:148
§ 125-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of these provisions shall, on conviction thereof, be
fined as follows:
Chapter 128
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 90. Firearms and fireworks — See Ch. 125.
Road and including all property extending out 3/4 mile on either
side of Route 109. The following are exceptions to this section:
(a) Approved indoor firearms ranges.
(b) Military funerals or reviews.
(c) Memorial events.
(d) Law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties.
(e) In the destruction of a dangerous animal as authorized by law.
(2) Nothing in this section shall infringe upon the statutory right of a
person to act in self-defense as set forth in the Maine Revised
Statutes.
B. Fireworks. No person shall discharge any fireworks within the
corporate boundaries of the Town of Sanford. Nothing in this section
shall be so construed as to prohibit a public display of fireworks under
supervision of the municipal officers of the Town.
A. First violation: $500.
B. Second violation: $750.
C. Third violation: $1,000.
§ 125-2 CABLE TELEVISION § 125-3
96:149

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 128-1. Sanford Fire Department Office of Fire Marshal;
enforcement; inspectors. [Amended 7-18-2017 by Order No.
17-83.06]
The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Sanford Fire Department
Office of the Fire Marshal or the Building Official. The Fire Department
Office of the Fire Marshal has been established and operated under the
supervision of the Chief of the Department. The Chief of the Department
may detail such members as inspectors as shall from time to time be
necessary for the enforcement of said code. (25 M.R.S.A. § 2361)
§ 128-2. Fire Marshal within Fire Department; duties.
The position of Fire Marshal is a position within the Fire Department. The
Fire Marshal is primarily responsible for enforcement of the Sanford Fire
Prevention Code and other such duties as are assigned by the Chief of the
Fire Department. (25 M.R.S.A. §§ 2352, 2353, 2360 and 2361)
§ 128-3. Notice of violation; penalties for noncompliance. [Amended
7-18-2017 by Order No. 17-83.06]
A. Any person, being the owner or tenant or having control of any property
or structure or part thereof, who violates any of the provisions of the
said Fire Prevention Code and/or another section of this article or who
fails to conform to any of the provisions thereof, after having received a
ten-day notice of such violation, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Pursuant to 25 M.R.S.A. § 2359, an
owner or occupant of a building who refuses to permit a Building
Official to enter the building or willfully obstructs the Building Official
in the inspection of the building must be penalized in accordance with
30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. The Fire Marshal, Chief of the Department,
Building Official, or a person designated by the Chief of the Department
may cause a notice of violation or order to be served on the person
responsible for the violation or noncompliance condition in violation of
the provisions hereof, or in violation of a plan or of a detail statement
made with a permit application. Such order shall direct the
discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of
the violation.
B. The Fire Marshal, Chief of the Department, Building Official or a person
designated by the Chief of the Department may contact a law
enforcement officer to issue a civil summons or may request that the
City Legal Department institute the appropriate proceedings in law or
in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation.
C. Such violations shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $2,500 for a specific violation as set forth in the City of
Sanford Code and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452, together with such injunctive
§ 128-1 CABLE TELEVISION § 128-3
96:151
§ 128-4. Board of Appeals. [Amended 7-18-2017 by Order No.
17-83.06]
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall act as the Fire Prevention Code Board
of Appeals in order to hear appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations
made by the Fire Marshal or Building Official relative to application and
interpretation of this code. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
be submitted as otherwise set forth in City Code Chapter 280, Zoning,
regarding administrative appeals, subject to the payment of any fees as
may be determined by the municipal officers from time to time (§§ 280-20
through 280-23 and §§ 280-28 through 280-3045).
§ 128-5. (Reserved)46
§ 128-6. Knox-Box® program.
The Knox-Box® program in the Town of Sanford shall be used for access to
buildings for emergency purposes only. The Town of Sanford Fire Marshal
shall serve as the administrator for the Knox-Box® program, as defined by
the Knox Company. No person shall make application, place into service, or
continue use of any Knox branded product without the written permission of
the Sanford Fire Marshal or designee. All Knox products found in violation
of this provision shall be removed and discontinued.
relief or administrative remedies as may be available. Each and every
day such a violation continues after such ten-day notice period shall
constitute a separate offense. (§ 280-11;44 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 and 25
M.R.S.A. § 2358).
44.Editor's Note: See now § 280-3-6.
45.Editor's Note: See now §§ 280-6-1 through 280-6-4 and §§ 280-8-1 through 280-8-3.
46.Editor’s Note: Former § 128-5, Board member conflicts of interest, was repealed 7-18-2017
by Order No. 17-83.06.
§ 128-3 SANFORD CODE § 128-6
96:152
ARTICLE II
Fire Alarms
§ 128-7. Resetting of alarms and sprinkler systems.
No person shall reset a fire alarm or sprinkler system that has caused the
Fire Department to respond without approval of the Fire Department.
§ 128-8. Connection of fire alarm reporting equipment; time limit
for receipt of alarms.
§ 128-9. Fire alarm modification.
No fire alarm system, once installed and operational, shall be modified or
extended without the prior approval of the Sanford Fire Marshal; neither
shall such a system be removed, rendered inoperable, disconnected from
the supervisory system, or interrupted in any manner, without the prior
knowledge of the Sanford Fire Marshal. The person(s) engaged in such
work shall be licensed by the State of Maine appropriately or shall be
ordered to cease and desist. The Sanford Fire Marshal shall be responsible
for maintaining the vendor registration application process and rules for the
installation schedule for the Town of Sanford.
§ 128-10. False alarm penalties.47 [Added 11-24-2015 by Order No.
15-143.10]
A. When Town ordinance, the National Fire Prevention Code, or other
regulation requires that a building or structure be equipped with a fire
alarm, such system shall include approved supervisory equipment
which shall transmit an alarm to an approved receiver. Such
supervision shall be by connection to a private alarm station that has
been approved as a fire alarm monitoring service by Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc., and accepted by the Sanford Fire Department Office
of the Fire Marshal. (NFPA 72)
B. The time required from initiation of the fire alarm to receipt of alarm by
the Fire Department shall not exceed 180 seconds, total.
A. False fire alarms disrupt the community, cause complacency and
business down time due to evacuations, and divert responders away
from genuine emergencies, which could potentially lead to loss of life
and property. The main reason for false alarms in the City of Sanford is
lack of maintenance to the alarm systems. This section will hold
property owners accountable for the maintenance of their alarm
systems. This section will not pertain to actual alarms that operated
correctly for proper reasons.
47.Editor's Note: With the addition of this section, former §§ 128-10 through 128-31 were
renumbered as §§ 128-11 through 128-32, respectively.
§ 128-7 CABLE TELEVISION § 128-10
96:153
(1) First and second responses. For the first and second responses by
the Sanford Fire Department to a false alarm within any calendar
year, the authority having jurisdiction (AHJ) shall give written
notice of the second false alarm to the alarm user within 10 days.
(2) Third response. For the third response by the Sanford Fire
Department to a false alarm within any calendar year, the AHJ shall
give written notice of the third false alarm to the alarm user within
10 days. The alarm user shall file a written report with the AHJ
within seven days thereafter stating the cause of the false alarm, if
known, and describing the corrective action taken. In addition the
alarm user may be required to pay an alarm penalty fee of $50.
(3) Fourth, fifth and sixth responses. For the fourth, fifth and sixth
responses by the Sanford Fire Department to a false alarm within
any calendar year, the alarm user shall pay a false alarm penalty fee
of $250 per event. In the case of equipment failure, the user must
file with the AHJ, within seven days of notice, a signed statement by
a qualified private alarm agent that the alarm system has been
inspected and is in proper working order. In case of human error or
other cause, the alarm user shall file a written report with the AHJ
describing the corrective action taken.
(4) Seventh and subsequent responses. For the seventh and
subsequent responses by the Sanford Fire Department to a false
alarm within any calendar year, the alarm user shall pay the false
alarm penalty of $500 per event. The alarm user's property may be
shut down until proper repairs are done should the AHJ deem the
property a safety issue to the public or employees of the property.
(5) Written notice deemed complete. Written notice by the AHJ shall be
complete upon leaving such notice at the property at the time of
response by the Fire Department or mailing such notice to the
alarm user at the user's last known address within 10 days by first
class mail.
B. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
AHJ: AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION — The Fire Chief or his or
her designee responsible for the enforcement of the fire codes for the
City of Sanford.
CALENDAR YEAR — January 1 through December 31 of each year.
§ 128-10 SANFORD CODE § 128-10
96:154
ARTICLE III
Fire Sprinklers and Water Supplies for Firefighting48
§ 128-11. Sprinkler systems required.
§ 128-12. Maintenance of sprinkler systems.
Occupied or unoccupied buildings or portions thereof of any construction
shall maintain all sprinklers and standpipe systems and all component parts
in a workable condition at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any owner
or occupant to reduce the effectiveness of the protection these systems
provide, except that this shall not prohibit the owner or occupant from
temporarily reducing or discontinuing the protection where necessary to
make tests, repairs, alterations, or additions. The Sanford Fire Marshal
shall be notified before such tests, repairs, alterations, or additions are
started. Nothing of a lesser nature in the NFPA and/or State of Maine
installation standards shall negate anything in this section.
§ 128-13. Fire protection water supply for subdivisions. [Amended
12-16-2014 by Order No. 14-186.12]
Any subdivision, as dictated by the rules of City of Sanford Code Chapter
275, with more than three lots shall install a reliable water supply for
firefighting. If a public hydrant is not available within 1,000 feet of each
lot, the subdivision shall be responsible for an adequate fire protection
water supply in accordance with NFPA 1231. Acceptable methods include,
but are not limited to, underground storage reservoirs with an approved
dry hydrant or approved residential sprinkler system in each principal
A. All buildings constructed in the Town of Sanford after the effective date
of this section or amendment thereto shall conform to the following:
buildings designed or used to house three or more families or which are
greater than three stories in height, of any construction, shall be
equipped with sprinkler systems that meet the current NFPA and State
of Maine installation standards.
B. Any building renovated so as to house three or more families shall
comply.
C. Any building or series of buildings joined together by any means that
will house three or more families shall comply.
D. For renovations only, the requirements of a sprinkler system may be
waived by the Fire Chief or his designee when alternative fire safety
measures, such as hardwired smoke alarms and fire-rated doors and/or
walls, are to be employed if in the opinion of the Fire Chief or his
designee such alternative fire safety measures will achieve
substantially the same measure of protection for the occupants.
48.Editor's Note: The provisions regarding sprinkler systems in this article are derived from
former Ch. 90, Building Construction and Fire Prevention, § 90-3.
§ 128-11 CABLE TELEVISION § 128-13
96:155
building in accordance with NFPA 13D. Individual property owners and/
or homeowners' associations shall be responsible for maintenance of the
protection system after the first five years.
A. If fire hydrants are not provided and the Planning Board determines
that fire protection water supply is needed, a minimum storage capacity
of 10,000 gallons plus 2,000 gallons per lot of principal building or such
other amount required by the Fire Chief shall be provided. Tanks will be
installed in accordance with the install drawings provided in this code.
(See Appendix A.49) The Town Engineer and the Fire Chief shall approve
the design of all storage facilities. All storage facilities will be
warranted for a period of five years to ensure that it functions in the
manner it was designed for. The Sanford Fire Marshal shall check the
facilities once a quarter for 20 quarters. A warranty fee will be paid to
the City of Sanford to guarantee the facilities will hold water. Fees will
be as follows: $25,000 for developments of three to eight lots.
Developments over eight lots up to 20 lots will incur a fee of $25,000
plus $2,500 per a lot. Any developments with more than 20 lots will
have to install a second fire protection supply. A management fee of
$250 per lot will be assessed to the water holding tank fee. Fees will be
released to the developer minus the management fee after five years of
proven fire protection (tank holding water and functioning properly)
and will be released only after the Sanford Fire Marshal does a final
inspection.
B. NPFA 13D sprinkler systems subject to review and approval of the
Sanford Fire Marshal may be utilized for fire protection.
49.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 128-13 SANFORD CODE § 128-13
96:156
ARTICLE IV
Heating Appliances50
§ 128-14. Use of oil-burning equipment.
The Sanford Fire Marshal finds that improperly installed or serviced
appliances burning oil for fuel and used for the heating of buildings, heating
of water, or cooking are dangerous to persons and property. The use of such
equipment shall be discontinued.
§ 128-15. Access to records.
The Sanford Fire Marshal shall be duly authorized to have access at
reasonable times to the records of all suppliers of oil-burning equipment in
this Town for the purpose of ascertaining to whom such equipment has been
sold or supplied.
§ 128-16. Oil burner and storage tank standards.
No oil-burning equipment and no fuel storage tank to be used in connection
therewith shall be installed, maintained or used in this Town unless it
shall conform to the standards established by the State of Maine Oil and
Solid Fuel Board and the Propane and Natural Gas Board pursuant to the
provisions of 32 M.R.S.A. Ch. 33, as amended, and with the standards
herein prescribed, whichever shall be higher. No such equipment or storage
tank shall be installed, maintained or used which shall be unsafe or which
shall endanger life or property.
§ 128-17. Application for installation certificate; fee.
No person, firm or corporation shall install any such equipment or tank
without application for a certificate therefor having first been made to
the Sanford Fire Marshal. Such application shall describe the installation
to be made, the premises upon which it is to be made, the name of the
person, firm or corporation making such installation, such installer's license
numbers by the State of Maine Oil and Solid Fuel Board and the Propane
and Natural Gas Board, and such other matters as may be required by the
Sanford Fire Marshal. Application for such certificate shall be in writing,
signed either by the owner of the premises upon which such equipment or
tank is to be installed or by the person who shall make such installation. The
fee for such certificate shall be $1.50, payable to the Town of Sanford.
§ 128-18. Inspections.
After such equipment or tank has been installed and within 72 hours after
notice thereof from the applicant, the Sanford Fire Marshal shall inspect
the said installation. No person, firm or corporation shall use any such
50.Editor's Note: The provisions regarding oil-burning equipment in this article are derived
from former Ch. 90, Building Construction and Fire Prevention, Art. II.
§ 128-14 CABLE TELEVISION § 128-18
96:157
equipment or tank, or maintain the same after installation, until inspected
by the Sanford Fire Marshal.
§ 128-19. Existing installations.
No inspection shall be required for the maintenance or use of any such
equipment or tank where such equipment or tank was installed prior to the
effective date of this article. All such equipment and tanks shall conform to
the standards set in § 91-16 hereof.
§ 128-20. Enforcement.
If such equipment or tank should not comply with the standards set in
§ 91-16 hereof, the Sanford Fire Marshal should notify the installer and
set forth wherein the installation does not meet the specifications of the
standards. The installer shall have 10 days after date of notification to
comply with the standards in § 91-16 hereof. If, at the end of the specified
time limit, the Sanford Fire Marshal shall determine that the installation is
still in violation of the standards as set forth in § 91-16, he shall give written
notice that such equipment or tank does not conform to the standards set
forth in § 91-16 hereof to the State of Maine Oil and Solid Fuel Board and
the Propane and Natural Gas Licensing Board.
§ 128-21. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article shall be punished by a fine as set forth in 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day of violation shall be a separate offense.
§ 128-18 SANFORD CODE § 128-21
96:158
ARTICLE V
Building Construction and Review
§ 128-22. Building permits.
All building permits, except for those issued for one- and two-family
dwellings, shall be issued by the Sanford Codes Enforcement Officer after
review and approval by the Sanford Fire Marshal. (NFPA 1-1.7.12)
§ 128-23. Occupancy permits.
All occupancy permits, except for those issued for one- and two-family
dwellings, shall be issued by the Sanford Codes Enforcement Officer after
review and approval by the Sanford Fire Marshal. (25 M.R.S.A. § 2357;
NFPA 1-1.7.13)
§ 128-24. Construction plan review.
The Sanford Fire Marshal shall conduct a construction plan review, as based
upon the provisions of the Sanford Fire Prevention Code, on any public
building changing use or obtaining a building permit, with the exception
of one- and two-family dwellings, which shall be handled by the Codes
Enforcement Officer. The Town of Sanford shall remain in compliance with
25 M.R.S.A. § 2448. The Sanford Fire Marshal shall be responsible for
maintaining a permit application process. (25 M.R.S.A. § 2448; NFPA
1-1.7.11)
§ 128-22 CABLE TELEVISION § 128-24
96:159

ARTICLE VI
Adoption of Codes
§ 128-25. Adoption of codes by reference. [Amended 7-18-2017 by
Order No. 17-83.06]
A. In accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3003, the following basic codes,
which relate either in whole or in part to fire prevention, are in effect in
the City of Sanford:
(1) NFPA 1 Uniform Fire Code, as amended by the State of Maine Fire
Marshal, using the current version as adopted by the State of
Maine Fire Marshal. (25 M.R.S.A. §§ 2361, 2452 and 2465; 5
M.R.S.A. §§ 8001 through 11008)
(2) NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, as amended by the State of Maine Fire
Marshal, using the current version as adopted by the State of
Maine Fire Marshal. (25 M.R.S.A. §§ 2361, 2452 and 2465; 5
M.R.S.A. §§ 8001 through 11008)
B. Copies of the above codes shall be kept on file in the office of the
Building Official for examination by the public.
§ 128-25 CABLE TELEVISION § 128-25
96:161

ARTICLE VII
Fire Lanes
§ 128-26. Establishment in Town.
§ 128-27. Maintenance; identification; location of signs.
A. Each application for residential or nonresidential approval, excluding
one- and two-family dwellings, and each application for site plan review
submitted to the Planning Board shall be reviewed by the Sanford Fire
Marshal to determine the location of such fire lanes as are necessary
under this article and to report his findings and designation of fire lanes
to the Planning Board, in writing. Findings and designations of fire
lanes shall be made a part of the record of proceedings before the
Planning Board on each such site plan review application.
B. In any application for a building or occupancy permit, excluding oneand
two-family dwellings, not requiring site plan review and approval
but otherwise included within Article VII, the Codes Enforcement
Officer shall notify the Sanford Fire Marshal of the application for
permit and the Sanford Fire Marshal shall designate directly to the
owner, owners or agent of the premises for which permit application is
made the location of required fire lanes. (NFPA 1-18.2.3)
A. Fire lanes established under this article shall be kept free of ice and
snow and rubbish containers or other obstructions. The owner, owners,
agent or occupant of any premises to which this article is applicable
shall cause to be erected, installed and maintained, at his or her own
expense, permanent, adequate signs bearing the words "FIRE
LANE—NO PARKING—VEHICLES WILL BE TOWED AT OWNER'S
EXPENSE" in or adjacent to said fire lane and in accordance with
section Article VII, § 128-26.
B. Such owner, owners, agents or occupants shall cause such other and
further designations as are reasonably required by the Sanford Fire
Marshal to warn persons to keep said fire lanes unobstructed. Failure to
maintain a fire lane in accordance with this section shall render the
owner, owners, agent or occupant of said development liable to a fine in
accordance with the general penalty provision of this Code with each
continuing day of such violation constituting a separate offense.
C. Signs shall be located within three feet of each end of a fire lane and/or
fire access and spaced a maximum of 75 feet apart thereafter along
each fire lane and/or fire access. Signs shall be within three feet of the
side of the fire lane and/or fire access. In addition, one sign is required
for every twenty-foot increment or portion thereof on any island
adjacent to a fire lane and/or fire access. Signs may be mounted on
buildings or existing posts or may be mounted on their own
permanently set posts. (NFPA 1-18.2.4)
§ 128-26 CABLE TELEVISION § 128-28
96:163
§ 128-28. Compliance.
Notice of establishment of fire lanes shall prescribe a reasonable time for
compliance. If compliance is not obtained within said time, then such owner,
owners or agents shall be subject to a fine in accordance with § 128-29B
of this Code. Each day following such specified time for compliance shall
constitute a new and separate violation.
§ 128-29. Parking prohibited; fines; towing and storage.
A. No person shall park or permit to stand a motor vehicle in any fire lane
established in accordance with this article.
B. Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of the
regulations as established above, any police officer may attach to such
vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has
been parked in violation of the regulations. Such owner or operator
shall pay to the Town a sum not less than $25 nor greater than $100,
payment of which shall be due within five business days of the issuance
of the notice of said violation. The registered owner of said motor
vehicle shall be presumed to be the operator of such vehicle. Any motor
vehicle found parked or standing in a fire lane that has been established
in accordance with this article, in addition to the foregoing, may be
towed upon the direction of a police officer to any public or private
parking facility, and all expense of such towing and any subsequent
storage shall be borne by the registered owner or operator of such
vehicle.
§ 128-28 SANFORD CODE § 128-29
96:164
ARTICLE VIII
Registration and Permits
§ 128-30. Permit required for certain activities.
The following professional designations shall be required to register with
the Fire Marshal's Office prior to commencement of any work or activity:
§ 128-31. Registration required for certain activities.
The Sanford Fire Marshal shall have the authority to require registration
for individuals and/or companies performing activities related to fire or life
safety within the jurisdiction. The Sanford Fire Marshal shall be responsible
for maintaining a registration process. Registration may be revoked by the
Sanford Fire Marshal when services or work has been found to be contrary
to this Code. Registration with the Sanford Fire Marshal shall be obtained
prior to working within the jurisdiction. (NFPA 1-1.13.1)
A. Automatic fire suppression systems: for installation or modification of
commercial cooking fire suppression systems or industrial fire
suppression systems, excluding fire sprinkler systems. (NFPA
1-13.1.1.1; 50.4.2)
B. Exhibit, trade show, special outdoor events, carnivals and fairs: for
operation of all exhibits and trade shows held within a jurisdiction, to
conduct a special outdoor event, carnival or fair. (NFPA 1-10.15.1;
20.1.4.5.1)
C. Explosives: For the manufacture, sale, disposal, purchase, storage, use,
possession or transport of explosives within the jurisdiction. (NFPA
1-65.9.2)
D. Fire alarm and detection systems: For installation or modification of fire
alarm and detection systems and related equipment. (NFPA 1-13.1.1.1)
A. R1: inspection, servicing, or recharging of portable fire extinguishers.
B. R2: installation, servicing, or recharging of fixed fire-extinguishing
systems, excluding fire sprinkler systems.
C. R3: installation or servicing of fire alarm or fire communication
systems. (NFPA 1-1.13.1)
§ 128-30 CABLE TELEVISION § 128-31
96:165

ARTICLE IX
Life Safety
[Added 11-24-2015 by Order No. 15-142.09]
§ 128-32. Elevators.
A. A minimum of one elevator shall be provided that adheres to this
chapter, size, and requirements as deemed by the authority having
jurisdiction (AHJ) or designee for the City of Sanford Fire Department
whenever an elevator is required or installed into a building and under
the following indicators:
(1) All new construction in which an elevator is provided for
multifamily residential, commercial, place of assembly, or
educational purposes.
(2) All new or renovated structures that provide elevators and are two
or more stories above or below grade level and when the
renovation or addition to the existing structure increases the
original footprint by more than 25% of the original.
(3) All existing structures in which an elevator is provided that
increase the number of levels from the original but stays within the
original footprint of the structure such that when finished is two or
more levels above or below grade.
B. At any time the AHJ has the right to request more than one elevator
meeting these requirements when deemed necessary due to the overall
footprint, size, or amount of renovation conducted for structures in
excess of five levels above or below grade.
C. Elevator requirements:
(1) All elevators shall be of a size and have proper door openings to
accommodate an ambulance stretcher that is 24 inches by 84
inches in size with two care personnel for transport between floors
with the stretcher in the lay-flat position.
(2) All elevators meeting these requirements shall be marked with a
three-inch star of life, colored blue, affixed to each side of the
hoistway door frame at each level on which the elevator opens.
§ 128-32 CABLE TELEVISION § 128-32
96:167
Chapter 130
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Chapter 132
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Juveniles — See Ch. 141. Loitering — See Ch. 158.
§ 132-1. Purpose.
The Town Council has determined that graffiti creates a visual blight and
adversely affects the enjoyment and value of property. When graffiti is
allowed to remain on property and is not promptly removed, it invites
additional graffiti and may encourage criminal activity or lead to nuisance
conditions. This chapter is intended to deter graffiti, to provide mechanisms
for prompt removal of graffiti, and to establish penalties for graffiti.
§ 132-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GRAFFITI — Any inscription, word, figure, design, painting, writing,
drawing or carving that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted or
otherwise applied to property without the prior authorization of the owner
of the property regardless of the content or nature of the material used.
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT — An aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped
marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or
any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural
or manmade surface.
GRAFFITI PARAPHERNALIA (including GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS) — Files,
folders, black books, sketch books, pictures (digital or printed), or papers
with a common graffiti tag on them, computer files and or images, rubber
or latex type gloves, or air filtration masks.
GRAFFITI REMOVAL — The removal or attempted removal or painting over
of graffiti by the owner of the affected property or by another person with
the consent of the owner or owners designee or by court order.
OWNER — The person listed on the Assessor's records for the Town of
Sanford as the owner of property, authorized agent, or legal occupant of
property.
PROPERTY — Any real or personal property, including but not limited to any
portion of any premises, structure, house, building, fence or vehicle.
§ 128-32 SANFORD CODE § 132-3
132:168
§ 132-3. Prohibited acts.
§ 132-4. Prohibited possession of graffiti implements.
Possession of graffiti implements in the following situations is deemed to
be evidence of an intent or attempt to commit a prohibited act and is
prohibited:
§ 132-5. Furnishing graffiti implements to minors prohibited.
A. The following acts are prohibited:
(1) Applying graffiti to any private or public property without the
permission of the owner.
(2) Soliciting or commanding another person to apply graffiti to any
private or public property without the permission of the owner.
(3) Aiding or abetting or agreeing to aid or abet another person in
planning to apply or applying graffiti to any private or public
property without the permission of the owner.
B. Any person in violation of this section and who is found in possession of
graffiti paraphernalia where a common or personal graffiti tag is
written, painted, designed, photographed, or stored, shall be prima
facie evidence that the person in possession is the author of the graffiti
tag(s).
A. By minors on or near school facilities. No person under the age of 18
years may possess any graffiti implement while on or within 50 feet of
any school property. Notwithstanding this provision, a person under 18
may possess a broad-tipped marker if traveling to or from a school in
which the minor is participating in a class or activity that requires the
possession of a broad-tipped marker. The burden of proof shall be on
the minor to demonstrate that possession was required for a school
class or activity.
B. By any person on or immediately adjacent to private property without
the permission of the owner of the property. "Immediately adjacent"
means near enough to the property to apply graffiti.
C. By any person in any public facility, park, playground, swimming area,
recreational facility, or other public building, structure, premises or
vehicle without the Town's permission, or within 50 feet of any bridge
abutment, or similar infrastructure without permission of the owner.
A. No person, other than a parent or legal guardian, may sell, exchange,
give, lend, or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged,
given, loaned, or otherwise furnished, any graffiti implement to any
person under the age of 18 years.
B. The Chief of Police may promulgate rules and regulations that allow
persons under the age of 18 years to purchase graffiti implements.
§ 132-3 GRAFFITI § 132-6
132:169
§ 132-6. Violations and penalties.
§ 132-7. Enforcement.
A. Any person violating § 132-3 or 132-4 of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine of not more than $250 for the first offense and not more than
$500 for a second or subsequent offense. Each day any violation shall
continue shall constitute a separate violation.
B. In addition to the fine stated in Subsection A, any person found to have
committed a violation of § 132-3 or 132-4 shall be subject to restitution
for all costs of graffiti removal, and/or to perform community service to
the Town of Sanford.
C. Any person found in violation of § 132-3 or 132-4, shall forfeit
ownership of any graffiti paraphernalia said person was in possession of
during the commission of the act. Forfeited property will then be
disposed of as determined by the Chief of Police.
D. In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be jointly and
severally liable with the minor for payment of all fines and fees.
E. In the case of community service, the minor or adult shall perform at
least 30 hours of community service. In a case where a minor is
assigned community service, at least one parent or guardian of the
minor shall be in attendance a minimum of 50% of the period of
assigned community service. The entire period of community service
shall be performed under the supervision of a community service
provider approved by the Chief of Police.
F. Any person violating § 132-5 or 132-7D or E of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $100 for the first offense and not more
than $200 for a second or subsequent offense. Each seven-day period
that any violation shall continue shall constitute a separate violation.
A. The Chief of Police or designee shall investigate violations of this
chapter and provide a Municipal Prosecutor to process these cases in
court.
B. Graffiti on Town or public property shall be reported to the Sanford
Police Department immediately upon discovery.
C. Removal of graffiti on Town or public property shall be removed as soon
as possible, however, not to exceed seven days unless authorized by the
Town Manager.
D. Graffiti on private property shall be reported immediately upon
discovery and removed within two weeks unless the Town Manager
authorizes a longer period of time to remove the graffiti.
E. Graffiti on property prior to the enactment of this chapter shall be
removed within 30 days of notification.
§ 132-6 SANFORD CODE § 132-7
132:170
§ 132-8. Anti-Graffiti Trust Fund.
The Town Council hereby creates the Town of Sanford Anti-Graffiti Trust
Fund. Penalties assessed against violators of this chapter shall be placed in
the fund, along with any monetary donations received from persons wishing
to contribute to the fund. The Town Manager shall direct the expenditures
of monies in the fund. Such expenditures shall be limited to the payment of
the cost of graffiti removal; the payment of rewards for information leading
to the conviction of violation of this chapter, the cost of administering the
chapter, and such other public purposes as may be approved by the Town
Manager.
Chapter 136
IMPACT FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 245.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 275.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
F. With approval of the Town Manager and Chief of Police a community
based committee will be formed to coordinate anti-graffiti activities.
§ 132-7 GRAFFITI § 132-8
132:171

ARTICLE I
Road Impact Fees
[Adopted 1-2-2008]
§ 136-1. Purpose.
§ 136-2. Legislative findings.
The Town Council of Sanford, Maine, finds, determines and declares as
follows:
A. The purpose of this article is to raise funds and deposit them into trust
accounts to help to pay the costs for future roadway improvements at
identified locations. The proposed improvements have been determined
to be necessary to provide capacity to accommodate new traffic
generated by new development projects in the Town of Sanford. This
article will help to assure that each new development pays a
proportionate share of the cost of improvements based upon the
development's use of the new roadway capacity.
B. This article imposes an impact fee on land development requiring
review under the Town's Subdivision Ordinance51 or site plan review
under the Town's Zoning Ordinance52 for providing new roads and
related facilities necessitated by new development that impacts traffic
in the Town as defined herein. This article also imposes impact fees on
all new development or redevelopment that requires the issuance of a
building permit by the Town and that generates new traffic within the
Town of Sanford.
C. This article also provides for the placement of impact fee revenue into
road impact fee trust accounts established for that purpose and for the
administration of the Road Impact Fee Article, including the
expenditure of funds derived from road impact fees and the refunds of
unexpended funds.
D. These fees shall be assessed as a flat rate on developments that
generate fewer than 20 peak hour trips in the p.m. peak hour. The
calculation of the number of p.m. peak hour trips shall be performed in
accordance with the provisions of this article. Flat rate fees shall be
credited equally to all existing traffic impact fee trust fund accounts.
E. All new development or redevelopment that generates more than 20
peak hour trips in the p.m. peak hour shall be required to submit a
traffic study to the Town Engineer as the basis for the impact fee
calculation.
A. The Town must expand its road system in order to provide adequate
levels of service in Town if new development that affects traffic within
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 275, Subdivision of Land.
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning, Art. XVII, Site Plan Review.
§ 136-1 GRAFFITI § 136-2
132:173
§ 136-3. Title; statutory authority; applicability.
the Town is to be accommodated safely and without decreasing current
levels of service. This must be done to promote and protect the public
health, safety and welfare;
B. The State of Maine has authorized municipalities to adopt impact fees
for various purposes, including the construction of off-site capital
improvements, such as roads and traffic control devices pursuant to
30-A M.R.S.A. § 4354;
C. The imposition of impact fees is a preferred method of insuring that
new development bears a proportionate share of cost of capital
investments necessary to accommodate such development.
D. New development frequently generates additional traffic, necessitating
the acquisition of rights-of-way, road construction and road
improvements;
E. The fees established by § 136-6 hereof are derived from, are based
upon, and do not exceed the costs of providing additional rights-of-way,
road construction and road improvements necessitated by the traffic
generated by new developments for which the fees are levied.
F. The reports entitled "Traffic Impact Fee Study Sanford, Maine," dated
April 2, 2007, and "Sanford Traffic Impact Fee Study - Flat Fee Method
Summary," dated August 12, 2007, set forth in more detail a reasonable
methodology and analysis for the determination of the impact of new
development on the need for and costs of additional rights-of-way, road
construction and road improvements in the Town.
A. Title. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Sanford Road
Impact Fee Ordinance."
B. Authority. The City Council of the City of Sanford, has the authority to
enact this article pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4354, and its statutory
and constitutional home rule powers. [Amended 10-7-2014 by Order
No. 14-145.09]
C. Applicability. [Amended 10-7-2014 by Order No. 14-145.09]
(1) The application of this article shall be suspended effective
November 7, 2014, for a period of not more than six months, unless
extended by the City Council after notice and public hearing.
(2) The City Council hereby directs the review of Chapter 136 in its
entirety to develop recommendations as to the amendment or
dissolution of Chapter 136.
(3) The City Council shall act upon the recommendations within the six
months starting November 7, 2014, unless extended, and then
apply Chapter 136 as amended to all new applications for
development as defined after such date. The application of Chapter
§ 136-2 SANFORD CODE § 136-3
132:174
§ 136-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT —
DEVELOPER — A person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal
entity commencing a land development activity or redevelopment activity,
which generates or attracts traffic in the Town and which requires
subdivision or site plan approval from the Town of Sanford, or which
requires a building permit from the Code Enforcement Officer.
DEVELOPMENT or DEVELOPMENT PROJECT — Any change in land use or
any construction of buildings or structures or any change in the use of any
structure that generates vehicle trips at the impact fee locations.
EXPANSION OF ROAD CAPACITY — All road and intersection capacity
enhancements, including but not limited to: extensions, widening,
intersection improvements, upgrading signalization, and expansion of
bridges.
136 as amended shall also be retroactively applied to all
applications for development made prior to November 7, 2014, for
which the determination of and calculation of road impact fees due
were not so completed.
(4) Agreements predating the effective date of the article between the
then Town and now City of Sanford and developers regarding the
payment of any road improvement fees shall not be affected by this
article.
Includes transportation planning, preliminary engineering, engineering
design studies, land surveys, right-of-way acquisition, engineering,
permitting and construction of all the necessary features of any road
construction project, including, but not limited to:
(1) Construction of new through lanes.
(2) Construction of new turn lanes.
(3) Construction of new bridges.
Construction of new drainage facilities in conjunction with new
roadway construction.
(4)
Purchase and installation of traffic signalization (including new and
upgraded signalization).
(5)
(6) Construction of curbs, medians, and shoulders.
(7) Relocating utilities to accommodate new roadway construction.
A.
Capital improvements do not include site-related improvements defined
herein.
B.
§ 136-3 GRAFFITI § 136-4
132:175
IMPACT FEE LOCATIONS — The intersections in Sanford as follows:
INDEPENDENT FEE CALCULATION STUDY — The traffic engineering and/
or economic documentation prepared by a developer to allow the
determination of the impact fee other than by the use of the methodology
outlined in § 136-6 of this article.
MANDATORY OR REQUIRED RIGHT-OF-WAY DEDICATIONS AND/OR
ROADWAY IMPROVEMENTS — Such noncompensated dedications and/or
roadway improvements required by the Town during subdivision or site plan
review.
ROADS — Means and includes arterial and collector streets and
transportation facilities associated with the arterial, federal and State aid
highway network within the Town and under the jurisdiction of the Town or
the State of Maine.
SITE-RELATED IMPROVEMENTS — Capital improvements and right-ofway
dedications for direct access improvements to and/or within the
development in question. Direct access improvements include, but are not
limited to, the following:
§ 136-5. Procedures.
A. Route 109/Route 99.
B. Route 109/Jagger Mill Road.
C. Route 4/Jagger Mill Road.
D. Route 4/School Street.
E. Route 109/Route 4.
A. Access roads leading to the development.
B. Driveways and roads within the development.
Acceleration and deceleration lanes, right and left turn lanes, and
required through lanes leading to those roads and driveways.
C.
D. Traffic control measures for those roads and driveways.
A. Any person who, after the effective date of this article, seeks a permit or
approval for any development described in § 136-3C of this article is
hereby required to pay a road impact fee in the manner and amount set
forth in this article.
B. Preliminary determinations regarding whether a proposed
development will generate traffic within the impact fee locations shall
be made by the Town Engineer (with or without consultation with the
Town's consulting traffic engineer). Actual traffic generation, impacts,
and the corresponding fee shall be determined through a traffic
analysis (in accordance with § 136-6 of this article), which may
accompany a more comprehensive traffic impact study, depending on
§ 136-4 SANFORD CODE § 136-5
132:176
§ 136-6. Calculation.
The impact fee is structured to be in proportion to the development project's
share of the infrastructure costs necessitated by the development and as
enabled by Title 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4354. The process for this impact fee
calculation is as follows:
the scope of the development, prepared by a registered professional
engineer with significant experience in traffic engineering and to be
paid for by the developer. This traffic analysis shall be reviewed and
approved by the Town Engineer (with or without consultation with
the Town's consulting traffic engineer) and shall be incorporated into
the review and approval of a development project by the Planning
Board, Site Plan Review Committee, or Planning and Code Enforcement
Department when applicable. Proposed developments that will
generate not more than 20 p.m. peak hour trips shall be assessed
impact fees based upon the table in § 136-6E of this article.
C. No extension of a building permit or extension of an application
pending before the Planning Board or Site Plan Review Committee,
issued before the effective date of this article, for any activity requiring
payment of an impact fee pursuant to this article shall be granted
unless and until the road impact fee hereby required shall have been
paid or said amount is agreed to be paid by the developer.
A. As per § 136-5 above, a traffic analysis shall be conducted by a
registered professional engineer with significant experience in traffic
engineering in order to determine the traffic impact, and requisite
impact fee total, as measured by additional vehicle trips to be
generated by a development project that pass through the impact fee
study area in the p.m. peak commuter hour.
B. The impact fee calculation for individual development projects within
the Town of Sanford shall use generally accepted standards, such as the
most current Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation
Handbook of traffic generation data or estimates from field
measurements or data collected at similar development types, and shall
be based on the p.m. peak commuter hour of traffic (between 3:00 p.m.
and 6:00 p.m. on a weekday).
C. The costs assigned to trips shall be based upon a fee per new trip (a.k.a.
primary trip) to be generated by a development project that passes
through the impact fee study area during the p.m. peak commuter hour.
Other types of traffic associated with a development project, such as
the capture of trips passing a site (a.k.a. pass-by trips) or trips in the
area that are rerouted (a.k.a. diverted trips) shall not be utilized in the
assessment of the fee.
D. The fee determination shall be based on the following:
§ 136-5 GRAFFITI § 136-6
132:177
(1) The total cost of the roadway infrastructure improvements within
the impact fee study area to be funded from this Impact Fee Article
are:
(a) Route 109/Route 99: $2,740,000.
(b) Route 109/Jagger Mill Road: $3,270,000.
(c) Route 4/Jagger Mill Road: $1,630,000.
(d) Route 4/School Street: $2,690,000.
(e) Route 109/Route 4: $600,000.
(2) The total additional (bidirectional) vehicle capacity to be fostered
by the roadway infrastructure improvement equal approximately
the following trip ends in the p.m. peak commuter hour of traffic.
(a) Route 109/Route 99: 2,318.
(b) Route 109/Jagger Mill Road: 1,614.
(c) Route 4/Jagger Mill Road: 2,630.
(d) Route 4/School Street: 1,791.
(e) Route 109/Route 4: 2,301.
(3) Each additional trip generated by new development projects will
benefit from the capacity increases noted in Subsection D(2) above
and will utilize one trip end of that additional capacity.
(4) The fee per trip, therefore, shall be as noted below:
(a) Route 109/Route 99: $591.
(b) Route 109/Jagger Mill Road: $1,013.
(c) Route 4/Jagger Mill Road: $310.
(d) Route 4/School Street: $751.
(e) Route 109/Route 4: $261 (The project cost is estimated to be
$2,100,000 of which the Town must raise $600,000 through
impact fees.)
E. Smaller developments.
(1) Developments on parcels not requiring subdivision or site plan
review or that generate fewer than 20 peak hour trips shall pay a
fee per trip based upon the following table:
§ 136-6 SANFORD CODE § 136-6
132:178
§ 136-7. Payment of fees.
The impact fee amount, as determined in accordance with § 136-5 and 136-6
of this article, shall be paid to the Code Enforcement Office (for deposit with
the Town Treasurer) as follows:
Land Use Fee Calculation
Variable
Flat Fee
Single-family
detached
Per unit $708
Apartment Per unit $ 435
Condominium
residential
Per unit $365
Office building 1,000 square feet $1,045
Retail 1,000 square feet $1,736
General light
industrial
1000 square feet $688
Other uses See Note 1 below $708 per trip
NOTES:
1. For other uses in the table, the flat rate shall be based upon
the new p.m. peak hour trips calculated from the Institute for
Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Rates for the proposed
use multiplied by $708 per trip.
2. This table may be expanded to detail flat fees for each land use
code in the ITE Trip Generation Handbook corresponding with the
Zoning Ordinance's listing of permitted uses.
(2) Fees collected under this section shall be divided equally and
deposited to the trust funds established by this article.
A. For a new residential subdivision or an expansion of a residential
subdivision, the impact fee amount shall be paid prior to the issuance of
building permits by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. For a new commercial or mixed use subdivision with multiple building
lots, or an expansion of a commercial or mixed use subdivision, the
impact fee amount shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building
permit by the Code Enforcement Officer for construction on an
individual lot.
C. For a new residential, commercial or mixed use development or an
expansion of a commercial or mixed use development on an individual
lot, the impact fee amount shall be paid prior to the issuance of a
building permit by the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 136-6 GRAFFITI § 136-7
132:179
§ 136-8. Road impact fee locations.
There are hereby established five impact fee locations as defined in § 136-4,
definition of "Impact fee locations," of this article.
§ 136-9. Impact fee trust fund.
§ 136-10. Use of impact fee funds.
§ 136-11. Refund of fees.
D. For any other development or redevelopment not listed above, the
impact fee amount shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building
permit by the Code Enforcement Officer.
E. For changes of use that require site plan review, the impact fee amount
shall be paid prior to the issuance of the building permit or, in the case
where a building permit is not required, prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
A. There are hereby established five separate road impact fee trust funds,
one for each impact fee location established by § 136-8 of this article.
B. Funds withdrawn from these accounts must be used in accordance with
the provisions of § 136-10 of this article.
A. Funds generated by this article will be used for the purpose of
completing the capital improvements identified in the June 15, 2007,
Traffic Impact Fee Study.
B. No funds shall be used for periodic or routine maintenance.
C. In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for the
advance provision of capital improvements for which road impact fees
may be expended, impact fee funds may be used to pay debt service on
such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the
improvements provided are a component of a master plan for roadway
infrastructure improvements, as per Subsection A of this section.
D. Funds may be used to provide refunds in accordance with § 136-11.
E. Funds shall not be used to pay for any site specific road improvements,
such as right-turn entry lanes, site driveway islands, etc., that are
required of a development project that is proposed and constructed on
any lot abutting a roadway section at the impact fee location. Such
project and site specific improvements shall be the responsibility of the
developer.
A. If a building permit is surrendered or expires without commencement
of construction, the developer shall be entitled to a refund, without
interest, of the impact fee as a condition for its issuance except that the
Town shall retain 3% of the impact fee paid to offset a portion of the
§ 136-7 SANFORD CODE § 136-11
132:180
§ 136-12. Exemptions.
§ 136-13. Credits.
costs of collection. The developer must submit an application for such a
refund to the Code Enforcement Officer not later than 15 days after the
expiration of the permit.
B. Any funds not expended or obligated by contract by the end of the
calendar quarter immediately following 10 years from the date the fee
was paid shall, upon application of the developer, be returned to the
developer, provided that the developer submits an application for a
refund to the Code Enforcement Officer within 180 days of the ten-year
period.
A. Alterations or expansions of an existing building which do not result in
the generation of additional new vehicle trips, as determined by the
Town Engineer, shall be exempt from payment of the traffic impact fee.
B. Construction of accessory buildings or structures which do not
generate additional vehicle trips, as determined by the Town Engineer,
shall be exempt from payment of traffic impact fees.
C. The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or
structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use, as
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, shall be exempt from
payment of the impact fee.
D. Municipal uses by the Town of Sanford shall not be subject to this
article.
E. The re-use or changes of use of existing buildings that require Planning
Board approval as conditional uses under the Town's Zoning Ordinance
shall be exempt from this article if they would not otherwise require site
plan review.
A. Credit for the dedication of land for rights-of-way shall be valued at the
most recent assessed value by the Town Assessor or by fair market
value established by private appraisers acceptable to the Town. Credit
for dedication of land shall be provided when property has been
conveyed at no charge to, and accepted by, the Town in a manner
satisfactory to the Town Council.
B. Construction of capital improvements.
(1) Credit for construction of capital improvements shall be given only:
(a) Where the Town and the developer agree in writing that it
would be more cost effective or expeditious for the developer
to construct improvements authorized for funding under this
article; or
§ 136-11 GRAFFITI § 136-13
132:181
(b) For the cost of constructing capital improvements as a
condition of Planning Board approval under site plan review or
under the Subdivision Ordinance of the Town, provided such
capital improvements must be eligible for designation by the
Town Council for funding under this article. In such cases, the
developer shall submit acceptable engineering drawings and
specifications, and construction cost estimates to the Town
which shall determine credit for construction based upon
either these cost estimates or upon alternative engineering
criteria and construction cost estimates, if the Town
determines that estimates submitted by the developer are
either unreliable or inaccurate.
(2) Upon final determination of all credits, the Town shall provide the
developer with a letter or certificate setting forth the dollar amount
of the credit, the reason for the credit, and the legal description or
other adequate description of the development to which the credit
may be applied. The developer must sign and date a duplicate copy
of such letter or certificate indicating his/her agreement to the
terms of the letter or certificate and return such signed document
to the Town before credit will be given. The failure of the developer
to sign, date and return such document with the balance of the
impact fees and building permit fees within 60 days shall nullify the
credit.
C. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection D, credit against impact
fees otherwise due will remain provisional until:
(1) Construction is completed and accepted by the Town or the State,
whichever is applicable; and
(2) A suitable maintenance and warranty bond is received and
approved by the Town, where applicable.
D. Security shall be given for provisional credit in the form of a
performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit or escrow agreement
posted with and approved by the Town Manager (with or without
consultation with the Town Attorney) in an amount determined by the
Town Manager. If the project will not be constructed within two years of
the acceptance of the offer by the Town, the amount of the security shall
be increased by 10% compounded for each year of life of the security. If
the construction project is not to be completed within five years of the
date of the developer's offer, the Town Council must approve the
construction project and its scheduled completion date prior to the
acceptance of the offer by the Town. The security or replacement shall
state the date for commencement of the project and the time period for
estimated completion. This date and/or time period may be extended by
the Town for good cause shown conditioned upon extension of the
security.
§ 136-13 SANFORD CODE § 136-13
132:182
§ 136-14. Amendments.
§ 136-15. Nonimpact fee intersections.
All developments proposed within the Town of Sanford that impact
intersections not included as impact fee locations within this article shall
be required to take all necessary steps to comply with the requirements
of all State and local ordinances, rules and regulations governing the safe
handling of traffic generated by such developments. This shall include but
not be limited to, the obligation to maintain adequate levels of service at all
affected intersections.
E. Credit may also be given for the costs of constructing capital
improvements required as a condition of Planning Board subdivision
approval or a Department of Environmental Protection site location or
development license if the development was approved prior to
enactment of this article but building permits are issued after
enactment. Credit shall be in an amount determined by the Planning
Board, based upon the scope of the development approved by the
Planning Board and/or DEP and the value of the capital improvements
actually constructed. Credit shall be given only to the extent that the
traffic impact of the proposed development, as determined at the time
of construction, does not exceed the impacts anticipated by the
subdivision or site review approval. The developer shall have the
burden of establishing the cost of capital improvements constructed.
F. Any claim for credit must be made prior to the time for payment of
impact fees. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived.
G. Credits shall not be transferred from one project or development to
another without the approval of the Town Council.
H. The determination of fees or credits made pursuant to this article may
be appealed to the Town Manager by filing a written request with the
Town Manager within 30 days of the notice of fee or credit
determination.
A. This article may be amended from time to time in accordance with the
provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4354, the Sanford Town Charter and the
rules of the Sanford Town Council.
B. Amendments may include deletion of impact fee locations when the
Town Council determines, in its sole and exclusive judgment, that all
required capital improvements have been made and the purposes of
this article are no longer applicable.
C. Amendments may include the addition of new impact fee locations,
after studies determine the need, scope and cost of road improvements
at the new locations. Said additions shall meet the standards for
inclusion into this article as specified in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4354.
§ 136-13 GRAFFITI § 136-15
132:183
Chapter 141
JUVENILES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 74.
Dance halls — See Ch. 108.
Graffiti — See Ch. 132.
Loitering — See Ch. 158.
§ 136-15 SANFORD CODE § 136-15
141:184
ARTICLE I
Special Protection
[Adopted 12-2-1980]
§ 141-1. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Special Protection Law for
Juveniles" as it protects juveniles by regulating sexually oriented material.
§ 141-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit any commercial enterprise from
disseminating sexually oriented material to juveniles for commercial gain.
It does not wish to suppress or inhibit the free exchange of ideas or artistic
expression protected by United States Constitutional provisions. It will
promote and protect the general welfare and morals of our youth.
§ 141-3. Prohibitions.
It shall be unlawful for any commercial enterprise to sell, provide or present
for sale any sexually oriented material to a juvenile for commercial gain.
§ 141-4. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISE — Any business, corporation, association or
natural person established for pecuniary gain.
DISSEMINATE — To sell, provide or present for sale or agree to the same.
JUVENILE — Any person 17 years of age or younger.
MATERIAL — Any book, pamphlet, magazine, picture, photograph or
drawing or similar visual representation.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED —
The material is made up, in whole or dominant part, of representations
or descriptions, actual or simulated, of human sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals,
or abusive conduct or torture in the context of a sexual relationship or
which emphasize the uncovered genitals;
A.
The material lacks serious literary, artistic, political, educational or
scientific value for juveniles; and
B.
The dominant theme of the material appeals to the prurient interest in
sex of juveniles.
C.
§ 141-1 JUVENILES § 141-5
141:185
§ 141-5. Exceptions.
This article is not intended to regulate any conduct expressly regulated by
existing state statute, nor does it apply to schools, libraries, museums or
other institutions accredited by the state.
§ 141-6. Violations and penalties.
Any conduct made unlawful by this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor
and shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100 for each violation of
this offense. Each day or time that such violation occurs shall be a separate
offense.
§ 141-5 SANFORD CODE § 141-6
141:186
ARTICLE II
Curfew
[Adopted 5-25-1999 (Ch. 12, Art. I of the 1977 Code)]
§ 141-7. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Curfew Ordinance of
the Town of Sanford, Maine."
§ 141-8. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to aid in control of juvenile delinquency in the
Town of Sanford.
§ 141-9. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their
usage clearly indicates another meaning:
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term shall include but
not be limited to fire, natural disaster, vehicular accident, or a serious
medical condition of sudden onset.
GUARDIAN — The person(s) or public or private agency who or which,
either pursuant to a court order or a voluntary placement or appointment
by the minor's parent(s), is the guardian of the person of the minor.
MINOR — Any person 17 years of age or younger.
PARENT — The natural mother or father, adoptive mother or father, or
stepmother or stepfather of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
public parks and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartments,
houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.
§ 141-10. Offenses.
A. It shall be unlawful for any minor to knowingly remain, walk, run, stand,
drive or ride about in or upon any public place in the Town of Sanford
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m.
B. It shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian having legal custody of a
minor to knowingly allow or permit the minor to be in violation of the
curfew imposed in Subsection A of this section.
C. Violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in § 141-13 of
this article.
§ 141-7 JUVENILES § 141-11
141:187
§ 141-11. Defenses.
It is a defense to prosecution under § 141-10 of this article that:
§ 141-12. Enforcement.
A. The minor was accompanied by his or her parent or guardian;
B. The minor was accompanied by an adult specifically designated by his
or her parent or guardian;
C. The minor was on an errand made necessary by an emergency;
D. The minor was attending a school, religious or government-sponsored
activity or was traveling to or from a school, religious or governmentsponsored
activity;
E. The minor was engaged in a lawful employment activity or was going
directly to or coming directly from lawful employment;
F. The minor was on the sidewalk in front of the place where he or she
resides;
G. The minor was on an errand specifically directed by his or her parent or
guardian;
H. The minor was in a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate
transportation; or
I. The minor was engaged in participating in or traveling to or from any
event, function or activity for which the application of § 141-10 of this
article would contravene his or her rights protected by the Maine or
United States Constitution.
A. Except as provided below for a first offense for minors, this article shall
be enforced by issuance of a civil summons directly to the offender.
Before taking any action to enforce this article, the police officer shall,
in the case of a minor, ask the age of the apparent offender. The police
officer may ask for proof of the apparent offender's age and shall be
justified in taking action to determine the apparent offender's age in the
absence of identification, subject to and in compliance with all
requirements imposed by law, including, without limitation, the
provisions of 17-A M.R.S.A. § 17. Pursuant to that statute, the police
officer may require the minor to remain in his or her presence for a
period of up to two hours.
B. For minors, a documented verbal warning shall be issued for a first
offense.
C. In all cases, upon finding a minor in violation of this article, the police
officer shall advise the minor that he or she is in violation of this Curfew
Ordinance and direct the minor to proceed at once by the most direct
route to his or her home or usual place of abode.
§ 141-11 SANFORD CODE § 141-12
141:188
§ 141-13. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for violation of this article shall be as follows:
D. If the minor refuses to proceed to his or her home or usual place of
abode after having been warned of the violation, or if the minor is
subsequently observed by a police officer to be in violation of this
article after having previously been warned, the police officer shall
summons the minor, and, if the minor's parent or guardian knowingly
allowed the violation to occur, the police officer may also summons the
parent or guardian.
A. For a first offense, subsequent to a receipt of a warning, as provided
above, a fine of $25 or, if the minor consents, four hours of community
service to be completed within 30 days of adjudication; and
B. For each subsequent offense, a fine up to $100 or, if the minor agrees,
16 hours of community service to be completed within 30 days of
adjudication.
§ 141-12 JUVENILES § 141-13
141:189
Chapter 149
LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 90.
Disorderly housing — See Ch. 114.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 128.
Retail use of marijuana — See Ch. 161, Art. I.
Odor nuisance control and abatement — See
Ch. 183, Art. I.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 141-13 SANFORD CODE § 141-13
141:190
ARTICLE I
Business Licensing
[Adopted 4-11-1977 as § 6.2 of the 1977 Code; amended in its
entirety by the City Council 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
§ 149-1.0. Purpose.
To protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of
Sanford (the City), the City requires licensing of certain uses and
businesses.
§ 149-1.1. Definitions.
In general, all words, phrases, and terms used in this article shall have their
customary and usual meanings; as used in this article, the following words,
phrases, and terms shall have the meaning indicated:
CONTAMINATION OF PROCESSES OR PRODUCTS — The act of rendering
or making a process or product impure, unsuitable, or unusable by
introducing harmful or undesirable elements, whether biological or
chemical.
§ 149-1.2. License required.
No person, firm, corporation, or other entity shall carry on any business or
other activity subject to a license requirement under this chapter or code or
any other regulation or law without such a license. All licenses shall be kept
on site for inspection.
§ 149-1.3. Taxes and fines owed.
The licensee and the licensee's place of business shall not have property
taxes, business taxes, or other fees, fines, charges, penalties, or interest
owing to the City. Failure to comply with this condition shall be deemed a
violation of this article and adequate grounds for the denial, revocation, or
suspension of a license.
§ 149-1.4. Fees.
It is the intent and purpose of this section to establish fees which bear
a reasonable relationship to the costs incurred by the City in the
administration and enforcement of this chapter and other applicable laws
and regulations.
A. To accomplish such purposes:
(1) All fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid in advance
at the time of application therefor to the City Clerk.
(2) All fees are nonrefundable regardless of whether a license or
permit is issued.
§ 149-1.0 JUVENILES § 149-1.4
141:191
B. No license shall be issued until each specific annual (unless an
alternative duration is specified by the business category) fee for all
applicable business categories, required in this section have been paid
including, payment of the City's expenditure for notification of public
hearings, required by State or local regulations, payment of the City's
expenditure for background checks as required by State or local
regulation, and payment of the City's expenditure for emergency
services as may be necessary for the specific license or permit.
C. Fee schedule, business license categories: [Amended 6-19-2018 by
Order No. 18-117-01]
Category 1 Licenses
(Administrative
Approval) Fee
Statutory or Code
Reference
Alcohol- and drug-free
housing
$100 per year Ch. 149, Art. XIII
Auctioneer,
nonresident certificate
$10 per day or $25 for
3 days
§ 149-1.4
B.Y.O.B. function $25 per event Ch. 74, Art. III
Brewery, distillery,
winery
$100 per year Ch. 149, Art. VII
Closing-out sale $50 per 60 days Ch. 149, Art. VIII
Coin-operated
entertainment device,
electronic video
machine, arcade
device
$50 per year Ch. 149, Art. III
Flea market $100 per year Ch. 256
Flea market vendor $25 per year Ch. 256
Kennel $50 per year Ch. 78, Art. IX; 7
M.R.S.A. §§ 3931
through 3950-A
Lodging
establishment
$50 per year Ch. 155
Massage therapist $50 per year Ch. 164
Off-premises catering
permit
$25 per application Ch. 149, Art. I
Pawnbroker $300 per year Ch. 193
Peddler $50 per year or $25
per day
Ch. 149, Art. IX
Places of assembly $100 per year Ch. 149, Art. X
Rental housing See § 149-5.7 Ch. 149, Art. V
§ 149-1.4 SANFORD CODE § 149-1.4
141:192
Category 1 Licenses
(Administrative
Approval) Fee
Statutory or Code
Reference
Residential care
facility
$50 per year Ch. 149, Art. XIV
Salvage collector $25 per year Ch. 213
Salvage dealer $500 per year Ch. 213
Secondhand dealer $200 per year Ch. 193
Sport shooting ranges $100 per year Ch. 149, Art. XI
Tattoo artist, body
piercing
$200 per year Ch. 149, Art. XII
Taxicab See § 232-23 Ch. 232
Tobacco retailer $25 per year Ch. 215, Art. II
Vacant building See § 149-6.8 Ch. 149, Art. VI
Victualer $75 per year Ch. 209
Waste hauler $500 per year Ch. 220
Yard sale permit $10 per day Ch. 256
Category 2 Licenses
(City Council
Approval) Fee
Statutory or Code
Reference
Beano-bingo
application
$100 per application Ch. 149, Art. I; 13-A
M.R.S.A. § 311 et seq.
Bottle club $100 per year Ch. 74, Art. II
Circus, carnival,
temporary exhibitions
$200 per day Ch. 149, Art. X
Games of chance
application
$65 per application Ch. 149, Art. I; 17
M.R.S.A. § 1831 et seq.
Liquor license
application and
transfers (Tier I)
$200 per application Ch. 149, Art. I; 28-A
M.R.S.A. §§ 653 et seq.
and 1051
Liquor license
application and
transfers (Tier II)
$400 per application Ch. 149, Art. I; 28-A
M.R.S.A. §§ 653 et seq.
and 1051
Medical marijuana
production facility
$1,500 per year Ch. 149, Art. IV
Mental health and
abuse clinics
$500 per year Ch. 149, Art. II
Special amusement
permit
$100 per year Ch. 74, Art. I
§ 149-1.4 JUVENILES § 149-1.5
141:193
§ 149-1.5. Duration of license.
All licenses, except licenses for medical marijuana production, shall expire
annually on December 31, except as otherwise provided by the general laws
of the State of Maine or stated elsewhere in code. Licenses for medical
marijuana production shall expire annually on March 31.
§ 149-1.6. Liquor license applications.
Upon receipt of an application for a liquor license, the City Clerk and City
Council shall follow the procedure established by this chapter, the City Code
and 28-A M.R.S.A. §§ 651 to 654, as amended. The fees for an application
shall be established under Chapter 149, Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this
Code, for new liquor license applications and transfers of liquor license
applications either as Tier I or Tier II.
§ 149-1.6.1. Off-premises catering permit.
Upon receipt of an application for an off-premises catering permit, the City
Clerk shall follow the procedure established by this chapter, the City Code
and 28-A M.R.S.A. § 1052, as amended. The fees for an application shall be
established under Chapter 149, Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this Code, for
an off-premises catering permit.
§ 149-1.6.2. Games of chance license.
Upon receipt of an application for a games of chance license, the City Clerk
shall follow the procedure established by this chapter, the City Code and
17 M.R.S.A. § 1831 et seq. The fees for an application shall be established
under Chapter 149, Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this Code, for a games of
chance application.
§ 149-1.6.3. Beano and bingo license.
Upon receipt of an application for a beano and bingo license, the City Clerk
shall follow the procedure established by this chapter, the City Code and
13-A M.R.S.A. § 311 et seq. The fees for an application shall be established
under Chapter 149, Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this Code, for a beano and
bingo application.
§ 149-1.7. Authority to issue licenses.
The City Clerk shall have the authority to issue all licenses shown as
Category 1 licenses in this chapter to qualified applicants. Only the City
Council shall have authority to issue Category 2 licenses and, when
A. Tier I shall mean that food gross income shall be in excess or equal to
liquor gross income.
B. Tier II shall mean that liquor gross income shall be in excess of food
gross income.
§ 149-1.5 SANFORD CODE § 149-1.7
141:194
applicable, shall follow the procedures outlined in State law for their
issuance.
§ 149-1.8. Licensing application requirements.
§ 149-1.9. Administration.
A. All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be filed with, and in
a form satisfactory to, the City Clerk, together with such supporting
documents and information, as the City Clerk may prescribe.
B. Such application may include, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) Name, address, and contact information, including phone number
and email address, of the applicant, all other persons having a legal
interest in the facility and property, and the individual(s)
designated by the applicant to manage operation of the facility, if
any.
(2) Location within the premises for which a license is sought,
identified by both City Tax Map and lot number and street address.
(3) Dimensions and acreage of the property.
(4) Copy of an approved site plan, if required under Chapter 280,
Zoning.
(5) Description of the use and facility and how the location and
improvements associated with the proposed facility comply with
the requirements of Chapter 280, Zoning, and this chapter.
(6) Type, location, and total cubic feet and equivalent pounds of carbon
dioxide, gas, super-cooled liquid, pesticide, fertilizer, or other
chemical stored or used in the operation of the facility, if any, and
location of all alarms and shut offs.
(7) Any other approvals required by City, State, or federal agencies.
(8) Other information specified in this chapter or any other applicable
regulation, codes, or law.
(9) Two copies of the license application and all supporting
documentation and a CD containing pdf files for the application and
each piece of supporting documentation.
A. City Clerk review. A license application shall be filed with and reviewed
by the City Clerk to determine if it is complete. If the application is not
deemed complete, the application shall be returned to the applicant and
shall be considered to be denied. If the application is deemed to be
complete, and the facility has not secured site plan, conditional use, or
other required permits under Chapter 280, Zoning, the applicant shall
be directed to schedule a meeting with the Planning Department.
§ 149-1.7 JUVENILES § 149-1.9
141:195
§ 149-1.10. Records; disposition of fees.
A record of the issuance of such license, with the name of the licensee
and the fee paid, shall be kept by the City Clerk. The fees collected by the
City Clerk for all licenses provided herein shall be turned over to the City
Treasurer in the same manner as tax moneys, and to be credited to the
Licenses and Fees Account.
§ 149-1.10.1. Investigation of applicant and review of application.
Upon receipt of an application for any license or permit, other than a
renewal application substantially identical to the original application, the
City Clerk shall inquire of other City departments, including the Inspection
Team, as appropriate, for comments as to whether a license may be granted
consistent with the provisions of the laws and codes enforced by such
department. In all appropriate cases, the Building Official shall verify that
the premises to be used for the proposed facility comply with the Building
Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, and Zoning Code, and if applicable,
Junkyard Screening Law; the Fire Chief shall cause inspection to be made
for the purpose of determining if codes, State law, or State regulation
concerning fire and safety have been complied with; and if the license is
B. Planning Board review. Upon referral from the City Clerk and
submission of the appropriate site plan, conditional use, or other
required permits under the provisions of Chapter 280, Zoning, the
Planning Department shall process applications for review. Upon
approval, the Planning Department shall forward the determination to
the City Manager, who shall schedule the licensing application for
review by the City Council.
C. City Council review. The City Council may impose conditions on the
approval of any license application it deems necessary to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any other provision of
law. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, documentation
of the following requirements:
(1) All landscaping, screening, or other requirements imposed by the
Planning Board have been installed, completed, and approved by
appropriate City staff.
(2) All requirements imposed by any other regulatory bodies having
jurisdiction have been installed, completed, and approved.
(3) All other measures required to improve the operations of the
facility or minimize its impacts on the surrounding neighborhood
have been constructed or implemented.
(4) The applicant shall meet with the Chief of Police or other State or
municipal officials, upon request, to establish a good working
relationship between the City and the owner and operators of the
facility and to provide for review of the operation of the facility.
§ 149-1.9 SANFORD CODE § 149-1.10.1
141:196
not issuable to any class of persons, firms, or corporations; the Police Chief
shall cause an investigation to be made of the principal officers or person
to be licensed; the Tax Collector shall verify that taxes have been paid or
payment arrangements made. All persons shall report to the City Clerk in
writing, and copies of any such report shall be deemed a public record.
§ 149-1.11. Inspections.
As a condition of granting a license, unless otherwise specified, an
inspection may be required. Submission of a license application shall
constitute permission for entry and inspection. The Inspection Team, which
consists of a representative of the Police Department, Fire Department
and the Code Enforcement Department, may inspect every facility to be
licensed under this chapter for the purpose of determining if the applicant
and premises is in compliance with all applicable laws, codes, rules and
regulations. Inspections shall take place at a reasonable time and prior to
a determination on the license application. Businesses with no regularly
scheduled hours shall be given 24 hours' notice for an annual inspection.
When an inspection is conducted for a use that is sensitive to contamination
of its processes or products, the Inspection Team shall use the following
protection from contamination protocols to the extent practicable:
A. The facility operator shall:
(1) Prior to inspection, provide a floor plan of the facility which
identifies, at a minimum, all walls, the layout of operations,
including storage, and the location of exits, signs, key components
of emergency, security, growing and other lighting, fire
extinguishers, mechanical rooms, key components of the
ventilation system, including but not limited to intake and exhaust
vents, key components of any filtration system, key components of
the sprinkler system and sprinkler heads, including clearance
heights, electrical panel, storage areas for hazardous materials,
including but not limited to chemicals and gases, plumbing
fixtures; and
(2) Maintain a Material Safety Data Sheet for any chemicals it uses in
its operation and described in its Operations Manual and Safety
Plan, required in Chapter 280, Zoning, which shall be made
available to the Inspection Team upon request.
(3) Provide a flow chart of the operation that identifies and directs the
Inspection Team first to the area of the site that is cleanest and
most sensitive to contamination and proceed to progressively less
clean and/or sensitive areas until the inspection is complete.
B. The Inspection Team shall:
(1) Don disposable boot covers, gowns, gloves, and hairnets if provided
by the facility operator.
§ 149-1.10.1 JUVENILES § 149-1.11
141:197
§ 149-1.11.1. Standards for denial, suspension or revocation.
In addition to any other provision of this code authorizing such action, a
license or permit may be denied, suspended, or revoked upon determination
of one or more of the following regarding the applicant, application, or
premises:
§ 149-1.12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this article or
the terms of a license may be penalized in the following manner:
(2) Provide the operator of the production facility a camera, heattemperature
gun, and a two-way communication device. The
facility operator will work with the Inspection Team, which will
direct the facility operator to designated areas, to provide visual
access and direct feedback to allow the inspection to take place
without requiring the Inspection Team to enter areas of the facility
that are sensitive to potential contamination.
C. If the Inspection Team observes violations, modifications of the facility
which required a permit which was not obtained, or cannot
satisfactorily conduct the inspection through remote observation then
the Inspection Team may have to enter the facility to complete the
inspection. If physical entry is required, the Inspection Team shall use
the protection from contamination protocols described in this article to
minimize the likelihood of contamination.
A. Failure to fully complete the application forms; knowingly making an
incorrect statement of a material nature on such form; failure to supply
any additional documentation required or reasonably necessary to
determine whether such license is issuable; or failure to pay any fee
required hereunder;
B. The applicant or related persons or entities have caused one or more
breaches of the peace;
C. Failure to comply with laws, code, rules and regulations;
D. Failure to license and operate a safe and proper place of business
through compliance with all relevant fire, health, and safety codes; or
E. The applicant, licensee, or employee of the licensee or person
representing the licensee has been convicted of any Class A, Class B,
Class C, or Class D crime or crime of equivalent severity or has proven
and known ties to criminal gangs or criminal organizations as defined
by federal law as verified by the Police Department.
A. Temporary suspension. The Code Enforcement Officer or Police
Department, with prior approval of the City Manager or his/her
designee, is authorized to immediately and temporarily suspend any
§ 149-1.11 SANFORD CODE § 149-1.12
141:198
§ 149-1.13. Appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals, acting in an appellate capacity, shall act as
the Licensing Board of Appeals in order to hear appeals of orders, decisions,
or determinations made relative to application and interpretations of this
Code. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be submitted as
otherwise set forth in City Code, Chapter 280, Zoning, regarding
administrative appeals, subject to the payment of any fees as may be
determined by the municipal officers from time to time.
§ 149-1.13.1. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, or part of this
ordinance, or of any ordinance included in this Code or through
supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair, or invalidate the
remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, article, or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
license. The City Manager, or his/her designee, shall determine if the
licensed premises has not met the requirements of the license.
B. Revocation. The Code Enforcement Officer or Police Department, with
prior approval of the City Manager, or his/her designee, is authorized to
immediately revoke any license. The City Manager, or his/her designee,
shall determine if the licensed premises has not met the requirements
of the license.
C. Unlicensed activity. Any person, firm, or corporation failing to apply for
a license and pay the required fee shall be in violation of this article and
such violation is a civil penalty or land use violation pursuant to 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4452, enforced by the Police Department or Code
Enforcement Officer and subject to a fine in the amount of $500 in
addition to any other fines for violating this article and the fee for
licensing.
D. Civil penalties. In addition to any other fines or penalties for violating
any provisions of this article or the terms of the license, violation of this
article is a civil penalty pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452, enforced by
the Police Department or Code Enforcement Officer. In any such
proceeding, the City may order that the licensee or unlicensed activity
abate any violations, pay a penalty between $100 and $2,500 per
violation, per day, and pay the court costs, attorneys and expert witness
fees incurred by the City.
§ 149-1.12 JUVENILES § 149-1.13.1
141:199

ARTICLE II
Mental Health and Abuse Clinics; Outpatient Addiction Treatment
Clinics
[Adopted 11-25-2008;53 amended in its entirety by the City Council
7-19-2016 by Order No. 16-61.10]
§ 149-2.1. Purpose and findings.
A. The City Council finds that an outpatient addiction treatment clinic can
be a valuable component of our health-care system if operated by
qualified and responsible operators and subject to reasonable
regulations to assure effective operation. The City Council also
recognizes the importance of appropriately siting clinics in order to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare. This requires restricting
the proximity of clinics to schools, child-care providers, public parks
and playgrounds, and other locations where children and young adults
may frequent. It requires siting in locations accessible by public
transportation, zoned to assure the compatibility of other allowed uses
in the zone with and to such clinics, and selected to assure the personal
safety and privacy of the patients and clients of such clinics. In addition,
the City and private interests have devoted substantial resources and
made significant efforts to attract retail and commercial development
into the downtown sections of Sanford and the Village of Springvale,
and location of a clinic in these areas may conflict with this
development plan.
B. The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the City to
protect areas where efforts are currently being made to stimulate new
business investment, and encourage focused and planned economic
growth, which includes the areas identified above. The location of
outpatient addiction treatment clinics in these areas could detract from
these efforts without benefiting the patients and clients of such
facilities. Proper locating shall also avoid adverse law enforcement
impacts and the overburdening of police and rescue resources while at
the same time protect the personal privacy, convenience, and interests
of the patients and clients of such facilities. The City Council finds that
with the reasonable and necessary location restrictions listed herein
and in the City's Land Use Code, there remain sufficient suitable areas
within the City to site mental health and abuse centers, including
outpatient addiction treatment clinics. Licensing of these facilities shall
enhance community relations with the providers of such clinics,
establish lines of communications with operators of the facilities, and
provide for periodic review of and reasonable control over their
operations. Licensing of these facilities is appropriate and consistent
with the City's policies and practices to review and license business
activities that can have an adverse impact on its citizens. The licensing
is not meant to conflict with the licensing done at the state level
53.Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally adopted as Ch. 153, but was renumbered as
Ch. 149, Art. II, to maintain the organization of the Code.
§ 149-2.1 JUVENILES § 149-2.1
141:201
§ 149-2.2. Applicability.
§ 149-2.3. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the
content clearly implies otherwise:
CHILD-CARE PROVIDER — This term is defined in Chapter 280, Zoning.
MENTAL HEALTH AND ABUSE CLINIC — This term is defined in Chapter
280, Zoning.
OUTPATIENT ADDICTION TREATMENT CLINIC — This term is defined in
Chapter 280, Zoning.
SANFORD DOWNTOWN AREA — That area identified by the Sanford
Downtown Legacy and shown on the map entitled "Sanford Downtown," as
it may hereafter be amended, and it also includes the area identified by
the Lafayette Circle, which includes all property within 1,320 feet of the
Lafayette School.
SCHOOL — A building, together with its contiguous accessory buildings and
grounds and uses, for the education and learning of children. Uses within
the meaning of this definition shall include, but are not limited to, private
and public preschool, elementary, middle and high school.
pursuant to 14-118 CMR Ch. 4, Regulations for Licensing/Certifying
Substance Abuse Treatment Programs in the State of Maine, but to
provide separate and additional requirements as necessitated by the
above findings to protect the local interests of persons in Sanford,
Maine.
C. In addition, the City Council has delegated to the Planning Board
application of the land use development standards in Chapter 280,
Zoning. Also the City Council finds that using the North American
Industry Classification System to identify the activity regulated
hereunder is the fairest and most equitable method available and treats
all similarly classified uses the same.
A. This article shall apply to any outpatient addiction treatment clinic
which is located or to be located within the City. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in 1 M.R.S.A. § 302, this article applies to any
application relating to the establishment or operation of a mental health
and abuse center or outpatient addiction treatment clinic, whether or
not such application had become a "pending proceeding" as defined in 1
M.R.S.A. § 302 prior to the enactment of this article.
B. Allowed locations and setback requirements for an outpatient addiction
treatment clinic is described in Chapter 280, Zoning. In addition, at the
time of application, the applicant must demonstrate that it is not within
1,000 feet of a child-care provider.
§ 149-2.1 SANFORD CODE § 149-2.3
141:202
SPRINGVALE VILLAGE — That area defined in the study prepared by Kent
Associates and referenced in the Springvale Design Guidelines in Chapter
280, Zoning, as it may be hereafter amended.
§ 149-2.4. Licensing application requirements.
§ 149-2.5. Administration.
The application shall be administered under the provisions of § 149-1.9,
except as noted below.
A. All applications for licenses under this article shall be filed in
accordance with § 149-1.8.
B. In addition to the information specified in § 149-1.8, an application for a
mental health and abuse clinic or outpatient addiction treatment clinic
shall provide:
(1) The social security number of a person designated by the applicant
as the responsible operator, and shall include the written consent
of such person to a full background and reference check by the
City.
(2) A detailed description of the proposed outpatient addiction
treatment clinic to include the following: population to be served,
client services, methods of treatment, identification of controlled
substances to be kept on site and how the applicant shall prevent
their theft or misuse, staffing requirements, security provisions,
hours of operation, anticipated parking demand, peak-hour traffic,
and identification and copies of other required licenses.
(3) A nonrefundable application fee of $500.
A. City Clerk review. When a license application for an outpatient
addiction treatment clinic is filed with the City Clerk, the Clerk shall
order a background check from the Police Department for the
applicant, individuals with a legal interest in the facility, and any
individual(s) hired to manage operation of the facility. The license
application with the background check shall then be reviewed by the
City Clerk to determine if the application is complete.
B. City Council review.
(1) The City Council shall conduct two public hearings on the
application to allow adequate time for public comment and review.
(2) The City Council may require the applicant to construct or
implement other measures when those measures are designed to
improve the operations of the clinic or minimize the impact of the
clinic on the surrounding neighborhood.
C. That the applicant meet with the Chief of Police or other state or
municipal official semiannually. The purpose of said meetings is to
§ 149-2.3 JUVENILES § 149-2.5
141:203
§ 149-2.6. Nonconforming uses.
Any mental health and abuse center or outpatient addiction treatment
clinic in lawful existence on the effective date of this article may remain
in operation in its present location without applying for or obtaining the
license required hereunder until the later of December 31 of the calendar
year in which this article is adopted or 12 months following the effective
date of this article. Thereafter, such clinics shall be required to comply with
all the licensing provisions of this article. A clinic in lawful existence and
operation on the effective date of this article may continue as sited and
being operated on that date but shall be considered a lawful nonconforming
use subject to all restrictions and regulations on nonconforming uses in this
article and Chapter 280, Zoning, as from time to time amended.
establish a good working relationship between the City and the owner
and operators of clinics and to provide for review of the operation of
the clinic on a regular basis.
§ 149-2.5 SANFORD CODE § 149-2.6
141:204
ARTICLE III
Electronic Video Machines
[Adopted 12-30-2008;54 amended in its entirety by the City Council
7-19-2016 by Order No. 16-61.10]
§ 149-3.1. Purpose. [Amended 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
The City Council has determined that the regulation of arcade devices, coinoperated
amusement devices and electronic video machines promotes the
health, safety, and welfare of Sanford's citizens by assuring that all arcade
devices, electronic video machines and coin-operated amusement devices
are operated in conformance with the laws of the State of Maine and of the
City.
§ 149-3.2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARCADE DEVICE — A coin-operated amusement device for amusement and
entertainment.[Added 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES — Any machine or device which
upon the insertion of a coin may be operated by the public generally for
use as a game, entertainment, or amusement, whether or not registering
a score, and which is operated for amusement only and does not dispense
any form of payoff, prize, or reward except free replays. For the purposes of
licensing, the owner of the establishment where the device is located shall
be the party responsible for obtaining the license.[Added 5-15-2018 by
Order No. 18-116-01]
ELECTRONIC VIDEO MACHINE — A machine, however operated, which
has a video screen featuring an electronically simulated game or games,
and delivers or entitles the person playing or operating it to receive the
privilege of playing the electronic video machine, but does not deliver or
entitle the person playing or operating the electronic video machine to
receive any cash, premiums, merchandise, tickets or something of value
other than the privilege of playing the electronic video machine without
charge.
§ 149-3.3. License required. [Amended 5-15-2018 by Order No.
18-116-01]
No person, firm, or corporation shall keep, maintain, operate, lease, or
otherwise establish an arcade device, coin-operated amusement device or
devices or electronic video machines, in any premises, building, apartment,
or place without first obtaining a license from the City Clerk. Licenses under
this article shall not be issued unless the City Clerk receives affirmation
from the Inspection Team that the applicant's proposed operation meets all
54.Editor's Note: This ordinance was adopted as Ch. 154 but was renumbered as Ch. 149, Art.
III, to maintain the organization of the Code.
§ 149-3.1 JUVENILES § 149-3.3
141:205
applicable requirements. Any person carrying out such activity without a
license is in violation of these provisions. Failure to comply with any of these
requirements shall be deemed a violation of this article and is adequate
grounds for the denial, revocation, or suspension of a license.
§ 149-3.3.1. Procedures and fees.
License applications under this article shall be processed according to the
procedures established in this article and Chapter 149, Licensing. A license
may be issued after the annual fee required has been paid through the
City Clerk's office. The fee for an electronic video machine license shall be
established under Chapter 149, Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this Code, for
electronic video machines, arcade devices, and coin-operated amusement
devices.
§ 149-3.4. Licensing information; affidavit.
In addition to the requirements of § 149-3.3 and Article I of this chapter,
each applicant must annually submit the following information with an
application for licensing each electronic video machine:
§ 149-3.5. Posting of affidavit.
All affidavits required by § 149-3.4 of this Code shall be posted in a
prominent location within 25 feet of the electronic video machines licensed
under this article.
A. The following affidavit must be signed by each member of the governing
board of the applicant and by the applicant's manager and shall be duly
notarized. [Amended 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
"I __________ (Name) do declare under the penalties of false swearing,
pursuant to 17-A M.R.S.A. § 452, and/or the revocation of any licenses
granted pursuant to Chapter 149: Licensing of the Code of the City
of Sanford, Maine, that in my capacity as an officer or manager of
the __________ (Name) I am familiar with the laws, both state and
local, which govern the operation of electronic video machines. I am
unaware of any illegal activity, including but not limited to illegal
gambling as defined in Title 17-A M.R.S.A. Part 2, Chapter 39,
regarding our electronic video machines, and should I become aware
of any illegal activity I will immediately notify the Maine State Police,
Bureau of Non-Profit Gaming Licenses."
§ 149-3.3 SANFORD CODE § 149-3.5
141:206
ARTICLE IV
Medical Marijuana Production Facilities
[Adopted 7-19-2016 by Order No. 16-61.10]
§ 149-4.1. Purpose and findings.
§ 149-4.2. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all medical marijuana production facilities which
are located or proposed to be located within the City. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in 1 M.R.S.A. § 302, this article applies to any
application relating to the establishment or operation of a medical
marijuana production facility, whether or not such application had become a
"pending proceeding" as defined in 1 M.R.S.A. § 302 prior to the enactment
of this article.
§ 149-4.3. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms, which are defined in this
article or Chapter 280, Zoning, shall apply unless otherwise indicated:
Medical marijuana
Medical marijuana production facility
A. The City Council finds that a medical marijuana production facility can
be a valuable component of the City's health care system if operated by
qualified and responsible operators and subject to reasonable
regulations to assure effective operation. The City Council also
recognizes the importance of appropriately siting medical marijuana
production facilities in order to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare, including but not limited to security and preventing the
impacts of medical marijuana production from extending beyond the
residential/commercial property line of the housing unit or suite of units
in which the production activity is taking place.
B. The City Council finds that with the reasonable and necessary location
restrictions and performance standards listed in the Chapter 280,
Zoning, there remain sufficient suitable areas within the City to site
medical marijuana production facilities. Licensing of these facilities
shall provide for periodic review of and reasonable control over their
practices to ensure that life safety concerns are addressed. Licensing is
not intended to conflict with M.R.S.A. Title 22, Chapter 558-C, Maine
Medical Use of Marijuana Act, or 10-144 CMR Chapter 122, Maine
Medical Marijuana Administrative Rules, but provides separate and
additional requirements as necessitated by the above findings to
protect the interests of persons in the City.
C. In addition, the City Council has delegated to the Planning Board
application of the land use development standards of Chapter 280,
Zoning.
§ 149-4.1 JUVENILES § 149-4.3
141:207
Medical marijuana registered primary caregiver
§ 149-4.4. Licensing application requirements. [Amended
2-20-2018 by Order No. 18-115-01]
§ 149-4.5. Administration.
The application shall be administered under the provisions of § 149-1.9.
§ 149-4.6. Preexisting medical marijuana production facilities.
[Amended 6-20-2017 by Order No. 17-77.08; 12-19-2017 by Order
No. 17-210-01; 2-20-2018 by Order No. 18-115-01]
A. All applications for licenses under this article shall be filed in
accordance with § 149-1.8.
B. In addition to the information specified in § 149-1.8, an application for a
medical marijuana production facility shall provide:
(1) Documentation of the registered caregiver's(s') valid Maine Stateissued
medical marijuana primary caregiver registry identification
card(s).
(2) Accurate vicinity map drawn to scale showing the location of any
existing private or public school, child-care provider, playground
and/or church within 500 feet of the proposed medical marijuana
production facility.
(3) Location within the facility where a copy of the medical marijuana
production facility's Operations Manual and Security Plan is stored.
(4) For any new operation, certification, by a mechanical engineer or
other qualified professional, registered in the State of Maine, of the
adequacy of the ventilation system to prevent odors from being
detected beyond the boundaries of the property or submission of an
Odor Control Plan that meets the requirements of § 280-15-10C(6)
of the Zoning Ordinance. For an existing licensed operation,
submission of a revised Odor Control Plan or verification that the
Odor Control Plan which was submitted for the new operation,
remains in place and is functioning effectively.
A. Any medical marijuana production facility in lawful existence on the
effective date of this article may remain in operation in its present
location without applying for or obtaining a license required hereunder
until March 31, 2018, or 12 months following the effective date of the
original adoption of this article, whichever is later; except that the City
Council may extend this deadline to May 15, 2018, if by March 20,
2018, an applicant submits certification by a mechanical engineer or
other qualified professional registered in the State of Maine of the
adequacy of the ventilation system to prevent odors from being
detected beyond the boundaries of the property or an Odor Control Plan
§ 149-4.3 SANFORD CODE § 149-4.6
141:208
§ 149-4.7. Confidentiality for medical marijuana registered
caregivers.
An individual who possesses a valid Maine State-issued medical marijuana
primary caregiver registry identification card need not identify himself or
herself in an application for a license for a medical marijuana production
facility. The cardholder must identify himself or herself and provide the
relevant cards to the City Clerk for examination, but the identity of the
cardholder shall not be a public record and the City Clerk shall not share the
identity of the cardholder, except as necessary by law in the performance
of his or her duties. At the time of application the cardholder may appoint
a representative to appear before the City Council on his or her behalf.
Advertisements for public hearing shall contain the location of the proposed
medical marijuana production facility and the identity of the owner of the
real estate and the identity of the designated representative. The City Clerk
may certify to the City Council that the applicant meets the necessary legal
requirements as a cardholder(s).
that meets the requirements of § 280-15-10C(6). Thereafter, such
facilities shall be required to comply with all the licensing provisions of
this article. A medical marijuana production facility in lawful existence
and operation on the effective date of this article may continue as sited
and operated on that date if a licensing application is submitted in
accordance with this article, until such time as the valid Maine Stateissued
medical marijuana primary caregiver registry identification card
or local licensing application is denied or revoked.
B. No person shall have any entitlement or vested right to licensing under
this article. To lawfully engage in operating a medical marijuana
production facility, all persons must obtain a license under these
regulations.
C. A preexisting business operating under this article must cease
operation within 45 days after the issuance of a denial letter or revised
denial letter, as applicable.
§ 149-4.6 JUVENILES § 149-4.7
141:209

ARTICLE V
Rental Housing
[Adopted 7-18-2017 by Order No. 17-83.06]
§ 149-5.1. Purpose; intent.
§ 149-5.2. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this article, have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms not defined
in this article, which are defined in articles adopted by reference, have the
meanings ascribed to them as stated in those articles.
RENT — Payments made for the use of a premises, including, but not
limited to, money, services, trade, or a combination thereof; or the sharing
A. The purpose of this rental housing license and associated rental
housing inspection program is to protect the health, safety, and general
welfare of the people of the City by recognizing that the offering for
rental of housing is a business, classifying and regulating such rentals
as a rental housing business, establishing a permanent mode of
protecting and regulating the living conditions and life safety of
residents of the City who rent dwellings, and to provide a means for
imposing license fees separate from property taxes to help the City
defray the cost necessary for housing inspections and enforcement of
this license and further including in the aims of the license and
inspection program, as beneficial purposes to:
(1) Correct and prevent conditions that adversely affect the life, safety,
welfare and health of occupants of rental housing.
(2) Preserve the value of land and buildings throughout the City.
(3) Eliminate substandard and deteriorating rental housing.
(4) Provide minimum standards for the health and safety of the
occupants of rental housing.
(5) Provide minimum space standards to prevent overcrowding.
(6) Enforce minimum standards for the maintenance of existing
residential buildings to prevent slum and blight.
B. It is not the intent of the City to intrude upon the contractual
relationship between tenant and landlord. The City does not intend to
intervene as an advocate of either party, or to act as an arbiter, or to be
receptive to the complaints from a tenant or landlord not specifically
and clearly relevant to the provisions of this article. In the absence of
such relevancy with regard to rental disputes, it is intended that the
contracting parties exercise such legal rights as are available to them
without the intervention of the City.
§ 149-5.1 JUVENILES § 149-5.2
141:211
of housing expenses with persons not part of the homeowner's immediate
family.
RENTAL HOUSING — Any property that contains a building or division of
a building that is rented or available for rent as a dwelling or habitation
to any person or persons. Rental housing includes rental of a house, home,
apartment, room, or bed for a time period which may terminate upon a
certain event, a specific term, for a series of periods until canceled, or atwill.
§ 149-5.3. Applicability; exceptions.
§ 149-5.4. License required.
A valid rental housing license under the terms of this article is required, and
no person, including without limitation a property owner, owner's associate,
real estate broker, associate real estate broker, real estate agent, or
property manager, shall allow any rental housing unit to be occupied, or let
or offer to another any rental housing unit for occupancy, or charge, accept
or retain rent for any rental housing unless the owner has a valid license
under the terms of this article. Any person carrying on such a business
activity without a license is in violation of these provisions.
§ 149-5.5. Issuance of license; transferability.
A license pursuant to this article may be issued to the property owner for
the property named on the approved license application. One license may
be issued for each property with rental housing units and shall be deemed
to cover only such dwelling units under single ownership. No transfer of a
license is allowed between property owners or between properties.
A. The provisions of this article apply to all rental housing, including and
not limited to dwellings and dwelling units, rooms, or beds rented
within dwelling units. The provisions apply to rental of single-family
dwellings, dwelling units in owner-occupied dwellings, condominiums,
townhouses, and to leasehold cooperative dwelling units.
B. The provisions of this article do not apply to owner-occupied single
dwelling units where no portion of the dwelling is rented; owneroccupied
dwelling units in cooperative, condominium, or townhouse
buildings where no portion of the dwelling is rented; dwelling units
occupied by a family as defined in Chapter 280, Zoning; hotels, motels,
or bed and breakfasts; hospitals; convalescent, rest, or nursing homes;
residential care or congregate care facilities; or other institutional beds
or rooms used for medical or mental health treatment services; or
mobile homes regulated by the Federal Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) Construction Code.
§ 149-5.2 SANFORD CODE § 149-5.6
141:212
§ 149-5.6. Renewal; license term.
Before December 31 the owner shall apply for or renew his or her annual
rental housing license for the successive year. Within 60 days of purchasing,
transferring, or converting a property into a rental housing unit or units
the owner shall apply for a rental housing license. All licenses expire on
December 31.
§ 149-5.7. Fees; credits and exemptions.
§ 149-5.8. Application for license.
A license application shall be made to the Code Enforcement Office on a
form furnished by the Code Enforcement Office for such purpose and shall
include the following information:
A. A license may be issued for a property owner after the annual fee
required has been paid through the Code Enforcement Office. The fee
for a rental housing license is according to the following schedule:
(1) Single family property: $100.
(2) Two-family property: $200.
(3) Three-family property: $300.
(4) Four-to-seven-unit property: $400.
(5) Eight-plus-unit property: $500.
(6) A mixed use property: $100, plus $100 for each dwelling unit at
that property up to a maximum of $500.
B. Property owners that apply for and are issued a license by December
31, have corrected any violations upon a second inspection, maintain
good standing, and meet all licensing standards are eligible for a credit
of 50% per rental housing property per year commencing in the second
year through the so-called "Good Neighbor Program."
C. Rental housing which has been newly constructed or has undergone
substantial renovations impacting all aspects of the building are exempt
from the fee for a period of two years because inspections were
conducted as part of the receiving a certificate of occupancy. These
properties are automatically eligible to roll into the so-called "Good
Neighbor Credit Program."
D. Rental housing may deduct $100 from the fee for each owner-occupied
unit.
A. Name, business or residence address, cell phone and primary telephone
numbers, email address of the owner or owners of the property;
B. Name, business or residence address, cell and primary telephone
numbers, e-mail address of the primary responsible party for the
§ 149-5.6 JUVENILES § 149-5.8
141:213
§ 149-5.9. Licensing standards.
The following minimum standards and conditions shall be met in order to
hold a rental housing license and maintain good standing. Failure to comply
with any of these standards and conditions shall be deemed a violation of
this article and adequate grounds for the denial, revocation, or suspension
of a rental housing license.
§ 149-5.10. Authority to issue licenses.
The Code Enforcement Office shall have the authority to issue all licenses
pursuant to this article to applicants meeting the licensing standards.
§ 149-5.11. Authorized entry for inspection.
To safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the public, Code Enforcement
Officers are authorized to enter any licensed rental housing at any
reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting.
§ 149-5.12. Inspections.
property which shall be the primary contact for the City to schedule
inspections and who takes responsibility for maintaining the property
and who may also be named if enforcement action is unavoidable.
C. Street address of the property, parcel identification code or map and lot
for the property.
D. Number and kind of rental housing units within the property. For each
rental housing unit, specify the floor number and unit number and/or
letter and/or designation.
A. The licensee shall provide all application information and have paid the
required license fee.
B. Rental housing shall not exceed the maximum number of dwelling units
permitted by this Code.
C. No rental housing shall be over-occupied or illegally occupied in
violation of this Code.
D. No rental housing shall have outstanding code violations or
alternatively be without an plan of action to correct those violations of
this Code approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
E. The rental housing shall not have been used or converted to rooming
units in violation of this Code.
F. The rental housing shall not be under condemnation as hazardous or
unfit for human habitation under this Code.
G. The rental housing shall not have delinquent real estate taxes due and
owing.
§ 149-5.8 SANFORD CODE § 149-5.12
141:214
§ 149-5.13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article or the terms of the
license may be penalized in the following manner:
A. Regular inspections are required for all rental housing.
B. After a license has been issued, the Code Enforcement Office will
schedule an initial inspection of a licensed property with the owner or
responsible party for a mutually agreed upon time.
C. Inspections of properties will be conducted as follows:
(1) Properties categorized as single-family, two-family, and threefamily
will have all units and common areas inspected.
(2) Properties categorized as four-through-seven-unit and mixed use
with four to seven units will have a sampling of four units and the
common areas inspected, unless life safety and more than two code
violations are found, then all units will be inspected.
(3) Properties categorized as eight-plus units and mixed use with eight
plus units will have a sampling of five units and the common areas
inspected, unless life safety and more than two code violations are
found, then all units will be inspected.
(4) Owner-occupied dwelling units need not necessarily be inspected.
D. The standards to be used for inspections pursuant to Chapter 90 and
Chapter 128 shall include the inspection of the premises, building
exterior, common areas, all dwelling units, accessory buildings, and the
basement.
E. If a violation of applicable law, ordinance or regulation is discovered,
the owner shall be notified of the nature of the violation and time within
which such correction shall be completed. In the event violations have
not been corrected upon a second reinspection, or no authorized person
was present to accompany the Code Enforcement Officer upon
reinspection, violations and penalties will apply unless an extension is
granted. The penalty for the third and each successive reinspection is
$50.
F. Following an inspection, if no violations are found, the property owner
will be issued a certificate showing compliance with the license and
code.
G. Rental housing receiving the so-called "Good Neighbor Credit" will be
inspected once every three to four years, unless a tenant complaint
cannot be resolved without an inspection; otherwise inspections will be
conducted once per year or more frequently as justified due to tenant
complaints, calls for police or fire service, age of structure, maintained
appearance of the structure, or nonpayment of taxes and other utilities.
§ 149-5.12 JUVENILES § 149-5.13
141:215
§ 149-5.14. Appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall act as the Rental Housing License Board
of Appeals in order to hear appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations
made relative to application and interpretations of this article. Appeals to
A. Temporary suspension. The Code Enforcement Officer, with prior
approval of the City Manager or his/her designee, is authorized to
immediately and temporarily suspend any license to an entire property
or portion thereof. The City Manager or his/her designee shall
determine if the continued operation of the licensed premises or
activity presents a danger to the health, safety, and general welfare of
the public; the Code Enforcement Officer has been refused entry to
inspect the premises; the licensed premises has not met the
requirements of the City property, building, fire, or applicable State
laws; the continuation of the license creates a nuisance; or the licensee
has not corrected violations by the expiration date within which such
violations were to be corrected.
B. Revocation. The Code Enforcement Officer, with prior approval of the
City Manager or his/her designee, is authorized to immediately revoke
any license to an entire property or portion thereof. The City Manager
or his/her designee shall determine if the continued operation of the
licensed premises or activity presents a danger to the health, safety,
and general welfare of the public; the Code Enforcement Officer has
been refused entry to inspect the premises; the licensed premises has
not met the requirements of the City property, building, fire, or
applicable State laws; the continuation of the license creates a
nuisance; or the licensee has not corrected violations by the expiration
date within which such violations were to be corrected.
C. Unlicensed rental housing units. Any person failing to apply for a rental
housing license and pay the required fee shall be in violation of this
article and such violation is a civil penalty enforced by the Police
Department and subject to a fine in the amount of $500 per property in
addition to any other fines for violating this article and the fee for
licensing the rental housing.
D. Civil penalties. In addition to any other fines or penalties for violating
any provisions of this article or the terms of the license, violation of this
article is a civil penalty enforced by the Police Department. In any such
proceeding, the City may seek an administrative warrant to conduct an
inspection, court order that the owner and/or operator of the licensed
activity abate any violations, pay a penalty between $100 and $2,500
per violation, per day, and pay the court costs, attorneys and expert
witness fees incurred by the City, and, if applicable, costs incurred by
the City in securing adequate substitute housing for affected tenants.
E. Condemnation. Upon temporary suspension, revocation, denial, or
unlicensed rental housing units, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
post the property against occupancy.
§ 149-5.13 SANFORD CODE § 149-5.14
141:216
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be submitted as otherwise set forth in
City Code Chapter 280, Zoning, regarding administrative appeals, subject
to the payment of any fees as may be determined by the municipal officers
from time to time.
§ 149-5.15. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, or part of this article
or of any ordinance included in this Code or through supplementation
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgement shall not affect impair or invalidate the remainder therefor
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
section, article, or part therefore directly involved in the controversy in
which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 149-5.14 JUVENILES § 149-5.15
141:217

ARTICLE VI
Vacant and Abandoned Buildings
[Adopted 7-18-2017 by Order No. 17-83.06]
§ 149-6.1. Findings.
§ 149-6.2. Purpose. [Amended 5-1-2018 by Order No. 18-184-0155]
The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety, and general
welfare of the people of the City by establishing a program to identify,
register, inspect to minimum standards and determine the actions the
owners will take to return vacant buildings to suitable or proper use or
occupancy, or securing or demolishing such vacant and abandoned
buildings. This article is intended to prevent or mitigate dangers to health,
safety, and welfare, promote responsible management, provide a safe
neighborhood for residents, safeguard property values, expedite building
repairs, and provide for prompt contact with owners or managers by police,
fire, and code enforcement when issues or emergencies develop.
§ 149-6.3. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this article, have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms not defined
in this article, which are defined in articles adopted by reference, have the
meanings ascribed to them as stated in those articles.
ABANDONED — A property that has been determined to be abandoned
pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3106-B that meets one or more of the following
criteria:[Amended 5-1-2018 by Order No. 18-184-01]
A. It is found that buildings which remain vacant and unoccupied for any
significant period of time become a blight in the City and
neighborhoods, which attracts criminal activity, is a threat to the public
safety, constitutes a fire hazard, constitutes a hazard to health or safety
because of inadequate maintenance or dilapidation, is a nuisance or is
dangerous to life or property, and causes neighboring properties to
suffer from stagnant or declining property value. The use and
maintenance of property in such condition and manner endangers the
public safety and health, constitutes an unreasonable use and
conditions to the annoyance, discomfort, and repose of a considerable
number of the public, is detrimental to the public good and common
welfare and renders a considerable number of the public insecure in the
use and enjoyment of their property, and thus constitutes a nuisance
condition.
B. Adequate protection of public health, safety and welfare, therefore
requires the establishment and enforcement of the means by which
such nuisance conditions may be abated.
55.Editor’s Note: This order also amended the title of Article VI.
§ 149-6.1 JUVENILES § 149-6.3
141:219
PROPERTY DEFECTS — A condition that, in the judgment of the
municipality, contributes to blight as a result of the continued lack of care,
maintenance or security of a property pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3106-B.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any person, agent, holder of an unrecorded
contract for deed, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, a mortgagor or
vendor in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee,
other person, firm or corporation in control of the freehold of the premises
or lessor state therein, or other legal entity having a legal or equitable
interest in a vacant building, including but not limited to the beneficiary of
a trust, and the holder of a life estate.[Amended 5-1-2018 by Order No.
18-184-01]
VACANT BUILDING — A residential or commercial building which is lacking
habitual presence of natural persons who have a legal right to be on
the premises, or at which substantially all lawful business operations or
residential occupancy has ceased with the exception of secure accessory
buildings not intended for human occupancy. Any building in which more
than one of the total exterior windows and doors are broken, boarded or not
present without functioning locks may be deemed vacant regardless of the
occupancy.[Amended 5-1-2018 by Order No. 18-184-01]
§ 149-6.4. Applicability; exceptions.
Doors and windows on the mortgaged premises are continuously
boarded up, broken or left unlocked.
A.
Furnishings and personal property are absent from the mortgaged
premises.
B.
The mortgaged premises are deteriorating so as to constitute a threat
to public health or safety.
C.
A mortgagee has changed the locks on the mortgaged premises and
neither the mortgagor nor anyone on the mortgagor's behalf has
requested entrance to, or taken other steps to gain entrance to the
mortgaged premises.
D.
Reports of trespassers, vandalism or other illegal acts being committed
on the mortgaged premises have been made to local law enforcement
authorities.
E.
A code enforcement officer or other public official has made a
determination or finding that the mortgaged premises are abandoned
or unfit for occupancy.
F.
The mortgagor is deceased and there is no evidence that an heir
or personal representative has taken possession of the mortgaged
premises.
G.
A. The provisions of this article apply to all vacant building or abandoned
property located within the City.
§ 149-6.3 SANFORD CODE § 149-6.4
141:220
§ 149-6.5. License required.
A vacant building license under the terms of this article is required. Any
person carrying on without a vacant building license shall be deemed in
violation of these provisions.
§ 149-6.6. Issuance of license; transferability. [Amended 5-1-2018
by Order No. 18-184-01]
A license pursuant to this article may be issued to the owner or responsible
party of the vacant building named on the approved license application.
One license may be issued for a vacant building and shall be deemed to
cover only such building under single ownership. No transfer of a license is
allowed between owners or between buildings.
§ 149-6.7. License timeframes. [Amended 5-1-2018 by Order No.
18-184-01]
§ 149-6.8. Fees. [Amended 5-1-2018 by Order No. 18-184-01]
§ 149-6.9. Application for license.
B. Exceptions. This article does not apply to primary residences of
members of the armed forces on active duty, lawful seasonal or resort
residences or facilities being occupied periodically during the year.
[Amended 5-1-2018 by Order No. 18-184-01]
A. Beginning August 1, 2017, and within 90 days of a building becoming
vacant, each owner or a responsible party of such vacant building shall
apply for a vacant building license. Applications are made to the Code
Enforcement Office.
B. Within 90 days of purchasing, transferring, assigning, or acquiring a
vacant building the owner or a responsible party shall apply for a
vacant building license.
A. A license may be issued for an owner or responsible party after the fee
required has been paid. The fee is paid through the Code Enforcement
Office.
(1) The fee is $300 for each six-month license issued for vacant
buildings which are determined to be abandoned, including
properties in mortgage default according to the criteria established
herein.
(2) The fee is $100 for each twelve-month license issued for vacant
buildings which are maintained by the owner or under the owner's
direct control.
B. The fee escalates at a rate of two times the prior year fee for each
additional year a building continues as abandoned regardless of the
responsible party.
§ 149-6.4 JUVENILES § 149-6.9
141:221
§ 149-6.10. Standards and conditions.
The following minimum standards and conditions shall be met for vacant
buildings. Failure to comply with any of these standards and conditions shall
be deemed a violation of this article.
A. A license application shall be made to the Code Enforcement Office on a
form furnished by the City Code Enforcement Office for such purpose
and shall include the following information:
(1) Name, business or residence address, cell phone and primary
telephone numbers, e-mail address of the owner or owners of the
building.
(2) Name, business or residence address, cell phone and primary
telephone numbers, e-mail address of the individual designated by
the owner or owners of the building as the authorized agent for
receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding in
connection with the enforcement of this article or code regarding
the vacant building.
(3) Name, business or residence address, twenty-four-hour-a-day cell
and primary telephone numbers, e-mail address of the property
manager responsible for management and maintenance of the
building which shall be the primary contact for the City to schedule
inspections.
(4) The name of any bank/lender/lien holder with an interest in the
property and its contact information, including the mailing address
of the bank/lender/lien holder.
(5) Street address of the building, parcel identification code or map
and lot for the property on which the building sits.
(6) Statement of intent, including the expected period of vacancy, the
plan for care, maintenance and security of the property during the
vacancy, code compliance pursuant to Chapter 90 and Chapter 128,
and a plan and timeline for lawful occupancy, rehabilitation, or
removal or demolition of the building to commence.
(7) List of persons authorized to be present in the building, including a
statement that any person not listed shall be considered
trespassers.
B. If any contact information required in the application changes or
becomes out-of-date, the owner must notify the Code Enforcement
Office of the changes in writing within 30 days of such change. Failure
to notify the Code Enforcement Office of changes is a violation of this
article.
§ 149-6.9 SANFORD CODE § 149-6.10
141:222
§ 149-6.11. Authority to issue licenses.
The Code Enforcement Office shall have the authority to issue all licenses
pursuant to this article to applicants meeting the licensing standards.
§ 149-6.12. Authorized entry for inspection.
To safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the public, Code Enforcement
Officers are authorized to enter any licensed vacant building at any
reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting.
§ 149-6.13. Inspections; correction of defects. [Amended 5-1-2018
by Order No. 18-184-01]
§ 149-6.14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article or the terms of the
license may be penalized in the following manner:
A. The licensee shall provide complete application information and have
paid the required license fee.
B. The building shall be in code compliance with Chapter 90 and Chapter
128 pursuant to an inspection of the premises, building exterior,
common areas, all dwelling units, accessory buildings, and the
basement.
C. A vacant building shall be free of any property defects as defined in
30-A M.R.S.A § 3106-B.
D. A vacant building shall not be a dangerous building pursuant to 17
M.R.S.A § 2851.
E. No vacant building shall be occupied or illegally occupied in violation of
this Code.
A. At the time of application, the owner or responsible party of a vacant
building shall arrange for an inspection of the property with the Code
Enforcement Office. The purpose of the inspection is to determine and
ensure compliance with minimum standards pursuant to Chapter 90
and Chapter 128 and shall include the inspection of the premises,
building exterior, common areas, all dwelling units, accessory
buildings, and the basement.
B. If any property defects are identified, property defects are to be
corrected within 30 days of the issuance of a notice to correct or within
30 days following issuance of a construction permit which was applied
for promptly by the owner or responsible party.
A. Dangerous buildings. A vacant or abandoned building deemed to be
structurally unsafe, unstable, unsanitary, constitutes a fire hazard, is
unsuitable or improper for the use or occupancy to which it is put,
§ 149-6.10 JUVENILES § 149-6.14
141:223
constitutes a hazard to health or safety because of improper
maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment, or is
otherwise dangerous to life or property is a dangerous building and
a nuisance and the City may seek to order the nuisance abated or
removed pursuant to 17 M.R.S.A § 2851. [Amended 5-1-2018 by
Order No. 18-184-01]
B. Abandoned building. A vacant or abandoned building may be deemed to
be abandoned and the City may seek to remedy property defects
pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A § 3106-B. [Amended 5-1-2018 by Order
No. 18-184-01]
C. Temporary suspension. The Code Enforcement Officer, with prior
approval of the City Manager or his/her designee, is authorized to
immediately and temporarily suspend any license to an entire property
or portion thereof. The City Manager or his/her designee shall
determine if the continued operation of the licensed premises or
activity presents a danger to the health, safety, and general welfare of
the public; the Code Enforcement Officer has been refused entry to
inspect the premises; the licensed premises has not met the
requirements of the City property, building, fire, or applicable State
laws; the continuation of the license creates a nuisance; or, the licensee
has not corrected violations by the expiration date within which such
violations were to be corrected.
D. Revocation. The Code Enforcement Officer, with prior approval of the
City Manager or his/her designee, is authorized to immediately revoke
any license to an entire property or portion thereof. The City Manager
or his/her designee shall determine if the continued operation of the
licensed premises or activity presents a danger to the health, safety,
and general welfare of the public; the Code Enforcement Officer has
been refused entry to inspect the premises; the licensed premises has
not met the requirements of the City property, building, fire, or
applicable State laws; the continuation of the license creates a
nuisance; or, the licensee has not corrected violations by the expiration
date within which such violations were to be corrected.
E. Unlicensed vacant buildings. Any person failing to apply for a vacant
building license and pay the required fee shall be in violation of this
article and such violation is a civil penalty enforced by the Police
Department and subject to a fine in the amount of $300 for each month
the building remains unlicensed.
F. Civil penalties. In addition to injunctive relief and any fines or penalties
for violating any provision of this article or the terms of the license,
violation of this article is a civil penalty enforced by the Police
Department. In any such proceeding, the City may seek an
administrative warrant to conduct an inspection, court order that the
owner and/or operator of the licensed activity abate any violations, pay
a penalty between $100 and $2,500 per violation, per day, and pay the
court costs, attorneys and expert witness fees incurred by the City.
§ 149-6.14 SANFORD CODE § 149-6.14
141:224
§ 149-6.15. Appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall act as the Rental Housing License Board
of Appeals in order to hear appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations
made relative to application and interpretations of this code. Appeals to the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be submitted as otherwise set forth in City
Code Chapter 280, Zoning, regarding administrative appeals, subject to the
payment of any fees as may be determined by the municipal officers from
time to time.
§ 149-6.16. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, or part of this article
or of any ordinance included in this Code or through supplementation
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgement shall not affect impair or invalidate the remainder thereof
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
section, article, or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which
such judgement shall have been rendered.
G. Condemnation. Upon temporary suspension, revocation, or unlicensed
vacant building the Code Enforcement Officer shall post the property
against occupancy.
§ 149-6.14 JUVENILES § 149-6.16
141:225

ARTICLE VII
Breweries, Distilleries and Wineries
[Adopted 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
§ 149-7.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BREWERY — Brewery, distillery, malt liquor, spirits, wine, and winery shall
have the same meaning as provided for in 28-A M.R.S.A. § 2, as amended
hereafter.
§ 149-7.2. License requirements.
No person, firm, or corporation may operate a brewery, distillery, or winery
until such person, firm or corporation first obtains a license for such
purpose from the City. Licenses under this article shall not be issued unless
the City Clerk receives affirmation from the Inspection Team that the
applicant's operation meets all applicable requirements. Any person
carrying out such activity without a license is in violation of these
provisions. Failure to comply with any of these requirements shall be
deemed a violation of this article and is adequate grounds for the denial,
revocation, or suspension of a license.
§ 149-7.3. Procedures and fees.
License applications under this article shall be processed according to the
procedures established in this article and Chapter 149, Licensing. A license
may be issued after the annual fee required has been paid through the City
Clerk's office. The fee for a license shall be established under Chapter 149,
Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this Code for brewery.
§ 149-7.1 JUVENILES § 149-7.3
141:227

ARTICLE VIII
Closing-Out Sales
[Adopted 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
§ 149-8.1. License requirements.
No person, firm, or corporation may offer for sale a stock of goods, wares,
merchandise under the designation of "closing-out sale," "going out of
business sale," "discontinuance of business sale," "entire stock must go,"
"must sell to the bare walls," or other designation that states, directly or by
implication, an intent of that person, firm or corporation to dispose of the
entire stock of goods with a view to permanently terminate further business
after that disposal is complete until such person, firm, or corporation first
obtains a license for such purpose from the City. Licenses under this article
shall not be issued unless the City Clerk receives affirmation from the
Inspection Team that the applicant's proposed operation meets all
applicable requirements. Any person carrying out such activity without a
license is in violation of these provisions. Failure to comply with any of these
requirements shall be deemed a violation of this article and is adequate
grounds for the denial, revocation, or suspension of a license.
§ 149-8.2. Procedures and fees.
License applications under this article shall be processed according to
the procedures established in this article and Chapter 149, Licensing. A
license may be issued after the required fee has been paid through the City
Clerk's office. The fee for a license shall be established under Chapter 149,
Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this Code for closing-out sales.
§ 149-8.3. Duration of license.
A license is valid for 60 days from the date of issuance. The license may
be extended for 60 additional days if the licensee provides an affidavit to
the City stating that all goods, wares or merchandise listed in the inventory
have not been disposed of within the original sixty-day period.
§ 149-8.4. Application.
License application shall be made to the City Clerk on a form furnished by
the City Clerk for such purpose and shall include in addition to any other
required information established under Chapter 149, Licensing:
A. A complete inventory of all items to be included in the sale.
B. An affidavit stating that merchandise will not be included in the stock
offered for sale unless the merchandise is in or at the place of business
where the sale will take place when the sale opens.
C. If the applicant has been in the same business for which the sale is
being conducted for less than two years of continuous operation, the
applicant must also state by affidavit that none of the merchandise was
§ 149-8.1 JUVENILES § 149-8.4
141:229
§ 149-8.5. Inventory.
Any unusual purchases and additions to the stock of goods, wares, or
merchandise made within 60 days before the filing of an application for a
license is prima facie evidence that the purchases and additions were made
in contemplation of the sale.
§ 149-8.6. Recordkeeping.
The City Clerk shall preserve all applications for licenses and other papers
filed in connection with an application as a public record for five years.
purchased before the sale opened for the purpose of selling and
disposing of that merchandise at the sale.
§ 149-8.4 SANFORD CODE § 149-8.6
141:230
ARTICLE IX
Peddling
[Adopted 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
§ 149-9.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MERCHANDISE — Any object, wares, goods, promises, commodities,
intangibles, services, or other things of value, but not including food.
PEDDLER — A person, firm, or corporation conducting business on a
temporary short-term basis from a nonfixed location, which may include
traveling by foot, cart, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance;
or who without traveling from place to place is selling, exposing, or offering
for sale, bargain, trade, exchange, or giving, tangible commodities,
products, goods, or merchandise or any service where delivery is made
at, or after the time of the sale. A peddler shall include "hawker" and
"huckster." A peddler shall include a transient seller. Peddling does not
include newspaper deliveries, deliveries made by common-carries such as
the United Parcel Service or take-out delivery made from licensed victualer
as defined in the Code. Peddling does not include casual transactions made
between private citizens.
TRANSIENT SELLER — A person, firm, or corporation who engages in
the business of soliciting, selling, giving, exposing, or offering for sale,
tangible commodities, goods, or merchandise, whether new or used, or any
service where delivery is made at, or after the time of sale to consumers by
means of personal contact, telephone contact, text messaging, or by other
electronic means such as email, whether or not the seller is present in the
State at the time of the contact or the time of sale, and who may or may
not have, for the purposes of carrying on such business, any permanent
place of business within the State or is conducting business on a temporary
short-term basis from a nonfixed location. Transient sellers shall include all
business done solely by electronic means or operating through an automatic
teller or kiosk. Transient seller does not include a person who sells at public
fairs, expositions, flea markets, or bazaars, or a member selling on behalf of
public service organizations. Transient seller does not include a person who
sells exclusively by mail contact.
§ 149-9.2. License requirements.
No person, firm, or corporation may operate as a peddler until such person,
firm, or corporation first obtains a license for such purpose from the City.
Licenses under this article shall not be issued unless the City Clerk receives
affirmation from the Inspection Team that the applicant's proposed
operation meets all applicable requirements. Any person carrying out such
activity without a license is in violation of these provisions. Failure to
comply with any of these requirements shall be deemed a violation of this
§ 149-9.1 JUVENILES § 149-9.2
141:231
article and is adequate grounds for the denial, revocation, or suspension of
a license.
§ 149-9.3. Procedures and fees.
License applications under this article shall be processed according to the
procedures established in this article and Chapter 149, Licensing. A license
may be issued after the required fee has been paid through the City Clerk's
office. The fee shall be established under Chapter 149, Licensing, § 149-1.4,
Fees, of this Code for peddlers. Licensed premises as defined in this code
are exempt from the fee for a peddler license.
§ 149-9.4. Application.
License application shall be made to the City Clerk on a form furnished by
the City Clerk for such purpose and shall include in addition to any other
required information established under Chapter 149, Licensing:
A. A brief description of the nature of the business and the tangible
commodity to be transacted.
B. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with
license number or other means of identification.
C. A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior
to the date of filing of the application.
D. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the
nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
E. A full description of the location peddling is to be carried out of if within
a stationary or regular location and a letter of agreement from the
owner of record of the property that the applicant will make
transactions upon.
§ 149-9.2 SANFORD CODE § 149-9.4
141:232
ARTICLE X
Places of Assembly and Temporary Exhibitions
[Adopted 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
§ 149-10.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CARNIVAL — Any traveling amusement show, excluding circuses, with
or without midway, rides, concessions, or other specific attractions. For
licensing purposes, the term "carnival" shall also include rodeos, thrill
shows, and freak shows.
CIRCUS — Any show in which feats of horsemanship, tumbling, strength,
etc., are exhibited, excluding carnivals and harness or running horse races;
any show with an enclosed ring for the exhibition of animals.
§ 149-10.2. Places of assembly license required.
No person, firm, or corporation may operate a place of assembly for the
purpose of amusement or entertainment including concert halls, indoor and
outdoor exhibition places, playhouses, movie theaters, concession stand,
indoor skating rinks, bowling alleys, billiard rooms, and municipal facilities
on a scheduled regular basis until such person, firm, or corporation first
obtains a license for such purpose from the City. Licenses under this article
shall not be issued unless the City Clerk receives affirmation from the
Inspection Team that the applicant's proposed operation meets all
applicable requirements. Any person carrying out such activity without a
license is in violation of these provisions. Failure to comply with any of these
requirements shall be deemed a violation of this article and is adequate
grounds for the denial, revocation, or suspension of a license.
§ 149-10.3. Temporary exhibitions license required.
No person, firm, or corporation may operate a traveling amusement show
or temporary exhibition or event, pageant, theatrical performance, whether
indoors or outdoors, including a music festival or exhibition for the purpose
of amusement or entertainment, including but not limited to circuses and
carnivals until such person, firm, or corporation first obtains a license for
such purpose from the municipal officers. Licenses under this article shall
not be issued unless the City Clerk receives affirmation from the Inspection
Team that the applicant's proposed operation meets all applicable
requirements and that any emergency services, including but not limited
to ambulance, fire, or police services necessary for the event are arranged
and paid for. Any person carrying out such activity without a license is
in violation of these provisions. Failure to comply with any of these
requirements shall be deemed a violation of this article and is adequate
grounds for the denial, revocation, or suspension of a license.
§ 149-10.1 JUVENILES § 149-10.4
141:233
§ 149-10.4. Fee exemption.
Municipal facilities and municipal sponsored events are exempt from the
fee.
§ 149-10.5. Procedures and fees.
License applications under this article shall be processed according to
the procedures established in this article and Chapter 149, Licensing. A
license may be issued after the fee required has been paid through the
City Clerk's office. The fee for a license shall be established under Chapter
149, Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this Code for places of assembly and
temporary exhibitions except that municipal facilities licensed to a City
Department or the farmers' market are exempt from the fee.
§ 149-10.6. Insurance requirements.
Prior to the issuance of a temporary exhibition license, the applicant shall
furnish documentation of public liability insurances with the City of Sanford
named as additionally insured sufficient in amount of no less than $400,000
per occurrence to insure for damages to public property in the area arising
out of or in connection with the event.
§ 149-10.7. Right to use property; plan of area.
The applicant shall file with his application for a temporary exhibition
license adequate proof of permission from the landowner to use the
property and shall furnish a plan showing the size of the area to be used,
with designated locations for drinking, toilet and washing facilities, waste
containers and disposal plan, first aid facilities and off-street parking.
§ 149-10.4 SANFORD CODE § 149-10.7
141:234
ARTICLE XI
Sport Shooting Ranges
[Adopted 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
§ 149-11.1. License requirements.
No person, firm, or corporation may operate a sport shooting range, open
to the public, used principally or primarily for archery, skeet and/or trap
shooting, other shooting sports, shooting rifles, shotguns and pistols or
other projectiles, such as paint balls or laser tag, until such person, firm, or
corporation first obtains a license for such purpose from the City. Licenses
under this article shall not be issued unless the City Clerk receives
affirmation from the Inspection Team that the applicant's proposed
operation meets all applicable requirements. Any person carrying out such
activity without a license is in violation of these provisions. Failure to
comply with any of these requirements shall be deemed a violation of this
article and is adequate grounds for the denial, revocation, or suspension of
a license.
§ 149-11.2. Procedures and fees.
License applications under this article shall be processed according to the
procedures established in this article and Chapter 149, Licensing. A license
may be issued after the annual fee required has been paid through the City
Clerk's office. The fee for a license shall be established under Chapter 149,
Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this Code for sport shooting ranges.
§ 149-11.1 JUVENILES § 149-11.2
141:235

ARTICLE XII
Tattoo Artists and Body Piercing
[Adopted 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
§ 149-12.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BODY PIERCING — The creation of an opening in the body of a human being
for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration, including, but not
limited to, piercing of an ear, lip, tongue, nose or eyebrow. Body piercing
does not include piercing an earlobe with a disposable, single-use or solid
needle that is applied using a mechanical device to force the needle or stud
through the earlobe.
TATTOO — Inserting pigment under the skin of human beings by pricking
with a needle or otherwise, so as to produce an indelible mark or figure
visible through the skin.
§ 149-12.2. License requirements.
No person, firm, or corporation may operate a tattoo artist establishment
or body piercing establishment until such person, firm, or corporation
first obtains a license for such purpose from the City. Licenses under this
article shall not be issued unless the City Clerk receives affirmation from
the Inspection Team that the applicant's operation meets all applicable
requirements. Any person carrying out such activity without a license is
in violation of these provisions. Failure to comply with any of these
requirements shall be deemed a violation of this article and is adequate
grounds for the denial, revocation, or suspension of a license.
§ 149-12.3. Procedures and fees.
License applications under this article shall be processed according to the
procedures established in this article and Chapter 149, Licensing. A license
may be issued after the annual fee required has been paid through the City
Clerk's office. The fee for a license shall be established under Chapter 149,
Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this Code for a tattoo artist or body piercing
establishment.
§ 149-12.4. Application for license.
A license application shall be made to the City Clerk on a form furnished by
the City Clerk for such purpose and shall include in addition to any other
required information established under Chapter 149, Licensing, a copy of
a valid State of Maine license for such occupation pursuant to 32 M.R.S.A.
§§ 4201 through 4301 for tattoo artists and 32 M.R.S.A. §§ 4321 through
4329 for body piercing.
§ 149-12.1 JUVENILES § 149-12.5
141:237
§ 149-12.5. Prerequisites for tattooing.
In addition to those rules and regulations promulgated according to 32
M.R.S.A. §§ 4201 through 4301, no tattoo shall be administered except by
conforming to all of the following:
A. Age. No tattoo shall be administered to any person less than 18 years
old, as verified by a driver's license, liquor identification card, military
identification card or other adequate record.
B. Notice of permanency. Before administering a tattoo, the patron shall
be advised that the tattoo should be considered permanent; that it can
be removed only with a surgical procedure; and that any effective
removal will leave permanent scarring and disfigurement. A written
cautionary notice shall be furnished to and signed by the patron.
C. Skin condition. The skin to be tattooed shall be free from rash, pimples,
infection or recent (less than two years) scar tissue. The patron must be
in apparent good health, and the skin to be tattooed generally in a
healthy condition to all appearances.
D. Sobriety of patron. Tattoos shall not be administered to any person
under the influence of drugs or alcohol, and the operator is charged
with the responsibility of making reasonable observation and inquiry to
assure himself that the patron is not under the influence of drugs or
alcohol.
E. Food, drink, smoking, and alcoholic beverages prohibited. The
consumption of food or drink and smoking is prohibited in the tattooing
area. The consumption of alcoholic beverages on the tattooing premises
is prohibited.
F. Prior jaundice or hepatitis. The patron shall be asked, before the
operation, whether he has had jaundice or hepatitis. If the answer is in
the affirmative, the tattoo operation shall not be performed.
G. Record; form. The tattoo establishment shall keep a permanent record
of all patrons tattooed, stating name, age, address, date of tattoo,
operator's name, place where tattooed, and a description of the design
of the tattoo. Such records shall be made available to any City official
upon request, and shall be in the following form, which shall be signed
by the patron and the tattoo artist:
Date: __________
I, the undersigned, realize that a tattoo is permanent; that it can be
removed only with a surgical procedure; and that any effective removal
will leave permanent scarring and disfigurement.
Name: __________
Address: __________
Date of Birth: __________
§ 149-12.5 SANFORD CODE § 149-12.5
141:238
Have you had jaundice or hepatitis within the last two years?
Yes _____ No _____
Patron's Signature: __________
Description of tattoo: __________
Area of body: __________
Tattoo Artist's
Signature:
__________
§ 149-12.5 JUVENILES § 149-12.5
141:239

ARTICLE XIII
Alcohol- and Drug-Free Housing
[Adopted 6-19-2018 by Order No. 18-117-01]
§ 149-13.1. Purpose.
The regulation of businesses that provide living facilities for people in
recovery from substance abuse disorders is necessary in order to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare and:
§ 149-13.2. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all businesses operating alcohol- and drug-free
houses that are not licensed by the State of Maine.
§ 149-13.3. Exceptions.
A license shall not be required under this license category from Statelicensed
community living facilities, supported living arrangements, or
nursing homes.
§ 149-13.4. Definitions.
In general, all words, phrases, and terms used in this article shall have their
customary and usual meanings; as used in this article, the following words,
phrases, and terms shall have the meanings indicated.
ALCOHOL- AND DRUG-FREE HOUSE — A business operated on a
residential premises tailored for people in recovery from substance abuse
disorders that may or may not be occupied under the definition of a family
as defined by the Zoning Code, as a community living facility for eight
or fewer people residing at that premises and that is not a State-licensed
housing facility. An alcohol- and drug-free house is also known as a "sober
house" or "recovery house."
OPERATOR — The lawful owner of an alcohol- and drug-free house or
a person, firm, or corporation employed and designated by the owner
to have primary responsibility for the daily operation of such house and
for maintaining standards and conditions in such house that create an
environment supportive of substance use disorder recovery. The operator
may be a resident of the alcohol- and drug-free house.
A. Protect the residents living in those living situations from exploitation;
B. Maintain adequate health and safety standards for protection of
residents and neighbors;
C. Ensure adequate fire, police and emergency response; and
D. Facilitate appropriate emergency response for residents who may
require special assistance during an emergency.
§ 149-13.1 JUVENILES § 149-13.5
141:241
§ 149-13.5. License requirements.
No person, firm, or corporation may operate an alcohol- and drug-free
house until such person, firm, or corporation first obtains a license for
such purpose from the City. Licenses under this article shall not be issued
unless the City Clerk receives affirmation from the Inspection Team that
the applicant's proposed operation meets all applicable requirements. Any
person carrying out such activity without a license is in violation of these
provisions. Failure to comply with any of these requirements shall be
deemed a violation of this article and is adequate grounds for the denial,
revocation, or suspension of a license.
§ 149-13.6. Procedures and fees.
License applications under this article shall be processed according to
the procedures established in this article and Chapter 149, Licensing. A
license may be issued after the fee required has been paid through the City
Clerk's office. The fee for a license shall be established under Chapter 149,
Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this Code, for an alcohol- and drug-free house.
§ 149-13.7. Application for license.
A license application shall be made to the City Clerk by the operator on
a form furnished by the City Clerk for such purpose and shall include in
addition to any other required information established under Chapter 149,
Licensing:
§ 149-13.8. Issuance of licenses; conditions.
A license pursuant to this article may only be issued to the operator named
and for the address provided on the approved license application. Only one
license may be issued for each address and operator named on the approved
license application. No transfer of a license is allowed between the names
or addresses; any change of ownership or address requires a new license.
A. The name of the applicant (operator), business name, and contact
information, including name, mailing address, phone number and email
address.
B. An affidavit from the operator, which shall be a statement of having met
the requirements of the section concerning the operator.
C. An affidavit from the owner of the property, which shall state that the
owner understands his or her property is being used for such business
activity.
D. Copy of the house rules for the facility, demonstrating having met the
minimum standards expressed in this article or documentation of
certification by the Maine Association of Recovery Residences.
E. The number of residents.
§ 149-13.5 SANFORD CODE § 149-13.9
141:242
§ 149-13.9. Requirements for operator.
An alcohol- and drug-free house must be operated or managed by a person,
firm, or corporation with at least two years' experience working with people
with substance abuse disorders.
§ 149-13.10. Minimum house rules. [Amended 2-5-2019 by Order
No. 18-584-01]
An applicant shall provide as documentation with their license application,
either certification by the Maine Association of Recovery Residences, or a
set of house rules or documentation of policies and procedures that state,
at a minimum:
§ 149-13.11. Compliance with other codes required.
§ 149-13.12. Required distance between licensees.
No license may be issued to a business location within 500 feet of another
business of the same kind.
A. Absolutely no alcohol or nonprofessionally administered drug use on or
off the premises;
B. Eviction for failing to submit a urine sample when asked by house staff
and for committing or threatening violence;
C. No visitors allowed without manager's consent and no guests allowed
overnight;
D. No borrowing money from staff or other residents;
E. Signing in and out of residency of the house;
F. Adherence to house curfew;
G. Providing residents access to staff 24 hours a day, seven days a week;
H. Prohibition against anyone with an outstanding criminal warrant to live
there;
I. Providing furnished living space to all residents;
J. Prohibiting smoking anywhere in the house;
K. Emergency procedures.
A. The residential premises shall be in compliance with the appropriate
chapter(s) of the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code as adopted by reference.
B. The residential premises shall be in compliance with the International
Property Maintenance Code as adopted by reference.
C. The residential premises shall be in compliance with the Zoning Code.
§ 149-13.9 JUVENILES § 149-13.12
141:243

ARTICLE XIV
Residential Care Facilities
[Adopted 6-19-2018 by Order No. 18-117-01]
§ 149-14.1. Purpose.
The regulation of living facilities that provide housing and services to
residents is necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare and:
§ 149-14.2. Applicability.
This article shall apply to residential care facilities that are licensed by the
State of Maine.
§ 149-14.3. Definitions.
In general, all words, phrases, and terms used in this article shall have their
customary and usual meanings; as used in this article, the following words,
phrases, and terms shall have the meanings indicated.
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY — A house or other place that, for
consideration, is maintained wholly or partly for the purpose of providing
residents with assisted living services, including assistance with activities of
daily living and instrumental activities of daily living, personal supervision,
protection from environmental hazards, meals, diet care, care management
and diversional or motivational activities. Residential care facilities provide
housing and services to residents in private or semi-private bedrooms in
buildings with common living areas and dining areas. A residential care
facility does not include licensed nursing homes, hospitals or supported
living arrangements certified by the State.
§ 149-14.4. License requirements.
No person, firm, or corporation may operate a residential care facility until
such person, firm, or corporation first obtains a license for such purpose
from the City. Licenses under this article shall not be issued unless the City
Clerk receives affirmation from the Inspection Team that the applicant's
proposed operation meets all applicable requirements. Any person carrying
out such activity without a license is in violation of these provisions. Failure
to comply with any of these requirements shall be deemed a violation of this
article and is adequate grounds for the denial, revocation, or suspension of
a license.
A. Maintain adequate health and safety standards for protection of
residents and neighbors;
B. Ensure adequate fire, police and emergency response; and
C. Facilitate appropriate emergency response for residents who may
require special assistance during an emergency.
§ 149-14.1 JUVENILES § 149-14.5
141:245
§ 149-14.5. Procedures and fees.
License applications under this article shall be processed according to
the procedures established in this article and Chapter 149, Licensing. A
license may be issued after the fee required has been paid through the City
Clerk's office. The fee for a license shall be established under Chapter 149,
Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this Code, for residential care facility.
§ 149-14.6. Compliance with other codes required.
§ 149-14.7. Required distance between licensees.
No license may be issued to a business location within 500 feet of another
business of the same kind.
A. The residential premises shall be in compliance with the appropriate
chapter(s) of the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code as adopted by reference.
B. The residential premises shall be in compliance the International
Property Maintenance Code as adopted by reference.
C. The residential premises shall be in compliance with the Zoning Code.
§ 149-14.5 SANFORD CODE § 149-14.7
141:246
Chapter 153
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Graffiti — See Ch. 132.
Solid waste — See Ch. 220.
Streets, sidewalks and public areas — See Ch.
226.
§ 153-1. Findings.
The proliferation and accumulation of litter discarded throughout the Town
endanger the free utilization and enjoyment of a clean and healthful
environment by people and constitute a public health hazard.
§ 153-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
words shall have the following meanings:
DISPOSAL PACKAGE OR CONTAINER — Any and all packages or
containers used for the purpose of containing a product sold or held out for
sale for human or animal consumption.
LITTER — All waste materials, including but not limited to any bottles,
glass, crockery, cans, scrap metal, junk, paper, garbage, rubbish, offal,
feathers, except feathers from live birds while being transported, old
automobiles or parts thereof, or similar refuse, or disposal packages or
containers thrown or deposited as prohibited in this chapter, but not
including the wastes of the primary processes of mining, logging,
sawmilling, farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container of suitable size which is clearly
identified with a sign, symbol or other device as a place where the public
may dispose of litter.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
organization or any kind whatsoever.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any area that is used or held out for use by the public,
whether or not owned or operated by public or private interest.
TRAILER — Any vehicle, without motive power, designed for carrying
persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
VEHICLE — Every vehicle which is self-propelled and designed for carrying
persons or property or which is used for the transportation of persons,
except motorcycles, farm implements and snowmobiles.
WATERCRAFT — Any type of vessel, boat or craft used or capable of being
used as a means of transportation on water.
§ 149-14.7 LITTERING § 153-3
153:247
§ 153-3. Littering on public or private property.
§ 153-4. Littering from vehicle.
A. No person shall throw, drop, deposit, discard or otherwise dispose of
litter on any public property or private property not owned by him in
the Town or in the waters of this Town or in the ice over such waters,
which property shall included, but is not limited to, any public park,
beach, campground, forest land, recreational area, trailer park,
highway, road, street or alley, except:
(1) Designation. When such property is designated by the Town or by
any of its agencies for the disposal of garbage and refuse and such
person is authorized to use such property for such purpose; or
(2) Receptacle. Into a litter receptacle in such a manner that the litter
will be prevented from being carried away or deposited by the
elements upon any part of said private or public property or waters.
B. Any conduct in violation of this section is a civil violation for which a
forfeiture of not more than $200 nor less than $25 may be adjudged for
the first violation, and for the second or subsequent violation a
forfeiture of not more than $500 nor less than $100 may be adjudged. In
addition to a forfeiture, or instead of a forfeiture, the court may direct
any person in violation of this section to pick up and remove from any
place any or all litter deposited thereon by that person prior to the date
of the adjudication and provide for its lawful disposal.
C. Further, any person in violation of this section may be required to
reimburse the Town for its reasonable costs in removing and disposing
of such litter, provided the Town made a reasonable effort to notify the
violator to remove and dispose of the same prior to the Town's removing
it.
A. No person shall throw, drop, deposit, discard or otherwise dispose of
litter from any vehicle upon private property or along the right-of-way
of any public highway, or in any public park or campground, or upon
any public beach or into waters or in or upon any other public place,
except into a litter receptacle in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements. The
operator of a vehicle shall not allow any person within the vehicle to
throw, drop, deposit, discard or otherwise dispose of litter in violation of
this section. The operator of the vehicle, unless it is a vehicle being
used for the carriage of passengers for hire, as well as the person
actually throwing, dropping, depositing, discarding or otherwise
disposing of the litter shall be in violation of this section.
B. Any conduct in violation of this section is a civil violation for which a
forfeiture of not more than $200 nor less than $25 may be adjudged for
the first violation, and for a second or subsequent violation a forfeiture
of not more than $500 nor less than $100 may be adjudged. In addition
§ 153-3 SANFORD CODE § 153-4
153:248
§ 153-5. Spillage from vehicle or trailer.
§ 153-6. Littering from watercraft.
thereto, in any court in which a forfeiture is adjudged against any
person, the court may direct that person to pick up and remove from
any place any or all litter deposited thereon by that person prior to the
date of the adjudication and provide for its lawful disposal.
C. Further, any person in violation of this section may be required to
reimburse the Town for its reasonable costs in removing and disposing
of such litter, provided the Town made a reasonable effort to notify the
violator to remove and dispose of the same prior to the Town's removing
it.
A. No vehicle or trailer shall be driven or towed on any public highway
unless such vehicle or trailer is so constructed, loaded or covered as to
prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise
escaping therefrom. This section shall only apply to vehicles or trailers
carrying trash, rubbish or other materials which may be construed as
litter.
B. Any conduct in violation of this section is a civil violation for which a
forfeiture of not more than $200 nor less than $25 may be adjudged for
the first violation, and for a second or subsequent violation a forfeiture
of not more than $500 nor less than $100 may be adjudged. In addition
thereto, in any court in which a forfeiture is adjudged against any
person, the court may direct that person to pick up and remove from
any place any or all litter deposited thereon by that person prior to the
date of the adjudication and provide for its lawful disposal.
C. Further, any person in violation of this section may be required to
reimburse the Town for its reasonable costs in removing and disposing
of such litter, provided the Town made a reasonable effort to notify the
violator to remove and dispose of the same prior to the Town's removing
it.
A. No person shall throw, drop, deposit, discard or otherwise dispose of
litter from any watercraft upon public or private property or along the
right-of-way of any public highway, or in any public park or
campground, or upon any public beach or into any waters within the
jurisdiction of the Town, except into a litter receptacle in such a manner
than the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the
elements. The operator of a watercraft shall not allow any person within
the watercraft to throw, drop, deposit, discard or otherwise dispose of
litter in violation of this section. The operator of the watercraft, unless
it is a watercraft being used for the carriage of passengers for hire, as
well as the person actually throwing, dropping, discarding or otherwise
disposing of the litter will be in violation of this section.
§ 153-4 LITTERING § 153-6
153:249
§ 153-7. Enforcement.
Every law enforcement officer of the Town shall have authority to enforce
this chapter. All fines imposed hereunder shall be paid over to the Town,
including any costs of suit.
Chapter 155
LODGING ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly housing — See Ch. 114.
Licensing — See Ch. 149.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 155-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the public by regulating lodging establishments, pursuant to 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 3801 et seq.
§ 155-2. Definitions.
In general, all words, phrases, and terms used in this chapter shall have
their customary and usual meanings; as used in this chapter, the following
words, phrases, and terms shall have the meanings indicated.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A unique lodging establishment defined in the
Zoning Code where the general public can stay overnight, and may be
provided with a limited menu serving only a breakfast meal. This meal can
be either a full breakfast or a continental breakfast.
COTTAGE — A lodging establishment which is a single structure where
sleeping accommodations are furnished to the public as a business for a day,
week, or month, but not more than an entire season.
B. Any conduct in violation of this section is a civil violation for which a
forfeiture of not more than $200 nor less than $25 may be adjudged for
the first violation, and for a second or subsequent violation a forfeiture
of not more than $500 nor less than $100 may be adjudged.
C. Further, any person in violation of this section may be required to
reimburse the Town for its reasonable costs in removing and disposing
of such litter, provided the Town made a reasonable effort to notify the
violator to remove and dispose of the same prior to the Town's removing
it.
D. This section shall not be construed to prohibit fishermen, lobstermen
end other harvesters of the waters from returning to those waters
materials which naturally originated therein.
§ 153-6 SANFORD CODE § 155-2
153:250
DORMITORY — A room in any establishment used for sleeping purposes by
four or more unrelated persons.
GUEST HOMES — Lodging establishments defined in the Zoning Code as
"lodging" and specifically the "renting of rooms and the furnishing of board"
by providing "not more than two rooms for rent in a building of residential
character, which is used principally as a single-family dwelling, in which the
family or person residing permanently in the home acts as proprietor and in
which meals may be taken."
HOTELS, INNS, and MOTELS — Lodging establishments defined in the
Zoning Code where sleeping accommodations are furnished to the public.
INNKEEPER — A person, firm, or corporation who keeps a lodging
establishment to provide lodging to travelers or others for compensation
and who maintains sleeping accommodations. An innkeeper is not a
landlord pursuant to landlord and tenant laws as provided in Title 14 of
State statute.
LODGING ESTABLISHMENTS — Every building or structure or any part
thereof kept, used as, maintained as, advertised as or held out to the public
to be a place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to the public as
a business, such as bed-and-breakfasts, guest homes, hotels, inns, motels,
and cottages.
§ 155-3. License required.
No person, firm, or corporation may operate as an innkeeper or operate a
lodging establishment until such person, firm, or corporation first obtains
a license for such purpose from the City Council. Licenses under this
chapter shall not be issued unless the City Clerk receives affirmation from
the Inspection Team that the applicant's proposed operation meets all
applicable requirements. Any person carrying out such activity without a
license is in violation of these provisions. Failure to comply with any of these
requirements shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and is adequate
grounds for the denial, revocation, or suspension of a license.
§ 155-4. Procedures and fees.
License applications under this chapter shall be processed according to the
procedures established in this chapter, Chapter 149, Licensing, and 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 3801 et seq. A license may be issued after the fee required has
been paid through the City Clerk's office. The fee for a license shall be a per
room rate established under Chapter 149, Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this
Code, for lodging establishment.
§ 155-5. Licensing board.
The City Council shall act as the City's licensing board and shall have the
authority to grant, deny, suspend or revoke any license in accordance with
State law.
§ 155-2 LITTERING § 155-6
153:251
§ 155-6. Posting of rates.
Every innkeeper shall post in every bedroom:
§ 155-7. Exceptions.
A license shall not be required for dormitories of charitable, educational, or
philanthropic institutions, or for private homes used in emergencies for the
accommodation of persons attending conventions, fairs, or similar public
gatherings, nor for temporary lodging places for the same.
§ 155-8. Compliance with life safety code required.
In order to have a license for a lodging establishment, the establishment
shall be in compliance with the appropriate chapter(s) of the NFPA 101 Life
Safety Code as adopted by reference.
Chapter 158
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Graffiti — See Ch. 132.
Curfew — See Ch. 141, Art. II.
Streets, sidewalks and public areas — See Ch.
226.
A. A schedule of the maximum daily rates for that room for occupancy by
one or more persons; and
B. Any requirement for a minimum number of days for which that room
must be rented.
§ 155-6 SANFORD CODE § 155-8
153:252
ARTICLE I
Public Places
§ 158-1. Causing obstructions by loitering.
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain
idle either alone and/or in consort with others in a public place in such
manner so as to:
§ 158-2. Enforcement.
When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in
§ 158-1A herein, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order
that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on
or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be
guilty of a violation of § 158-1.
§ 158-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be subject
to a fine not exceeding $100 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days,
or both. Any such violation shall constitute a separate offense on each
successive day continued.
A. Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other
public place or building by hindering or impeding or tend to hinder or
impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or
pedestrians.
B. Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or
any other public place or building any act or thing which is an
obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of
property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon
or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the
free and uninterrupted ingress, egress, and regress therein, thereon,
and thereto.
§ 158-1 LITTERING § 158-3
153:253

ARTICLE II
Parks, Schools, Malls and Cemeteries
[Amended 12-4-1979; 11-16-1993]
§ 158-4. Prohibited acts.56
No person shall remain or loiter in any of the parks, school properties,
malls or cemeteries of the Town of Sanford, nor shall any person go upon
or over any of the paths, drives, streets, boulevards or roadways of said
parks, school properties, malls or cemeteries between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 5:00 a.m., except that, unless otherwise prohibited, a person may
go upon or over the paths, drives, streets, boulevards or roadways of said
parks or malls for the purpose of traveling across or through said parks or
malls, nor shall any person park a vehicle or otherwise permit such vehicle
to remain between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any of the
drives, streets, parking lots or parking areas, boulevards, promenades or
roadways within such parks, malls, school properties or cemeteries unless
specific permission is granted by the Town Council of the Town of Sanford.
§ 158-5. Violations and penalties.
Every person convicted of any violation of any provision of this article shall
be punished by a fine not to exceed $50.
56.Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 158-4 LITTERING § 158-5
153:255

ARTICLE III
Parks and Recreation Facilities
[Added 5-17-2016 by Order No. 16-60.09]
§ 158-6. Drug-free safe zones.57
A. Pursuant to its authority under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3253, the City does
hereby designate the following athletic fields, parks, playgrounds or
recreation facilities as "safe zones" under 17-A M.R.S.A. § 1101(23):
(1) Gowen Park.
(2) Goodall Park.
(3) Springvale recreation area.
(4) Shaw soccer field.
(5) Carpentier Park.
(6) Springvale Park.
(7) Veteran's Park.
(8) Airport ball field.
(9) Benton Park.
(10) Sanford Skateboard Park.
(11) Sanford Trails System.
(12) Number 1 Pond.
(13) Gateway Park.
B. The Commissioner of Public Safety has approved the following wording
to be used on a safe zone informational sign under Maine Revised
Statutes, Title 3-A, § 3253:
DRUG - FREE
SAFE ZONE
INCREASED PENALTIES FOR DRUG CRIMES
COMMITTED WITHIN THIS ZONE
(17-A, M.R.S.A. CHAPTER 45)
57.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 215, Smoking and Tobacco Use, Art. I, Safe Zones.
§ 158-6 LITTERING § 158-6
153:257
Chapter 161
MARIJUANA
GENERAL REFERENCES
Medical marijuana production
facilities — See Ch. 149, Art. IV.
§ 158-6 SANFORD CODE § 158-6
153:258
ARTICLE I
Retail Establishments
[Adopted 8-1-2017 by Order No. 17-105.16]
§ 161-1. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the Marijuana Legalization Act, 7
M.R.S.A. c. 417; and Municipal Home Rule Authority, Maine Constitution,
Art. VIII, Pt. 2; and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001.
§ 161-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, "retail marijuana establishments," including
"retail marijuana stores," "retail marijuana cultivation facilities," "retail
marijuana products manufacturing facilities" and "retail marijuana testing
facilities," and "retail marijuana social clubs," are defined as set forth in 7
M.R.S.A. § 2442.
§ 161-3. Prohibitions enumerated; intent.
§ 161-4. When effective; duration.
This article shall take effect immediately upon enactment by the municipal
legislative body unless otherwise provided and shall remain in effect until it
is amended or repealed.
§ 161-5. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Retail marijuana establishments, including retail marijuana stores,
retail marijuana cultivation facilities, retail marijuana products
manufacturing facilities, and retail marijuana testing facilities, and
retail marijuana social clubs, are expressly prohibited in this
municipality.
B. No person or organization shall develop or operate a business that
engages in retail or wholesale sales of a retail marijuana product, as
defined by 7 M.R.S.A. § 2442.
C. Nothing in this article is intended to prohibit any lawful use, possession
or conduct pursuant to the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act, 22
M.R.S.A. c. 558-C.
A. This article shall be enforced by the municipal officers or their
designee.
B. Violations of this article shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty
provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
§ 161-1 LITTERING § 161-5
153:259

ARTICLE II
Cultivation
[Adopted 12-19-2017 by Order No. 17-160-01]
§ 161-6. Findings.
It has been found that inconsistent, competing, and undeveloped State
laws regarding the enforcement of medical marijuana cultivation and
recreational marijuana cultivation constitutes an emergency affecting the
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Sanford.
§ 161-7. Purpose.
To protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, the purpose of this
emergency ordinance is to allow local zoning enforcement of marijuana
cultivation until such time that the State institutes appropriate and
enforceable standards with regard to medical marijuana and recreational
marijuana cultivation.
§ 161-8. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A § 3001 and the City's home
rule powers as provided for in Article VII-A of the Maine Constitution and
30-A M.R.S.A. § 2101 et seq.
§ 161-9. Applicability.
This article applies to the cultivation of medical marijuana by qualifying
patients or caregivers and the cultivation of recreation marijuana for
personal use.
§ 161-10. Visibility requirements.
§ 161-11. Enforcement.
A. Cultivation of marijuana must be entirely screened from common visual
observation from the street.
B. Outdoor cultivation of marijuana must be entirely screened from
common visual observation from the street by a solid fence high enough
to conceal the marijuana cultivation from the street. The fence must be
a minimum of six feet in height.
C. Outdoor cultivation of marijuana must be set back from the street a
minimum of 25 feet.
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer or his or her agent
to enforce the provisions of this article. If the Code Enforcement Officer
or his or her agent shall find that any provision of this article is being
violated, he or she shall notify in writing the person responsible for
such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the
§ 161-6 LITTERING § 161-11
153:261
§ 161-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation, being the owner of or having control or
use of any building or premises, who or which violates any of the provisions
of this article shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $2,500 for
a specific violation, and other remedies, injunctive relief, and costs as set
forth in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day during which a
violation of said article continues, 10 days after notification by the Code
Enforcement Officer, shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 161-13. Appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall act as the Board of Appeals in order
to hear appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made relative to
application and interpretations of this article. Appeals to the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall be submitted as otherwise set forth in the City Land Use
Code58 regarding administrative appeals, subject to the payment of any fees
as may be determined by the municipal officers from time to time.
§ 161-14. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions.
action necessary to correct it. He or she shall order discontinuance of
illegal use of buildings, structures, or additions or work being done
or shall take any other action authorized by this article to ensure
compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to institute or cause
to be instituted, in the name of the City, any and all actions, legal or
equitable, that may be appropriate or necessary for the enforcement of
this article; provided, however, that this section shall not prevent any
person entitled to equitable relief from enjoining any act contrary to the
provisions of this article.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer, in his or her discretion, where a
violation of this article has been brought to his or her attention, may so
advise the party in violation, in writing, and may give such violators
permission to continue for a period not exceeding 10 days, provided
that such violators intend and do appeal to the Zoning Board of
Appeals. Failure to perfect or commence such appeal within 30 days
will then subject the violator to prosecution under this section.
58.Editor's Note: See Part III, Land Use Legislation.
§ 161-11 SANFORD CODE § 161-14
153:262
Chapter 164
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND THERAPISTS
§ 161-14 LITTERING § 161-14
153:263

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Amended 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
§ 164-1. (Reserved)
§ 164-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of massage
establishments in order to protect the public health and safety and the
general welfare.
§ 164-3. Definitions.
In general, all words, phrases, and terms used in this chapter shall have
their customary and usual meanings; as used in this chapter, the following
words, phrases, and terms shall have the meaning indicated.
MASSAGE and THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE — Used interchangeably to mean
any method of rubbing, kneading, tapping, vibration, compression,
percussion, application of friction or manipulation of the external parts of
the human body with the hands or other parts of the body or with the aid of
any instrument or device.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT and THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE
ESTABLISHMENT — Used interchangeably to mean any business
establishment and premises, including but not limited to a sole
proprietorship, in which the business operations consist of providing or
making available massage which has a fixed place of business.
MASSAGE THERAPIST — Any person who performs therapeutic massage
either at a fixed place of business or within the City.
§ 164-4. Exemptions.
The following persons are exempt: members of other professions licensed,
certified or registered by the State, including but not limited to physicians,
chiropractors, physical therapists, cosmetologists or registered nurses
performing soft tissue manipulation consistent with the laws of the State
governing their practices, provided they do not use the title "massage
therapist."
§ 164-1 LITTERING § 164-4
153:265

ARTICLE II
Licenses
[Amended 2-5-2008; 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
§ 164-5. License required.
No person, firm, or corporation shall operate as a massage therapist until
such person, firm, or corporation first obtains a license for such purpose
from the City Clerk. Licenses under this article shall not be issued unless
the City Clerk receives affirmation from the Inspection Team that the
applicant's proposed operation meets all applicable requirements. Any
person carrying out such activity without a license is in violation of these
provisions. Failure to comply with any of these requirements shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter and is adequate grounds for the denial,
revocation, or suspension of a massage therapist license.
§ 164-6. Procedures and fees.
License applications under this chapter shall be processed according to
the procedures established in this chapter and Chapter 149, Licensing. A
license may be issued to a massage therapist after the annual fee required
has been paid through the City Clerk's office. The fee for a massage
therapist license shall be established under Chapter 149, Licensing,
§ 149-1.4, Fees, of this Code, for massage therapist.
§ 164-7. Application procedure.
A license application shall be made to the City Clerk on a form furnished by
the City Clerk for such purpose and shall include, in addition to any other
required information established under Chapter 149, Licensing:
A. A copy of the applicant's State Massage Therapist License certificate;
B. Attested copies of the articles of incorporation and bylaws, if the
applicant is a firm or corporation, evidence of partnership if a
partnership, or articles of association and bylaws, if the applicant is an
association, as well as a list of all officers and directors;
C. An affidavit which will identify all owners, officers, managers or
partners of the applicant and their places of residence at the time of the
application and for the immediately preceding three years;
D. Two front-face photographs of the applicant taken within 30 days of
application, of such size as the City Clerk may specify;
E. The release authorized by 16 M.R.S.A. § 620(6), Criminal History
Record Information Act, with the application of each applicant and for
each officer, owner, manager or partner of an applicant seeking a
massage therapist license.
§ 164-5 LITTERING § 164-8
153:267
§ 164-8. Criminal history of applicant.
No applicant for a massage therapist license, nor any owner, officer,
manager or partner of an applicant shall have been convicted of a crime
now classified as a Class A, B or C crime, or a crime involving moral
turpitude, nor of violating any of the gambling, drug or prohibitive liquor
laws of either the United States or the State of Maine or any other state
within the five years immediately preceding the date of application.
§ 164-9. Investigation.
In addition to any other requirements of Chapter 149, Licensing, upon
receipt of an application or notice of a change of the owners, officers,
managers or partners of the applicant:
§ 164-10. through § 164-11. (Reserved)
§ 164-12. Use of license.
No person shall make use of, in any manner, to his own or another's benefit,
any license which has not been duly issued to him in accordance with this
chapter.
§ 164-13. Standards for denial.
A license under this chapter shall be denied for the following reasons:
A. The Code Enforcement Officer may verify that the premises at which
the establishment will be located complies with all applicable
ordinances of the City, including but not limited to the Building Code,
Electrical Code, Plumbing Code and Zoning, of the Code, and shall
report his findings in writing to the City Clerk;
B. The City Clerk shall review the application and other documents and
determine whether such documents comply with all of the requirements
of this chapter, Code, and State law;
C. If requested by the Code Enforcement Officer, the Health Officer shall
inspect the location or proposed location to determine whether the
applicable codes relating to health and safety have been satisfied and
shall report his findings in writing to the City Clerk;
D. The Fire Chief or his designee may verify that the premises at which the
establishment will be located complies with all applicable fire and
safety codes; and
E. The Police Chief or his agent may investigate the application, including
the criminal history record information required under § 164-8, and
shall report his findings in writing to the City Clerk.
A. To a firm or corporation not registered to do business in this State;
§ 164-8 SANFORD CODE § 164-13
153:268
§ 164-14. Grounds for suspension or revocation.
B. To a person, firm, or corporation if any principal officer thereof or any
person having an actual ownership interest or management authority
therein has a disqualifying criminal conviction within the immediately
preceding five years; or
C. To an applicant who is not at least 18 years of age.
A. All licenses. Any license may be suspended or revoked by the City
Council upon a determination that the licensee:
(1) Failed to notify the City Clerk of any change in material fact set
forth in the application for such license; or
(2) Violated any provision of this Code.
B. Therapeutic massage establishment license or combined
establishment/therapist license. In addition to the provisions of
Subsection A, a license may be suspended or revoked upon a
determination that the licensee:
(1) Permitted any person to perform therapeutic massage without a
valid license to do so;
(2) Permitted or allowed an employee or massage therapist to violate
any provision to this chapter on the premises of the establishment
or in the course of conduct of the business of the establishment; or
(3) Knowingly permitted any violation of 17-A M.R.S.A. §§ 851 and 855.
§ 164-13 LITTERING § 164-14
153:269

ARTICLE III
Operating Requirements
§ 164-15. License to be displayed. [Amended 5-15-2018 by Order
No. 18-116-01]
A valid therapeutic massage establishment license shall be displayed at all
times in an open and conspicuous place in the massage establishment for
which it was issued. A valid license must be readily available to be produced
immediately if demanded of the licensee.
§ 164-16. Age restrictions.
No massage or therapeutic massage shall be practiced on a minor without
the presence of a parent or legal guardian representing the minor.
§ 164-17. Massage equipment.
All therapeutic massage shall be administered on a massage treatment
table, treatment mat or other similar massage equipment.
§ 164-18. Maintenance and cleaning.
Every person who conducts or operates a therapeutic massage
establishment shall keep the same at all times in a clean and sanitary
condition. All instruments, supplies and devices of any kind, or parts
thereof, that come into contact with the human body shall be kept clean by
a modern and approved method of cleaning.
§ 164-19. Prohibited activities.
No massage therapist shall:
§ 164-20. Closing hours.
No massage establishment shall be kept open for massage purposes
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., provided that any massage
begun before 10:00 p.m. may be completed.
A. Administer a massage to a patron whose genitals are exposed.
B. Administer or agree to administer a massage to the genitals or anus of a
patron.
C. Administer a massage unless he or she is fully clothed in
nontransparent clothing of the type customarily worn by massage
therapists while administering a massage.
§ 164-15 LITTERING § 164-21
153:271
§ 164-21. Supervision. [Amended 5-15-2018 by Order No.
18-116-01]
At all times when open for business, a therapeutic massage establishment
shall have upon the premises a licensed massage therapist who shall be
available to supervise the operation of the establishment and assure that no
violations of this chapter occur.
§ 164-22. List of employees. [Amended 5-15-2018 by Order No.
18-116-01]
The therapeutic massage establishment shall keep a written list of the
names and current addresses of all employees, both on duty and off duty.
Such list shall be shown to the Chief of Police or his authorized deputy, the
City Clerk or his representative upon request.
§ 164-21 SANFORD CODE § 164-22
153:272
ARTICLE IV
Enforcement; Severability
[Amended 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
§ 164-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms of the
license may be penalized in the following manner:
§ 164-24. Appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall act as the Massage Therapist License
Board of Appeals in order to hear appeals of orders, decisions, or
determinations made relative to application and interpretations of this
chapter. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be submitted as
otherwise set forth in City Code Chapter 280, Zoning, regarding
administrative appeals, subject to the payment of any fees as may be
determined by the municipal officers from time to time.
§ 164-25. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, or part of this chapter
or of any ordinance included in this Code or through supplementation
A. Temporary suspension. The Code Enforcement Officer or Police
Department, with prior approval of the City Manager or his/her
designee, is authorized to immediately and temporarily suspend any
license. The City Manager or his/her designee shall determine if the
licensed premises has not met the requirements of the license.
B. Revocation. The Code Enforcement Officer or Police Department, with
prior approval of the City Manager or his/her designee, is authorized to
immediately revoke any license. The City Manager or his/her designee
shall determine if the licensed premises has not met the requirements
of the license.
C. Unlicensed massage therapist or establishment. Any person operating
any massage business or massage establishment failing to apply for a
massage therapist license and pay the required fee shall be in violation
of this chapter, and such violation is a civil penalty enforced by the
Police Department and subject to a fine in the amount of $500 in
addition to any other fines for violating this chapter and the fee for
licensing the massage therapist.
D. Civil penalties. In addition to any other fines or penalties for violating
any provisions of this chapter or the terms of the license, violation of
this chapter is a civil penalty enforced by the Police Department. In any
such proceeding, the City may order that the licensee or unlicensed
massage therapist abate any violations, pay a penalty between $100
and $2,500 per violation, per day, and pay the court costs, attorneys and
expert witness fees incurred by the City.
§ 164-23 LITTERING § 164-25
153:273
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair, or invalidate the remainder thereof
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
section, article, or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which
such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 164-25 SANFORD CODE § 164-25
153:274
Chapter 178
NOISE
§ 178-1. Findings and purpose.
§ 178-2. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 and the City's
home rule powers as provided for in Article VII-A of the Maine Constitution
and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2101 et seq.
§ 178-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DAYTIME HOURS — The hours between: 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday
through Thursday; 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Friday through Saturday; and
9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sunday.
NIGHTTIME HOURS — The hours between: 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
Sunday evening through Friday morning; 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Friday
evening through Saturday morning; and 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., Saturday
evening through Sunday morning.
NOISE-CREATING DEVICES — Any electrical, mechanical, or chemical
device or instrument, or combination thereof that creates noise during its
operation.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, roadway, alley, sidewalk, or other
area dedicated to public travel or transportation purposes.
§ 178-4. Certain noises prohibited.
A. It is found that excessive, unnecessary, annoying, or distracting noise:
(1) Causes distractions to other drivers which impairs the safe
operation of motor vehicles;
(2) Threatens and/or intimidates pedestrians;
(3) Unreasonably disturbs the quiet and normal functioning of the
City's residential neighborhoods;
(4) Projects a negative image of the City, all detrimental to the health,
safety, and welfare of the Sanford's citizens and guests.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit unnecessary, excessive,
annoying, or distracting noise within the City of Sanford.
A. No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any
loud, boisterous, unnecessary, or unusual noises which shall annoy,
§ 164-25 LITTERING § 178-4
153:275
disturb, injure, or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace, or
safety of others.
B. The following activities, conduct, or acts, are declared to be loud,
boisterous, unnecessary, or unusual noises and are deemed to annoy,
disturb, injure, or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace, or
safety of others in violation of this chapter and shall include, but are not
limited to:
(1) Using or operating or permitting to be played, used, or operated
any radio, receiver, electronically amplified musical instrument,
phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or
noise-creating device for the producing or reproducing of music or
sound which is audible outside of any structure during nighttime
hours, which is audible from a minimum of 75 feet from the
property line of the noise source except as otherwise permitted,
licensed, or sponsored by the City Council;
(2) Loud, boisterous, unnecessary, or unusual noises annoying,
disturbing, injuring, or endangering the comfort, repose, health,
peace, or safety of others audible outside any structure during
nighttime hours, which is audible from a minimum of 75 feet from
the property line of the noise source except as otherwise permitted,
licensed, or sponsored by the City Council;
(3) The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle,
nonessential to safe and reasonable operation, in one or more of
the following ways:
(a) Revving of motor vehicle engines;
(b) Squealing of tires;
(c) Accelerating or braking unnecessarily so as to cause a harsh,
objectionable or unreasonable noise; or
(d) Operating audio equipment clearly audible beyond the
confines of a motor vehicle.
(4) Owning, possessing or harboring any animal or bird which,
frequently or for continued duration, makes sounds which create
noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary. For
the purpose of this chapter, a barking dog shall mean a dog that
barks, bays, cries, howls, or makes any other noise continuously
and/or incessantly for a period of 10 minutes or barks
intermittently for 1/2 hour or more to the disturbance of any person
at any time of day or night, regardless of whether the dog is
physically situated in or upon private property; provided, however,
that a dog shall not be deemed a barking dog for purposes of this
chapter if, at the time the dog is barking, a person is trespassing or
threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which the
§ 178-4 SANFORD CODE § 178-4
153:276
§ 178-5. Exceptions.
The standards of this chapter shall not apply to noises emitted by or related
to:
§ 178-6. Creation of certain noises upon public right-of-way
prohibited; exceptions.
dog is situated or for any other legitimate cause which teased or
provoked the dog.
(5) Evidence of the use, discharge, or ignition of fireworks except as
otherwise permitted, licensed, or sponsored by the City Council.
A. Any bell or chime from any building clock, school, or church.
B. Any siren, whistle, or bell by emergency vehicle or any other alarm
system used in an emergency situation; provided, however, that burglar
alarms or car alarms failing to terminate within 30 minutes after being
activated shall be unlawful.
C. Warning devices required by the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) or State or federal safety regulations.
D. Farming equipment or farming activities.
E. Timber harvesting (felling trees and removing logs from woods).
F. Municipal solid waste collection.
G. Refuse and solid waste collection during daytime hours.
H. Municipal, public works, or utility projects.
I. Domestic power equipment operated by a homeowner during daytime
hours, such as, but not limited to, power saws, sanders, grinders, drills,
lawn and garden tools, or other domestic power equipment or similar
devices.
J. Construction or demolition activity permitted and duly authorized
during daytime hours. Emergency construction or repair work by public
utilities and agencies is exempted. The Police Department may allow
construction during nighttime hours if it is demonstrated that
extenuating circumstances disallows construction during daytime
hours.
K. Blasting activities permitted and duly authorized during daytime hours
at specified times announced beforehand to the local public.
L. Existing industrial noise sources which are in operation as of May 22,
1984, shall be provided a permanent noise level allowance of 10dB(A)
otherwise required herein.
§ 178-4 LITTERING § 178-6
153:277
A. While occupying any public right-of-way, persons shall not operate any
noise-creating device in such a manner that the public's attention is
drawn to the source of the noise. Such activities or conduct shall
include, but are not limited to:
(1) Discharging fireworks or any exploding device.
(2) Firing a starter pistol, air gun, BB gun, or a firearm.
(3) Sounding a bell or whistle for so extended a period of time as to
cause annoyance to others.
(4) Rapid throttle advance and/or revving of an internal combustion
engine resulting in increased noise from the engine so as to cause
annoyance to others.
(5) Operating a motor vehicle, as defined in 29-A M.R.S.A. § 101 (42),
including but not limited to a motorcycle, with a straight pipe
exhaust system, an exhaust system with a cutout, bypass or similar
device or an exhaust system that does not meet the requirements of
Maine Statutes, including, but not limited to 29-A M.R.S.A. § 1912:
(a) Muffler required. A person may not operate a motor vehicle
unless that vehicle is equipped with an adequate muffler
properly maintained to prevent excessive or unusual noise.
"Excessive or unusual noise" includes motor noise emitted by a
motor vehicle that is noticeably louder than similar vehicles in
the environment; and
(b) Amplification prohibited. A person may not operate a motor
vehicle with an exhaust system that has been modified when
the result of that modification is the amplification or increase
the noise emitted by the motor above that emitted by the
muffler originally installed on the vehicle.
B. The prohibition against certain noises upon the public right-of-way shall
not apply to the following activities or conduct:
(1) Expression or communication protected by the United States
Constitution, including the First Amendment, or the Maine
Constitution.
(2) Any activity or conduct where the regulation of which has been
preempted by Maine Statutes.
(3) Any noise for which a permit has been issued by an authorized
agency.
(4) The sounding of any signaling device permitted by law.
§ 178-6 SANFORD CODE § 178-7
153:278
§ 178-7. Engine brakes.
A person operating a motor vehicle shall not use an unmuffled engine brake
to slow the vehicle except in an emergency situation for the purpose of
avoiding a collision. "Engine brake" means a device that retards the motion
of a motor vehicle by using the compression of the engine of the motor
vehicle and "unmuffled" means that the engine brake is not equipped with
a muffler which complies with the requirements of 29-A M.R.S.A. § 1912.
This section does not apply to emergency response vehicles operated by a
governmental entity or licensed provider of emergency medical services.
§ 178-8. Truck idling.
No person shall operate an engine or any standing motor vehicle with a
weight in excess of 10,000 pounds manufacturer's gross vehicle weight
for a period in excess of 10 minutes within any eight-hour period during
nighttime hours, when such vehicle is parked on a residential premises or
on a public right-of-way next to a residential premises.
§ 178-9. Enforcement; violations; penalties.
§ 178-10. Defense for noise violations by motor vehicles.
A person served with a violation and citation by motor vehicle must provide
satisfactory evidence that the muffler or exhaust system does not emit noise
in excess of 95 decibels as measured in accordance with the standards
and specifications outlined in Standard J-1169 adopted by the Society of
Automotive Engineers in May 1998. Measurements must be made by a
participating certified inspection station pursuant to 29-A M.R.S.A. § 1912.
§ 178-11. Public nuisance; abatement.
In addition to the issuance of a citation and civil penalties, pursuant to 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4302, noise may constitute a public nuisance if it is unreasonable
or if it results in the unreasonable interference with the use and enjoyment
of private or public property or with the rights of health and comfort of
A. This chapter is enforced by the Police Department. Violations are
prosecuted as a civil violation and a civil penalty will be imposed
through the issuance of citation and enforced through the district court.
The civil penalties imposed are cumulative, and each day that the
violation continues is a separate offense.
B. The following civil penalties shall be imposed through the issuance of a
citation:
(1) First citation: $50.
(2) Second citation: $100.
(3) Third and subsequent citations: $200.
§ 178-7 LITTERING § 178-11
153:279
people as demonstrated by unreasonable volume, time, and duration of the
noise and shall be a violation and shall be abated:
§ 178-12. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, or part of this chapter
or of any ordinance included in this Code or through supplementation
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
section, article, or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which
such judgment shall have been rendered.
Chapter 183
ODORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Business licenses — See Ch. 149, Art. I. Zoning — See Ch. 280.
A. Pursuant to 17 M.R.S.A. § 2706, whoever erects, causes, or continues a
public nuisance, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100, and
the court with or without such fine may order such nuisance to be
discontinued or abated; and
B. Pursuant to 17 M.R.S.A. § 2702, when on indictment, complaint or
action any person is adjudged guilty of a nuisance, the court, in addition
to the fine imposed, if any, or to the judgment for damages and cost for
which a separate execution shall issue, may order the nuisance abated
or removed at the expense of the defendant.
§ 178-11 SANFORD CODE § 178-12
153:280
ARTICLE I
Nuisance Control and Abatement
[Adopted 8-2-2016 by Ord. No. 16-101.06]
§ 183-1. Statutory authority; administration and enforcement;
severability.
§ 183-2. Purpose.
The City finds that because most odorous pollutants have a complex
chemical composition and may elicit a broad spectrum of responses by the
receptors, special methods must be employed in their measurement and
characterization. Although analytical data are more precise and may be
useful in identifying a source, it is the human response or the sensory data
that is most critical in determining the necessary degree of odor control.
Analytical data may be used to specify permissible emission levels from
a source, but sensory data must be employed to assess the impact in the
surrounding community. The latter is the City's primary concern.
§ 183-3. Objectionable odor determination.
An odor will be deemed objectionable and is a public nuisance when any of
the following occurs:
A. Authorization. This article is adopted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001
and the City's Home Rule Powers as provided for in Article VII-A of the
Maine Constitution and Title 30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 2101 through 2109 and
in accordance with the authority of the City to seek judicial remedies in
order to protect the inhabitants of the City, the City as a municipal
corporation, and individual residents of the City as provided for by the
laws of the State of Maine, including, but not limited to 17 M.R.S.A.
§§ 2702, 2705 and 2706; 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2002 and at common law.
B. Administration and enforcement. The Code Enforcement Officer of the
City of Sanford shall administer and enforce this article.
C. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or
portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional
by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions.
A. Creates a public nuisance at common law; or
B. The erection, continuance or use of any building or place for the
exercise of trade, employment or manufacture which, by noxious
exhalations or offensive smells, become injurious and dangerous to the
health, comfort or property of individuals or the public; or
C. All members of a panel consisting of the Code Enforcement Department
and four residents of the City, appointed by the Mayor to assist the Code
§ 183-1 LITTERING § 183-3
153:281
§ 183-4. Compliance required; applicability.
No odor source, land use, facility, or activity shall be exempt from complying
with the odor management standards contained in this article, Chapter 149,
Licensing, and Chapter 280, Zoning, because of grandfathering or because
of being an existing use, facility, or activity at the time the standards were
enacted. The odor standards apply to all existing and future odor sources,
land uses, facilities, and activities in the City, except as otherwise provided
herein.
§ 183-5. Observation procedures.
Odor observation shall be undertaken to arrive at a determination that an
objectionable odor exists, shall be at or beyond the property line or at or
near places where people live or work.
§ 183-6. Enforcement.
In the event that the Code Enforcement Department receives complaints
that smells or odors are detectable beyond the property line, the following
process shall be used to correct the odor problem:
Enforcement Department in investigating complaints and who are not
aggrieved by the source, determine following concurrent, personal
observation, that the odor at the property line of the source based on
City Tax Maps or elsewhere in the City is objectionable, taking into
account its nature, concentration, location, and duration and are able
to identify the source.
A. Within seven days of receiving a complaint, the Code Enforcement
Department shall investigate the property to assess the situation and
discuss odor compliance with the business operator, including but not
limited to asking the business operator what is being done to mitigate
odors. If the Code Enforcement Department detects odor beyond the
property lines and/or the operator indicates that odor management
provisions described in its Operations Manual and Safety Plan
described in Chapter 280, Zoning are not being followed, the Code
Enforcement Department shall provide verbal notice of violation to the
operator and instructions to comply with odor management provisions
and require the operator to notify the Code Enforcement Department of
conformance within 10 days.
B. If complaints persist and/or the Code Enforcement Department
continues to observe an odor issue, the Code Enforcement Department
shall assemble the panel authorized as described above to investigate
the complaints. If the Code Enforcement Department and the panel
observe odor issues after the ten-day period as described above, the
Code Enforcement Department shall notify the operator of violation in
writing and require notification of conformance within 10 days.
§ 183-3 SANFORD CODE § 183-6
153:282
C. If complaints persist and/or the Code Enforcement Department and the
panel continue to observe odor issues after the ten-day period
described above, the Code Enforcement Department shall provide a
second written notice of violation, assess a fine for a first violation, as
specified under Chapter 149, and require the operator to prepare an
Odor Control Plan that meets the requirements of § 280-15-10C(6) of
the Zoning Ordinance and submit a written report from a mechanical
engineer or odor management specialist with recommendations for
modification/improvement of the ventilation system within 45 days and
installation of recommendations and notice of compliance within 60
days. The City may use contracted staff and peer review escrow fees to
review an Odor Control Plan under § 280-3-4 of the Zoning Ordinance.
[Amended 2-20-2018 by Order No. 18-115-01]
D. If the operator has not submitted the required report within 45 days, or
if the operator has not submitted evidence of compliance within 60 days
as described above, the Code Enforcement Department shall provide a
third written notice of violation and assess a fine for a second violation,
as specified under Chapter 149.
E. If the operator has not submitted the required report within 60 days as
described above or if the operator has not submitted evidence of
compliance within 75 days, the City Manager shall assess a fine for a
third violation, as specified under the Chapter 149, and temporarily
suspend the business license.
F. If the operator has not submitted the required report within 75 days as
described above or if the operator has not submitted evidence of
compliance within 90 days, the City Manager shall ask the City Council
to permanently revoke the business license.
G. Upon request of the City Manager, and as directed by Chapter 149, the
City Council shall undertake the required process to consider
revocation of the business license.
§ 183-6 LITTERING § 183-6
153:283
Chapter 189
PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY (PACE)
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 90.
§ 189-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "the Town of Sanford
Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance" (the "ordinance")."
§ 189-2. Purpose.
By and through this chapter, the Town of Sanford declares as its public
purpose the establishment of a municipal program to enable its citizens
to participate in a property assessed clean energy ("PACE") program so
that owners of qualifying property can access financing for energy-saving
improvements to their properties located in the Town. The Town declares its
purpose and the provisions of this chapter to be in conformity with federal
and State laws.
§ 189-3. Enabling legislation.
The Town enacts this chapter pursuant to Public Law 2009, Chapter 591
of the 124th Maine State Legislature, "An Act to Increase the Affordability
of Clean Energy for Homeowners and Businesses," also known as "the
Property Assessed Clean Energy Act" or "the PACE Act" (codified at 35-A
M.R.S.A. § 10151 et seq.).
§ 189-4. Definitions.
Except as specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall have their customary meanings; as used in this chapter, the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated:
ENERGY-SAVING IMPROVEMENT — An improvement to qualifying
property that is new and permanently affixed to qualifying property and
that:
Will result in increased energy efficiency and substantially reduced
energy use and:
Meets or exceeds applicable United States Environmental
Protection Agency and United States Department of Energy Energy
Star Program or similar energy-efficiency standards established or
approved by the Trust; or
(1)
A.
§ 183-6 SANFORD CODE § 189-4
153:284
MUNICIPALITY — The Town of Sanford.
PACE AGREEMENT — An agreement between the owner of qualifying
property and the Trust that authorizes the creation of a PACE mortgage
on qualifying property and that is approved in writing by all owners of
the qualifying property at the time of the agreement, other than mortgage
holders.
PACE ASSESSMENT — An assessment made against qualifying property to
repay a PACE loan.
PACE DISTRICT — The area within which the municipality establishes a
PACE program hereunder, which is all that area with the municipality's
boundaries.
PACE LOAN — A loan, secured by a PACE mortgage, made to the owner(s)
of a qualifying property pursuant to a PACE program to fund energy-saving
improvements.
PACE MORTGAGE — A mortgage securing a loan made pursuant to a PACE
program to fund energy-saving improvements on qualifying property.
PACE PROGRAM — A program established under State statute by the Trust
or a municipality under which property owners can finance energy-saving
improvements on qualifying property.
QUALIFIYING PROPERTY — Real property located in the PACE district of
the municipality.
RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION — A fixture, product, system, device
or interacting group of devices installed behind the meter at a qualifying
property, or on contiguous property under common ownership, that
produces energy or heat from renewable sources, including but not limited
to photovoltaic systems, solar thermal systems, biomass systems, landfill
gas to energy systems, geothermal systems, wind systems, wood pellet
systems and any other systems eligible for funding under federal qualified
energy conservation bonds or federal clean renewable energy bonds.
TRUST — The Efficiency Maine Trust established in 35-A M.R.S.A § 10103
and/or its agent(s), if any.
§ 189-5. Establishment and funding.
Involves air sealing, insulating, and other energy-efficiency
improvements of residential, commercial or industrial property in a
manner approved by the Trust; or
(2)
Involves a renewable energy installation or an electric thermal storage
system that meets or exceeds standards established or approved by the
Trust.
B.
A. The municipality hereby establishes a PACE program allowing owners
of qualifying property located in the PACE district who so choose to
access financing for energy-saving improvements to their property
through PACE loans administered by the Trust or its agent.
§ 189-4 LITTERING § 189-5
153:285
§ 189-6. Amendments.
In addition, the municipality may from time to time amend this chapter to
use any other funding sources made available to it or appropriated by it
for the express purpose of its PACE program, and the municipality shall
be responsible for administration of loans made from those other funding
sources.
§ 189-7. Conformity with the requirements of the Trust.
If the Trust adopts standards, promulgates rules, or establishes model
documents subsequent to the municipality's adoption of this chapter and
those standards, rules or model documents substantially conflict with this
chapter, the municipality shall take necessary steps to conform this chapter
and its PACE program to those standards, rules, or model documents.
§ 189-8. Program administration.
B. PACE loan funds are available from the Trust in municipalities that:
(1) Adopt a PACE ordinance;
(2) Adopt and implement a local public outreach and education plan;
(3) Enter into a PACE administration contract with the Trust to
establish the terms and conditions of the Trust's administration of
the municipality's PACE program; and
(4) Agree to assist and cooperate with the Trust in its administration of
the municipality's PACE program.
A. Pursuant to 35-A M.R.S.A. § 10154, Subdivisions 2(A)(2) and 2(B), the
municipality will enter into a PACE administration contract with the
Trust to administer the functions of the PACE program for the
municipality. The PACE administration contract with the Trust will
establish the administration of the PACE program, including, without
limitation, that:
(1) The Trust will enter into PACE agreements with owners of
qualifying property in the municipality's PACE district;
(2) The Trust, or its agent, will create and record a notice of the PACE
agreement in the appropriate County Registry of Deeds to create a
PACE mortgage;
(3) The Trust, or its agent, will disburse the PACE loan to the property
owner;
(4) The Trust, or its agent, will send PACE assessment statements with
payment deadlines to the property owner;
(5) The Trust, or its agent, will be responsible for collection of the
PACE assessments;
§ 189-5 SANFORD CODE § 189-8
153:286
§ 189-9. Municipal liability.
Chapter 193
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 149.
Salvage dealers and collectors — See Ch. 213.
Yard sales and flea markets — See Ch. 256.
§ 193-1. Definitions.
In general, all words, phrases, and terms used in this chapter shall have
their customary and usual meanings; as used in this chapter, the following
words, phrases, and terms shall have the meaning indicated:
(6) The Trust, or its agent, will record any lien, if needed, due to
nonpayment of the assessment;
(7) The Trust, or its agent, on behalf of the municipality, promptly shall
record the discharges of PACE mortgages upon full payment of the
PACE loan.
B. In conjunction with adopting this chapter, the municipality shall adopt
and implement an education and outreach program so that citizens of
the municipality are made aware of home energy-saving opportunities,
including the opportunity to finance energy-saving improvements with
a PACE loan.
C. The municipality will assist and cooperate with the Trust in its
administration of the municipality's PACE program.
D. PACE assessments do not constitute a tax but may be assessed and
collected by the Trust in any manner determined by the Trust and
consistent with applicable law.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, municipal
officers and municipal officials, including, without limitation, tax
assessors and tax collectors, are not personally liable to the Trust or to
any other person for claims, of whatever kind or nature, under or
related to a PACE program, including, without limitation, claims for or
related to uncollected PACE assessments.
B. Other than the fulfillment of its obligations specified in a PACE
administration contract with the Trust entered into under § 189-8A
above, a municipality has no liability to a property owner for or related
to energy-saving improvements financed under a PACE program.
§ 189-8 LITTERING § 193-1
153:287
PAWN TRANSACTION — The lending of money on the security of pledged
tangible personal property that is delivered to a pawnbroker and held by
the pawnbroker and including the purchase of tangible personal property
on the condition that it may be repurchased by the seller for a fixed price
within a fixed period of time.
PAWNBROKER — Any person, firm, or corporation and premises engaged in
the business of pawn transactions.
PRECIOUS METALS — Any item composed in whole or in part of gold,
palladium, silver, or other such valuable metals but does not include dental
gold, unrefined metal ore, and electronic product, any part of a mechanical
system on a motor vehicle or gold or silver coins or bullion.
SECONDHAND DEALER — Any person, firm, or corporation and premises
engaged in the business of selling and acquiring through exchange, pawn or
purchase, secondhand or used tangible personal property such as articles,
merchandise, or goods from private citizens, including but not limited to
electronics, gaming systems/video games/video game accessories, jewelry,
valuable and precious metals and stones, firearms, antiques, used cars,
tires, automobile accessories, office and store fixtures and equipment, and
household goods and appliances, but not typically including articles of
clothing or books. Secondhand dealers do not include businesses engaged
in the trade of similar articles by a retail or wholesale establishment. A
secondhand dealer includes precious metal dealers. A secondhand dealer is
not a State-licensed dealer pursuant to 29-A M.R.S.A. § 851 et seq.
§ 193-2. Purchase from minor.
A pawnbroker or secondhand dealer will not either directly or indirectly
purchase, acquire or receive, by way of barter or exchange, any tangible
personal property from a person who has not attained the age of 18 except
when said minor shall be accompanied by a parent or legal guardian who
shall sign the transaction record in person before said dealer or collector.
§ 193-2.1. Purchase from known thieves.
§ 193-3. Records.
A. A pawnbroker and secondhand dealer will not knowingly, either by
direct or indirect purchase, acquire or receive, by way of barter or
exchange, any tangible personal property from a person known to be a
thief or a receiver of stolen property.
B. The Police Department may advise the secondhand dealer of any person
previously convicted as a thief or receiver of stolen property.
A. Pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 3962, 3963 and 3971, every pawnbroker
and secondhand dealer shall keep records of every transaction for a
period of no less than two years which shall be made promptly available
for inspection at the principal place of business upon request by a law
enforcement officer or prosecuting attorney and shall electronically
§ 193-1 SANFORD CODE § 193-3
153:288
§ 193-3.1. Electronic reporting of transactions.
report every transaction of tangible personal property or precious
metal acquired, exchanged, pawned, or pledged through an electronic
reporting system in the format, form, and manner designated by the
Chief of Police and shall maintain equipment of sufficient capability
to produce detailed, daily electronic transaction reports for each
transaction to that electronic reporting system. Such equipment and
capabilities include but are not limited to a computer with Internet
access and a digital color camera capable of providing readable and
recognizable document photocopies and facial photographs.
B. Each record of each transaction shall include:
(1) A digital color photograph of the person's face from the front.
(2) A digital color photocopy of a valid government-issued photo
identification document.
(3) The person's name, date of birth, height, weight, hair color, and eye
color.
(4) The person's current address and telephone number.
(5) If the person is acting on behalf of a company or business, the
name, address, and telephone number of such company or business
shall also be recorded.
(6) The date and time of the transaction.
(7) A complete and thorough description of the transaction, including,
but not limited to the following:
(a) Type of articles.
(b) Brand name, make, manufacturer (if applicable).
(c) Model number (if applicable).
(d) Serial number (if applicable).
(e) Color, finish, metal type, and karat (if applicable).
(f) Distinguishing marks, identifiers, engravings, number and
color of stones, etc.
(8) A digital photograph of each transaction of tangible personal
property or precious metal, including the capture of distinguishing
characteristics, identifying numbers, markings, writing, or
engravings, etc.
A. Each transaction of tangible personal property or precious metal shall
be recorded to the designated electronic reporting system each day
that the transaction takes place.
§ 193-3 LITTERING § 193-3.1
153:289
B. Multiple pieces of similar tangible personal property or precious metal,
such as baseball card collections, action figure collections, tool sets, or
jewelry collections, may be grouped together using one general
descriptor when entered into the designated electronic reporting
system as a transaction.
C. Each transaction recorded in the designated electronic reporting
system shall contain the following information with the form completed
accurately and in its entirety:
(1) The person's name, date of birth, height, weight, hair color, and eye
color.
(2) The person's current address and telephone number.
(3) If the person is acting on behalf of a company or business, the
name, address, and telephone number of such company or business
shall also be recorded.
(4) The date and time of the transaction.
(5) A complete and thorough description of transaction, including, but
not limited to the following:
(a) Type of articles.
(b) Brand name, make, manufacturer (if applicable).
(c) Model number (if applicable).
(d) Serial number (if applicable).
(e) Color, finish, metal type, and karat (if applicable).
(f) Distinguishing marks, identifiers, engravings, number and
color of stones, etc.
(6) A digital photograph of each transaction of tangible personal
property or precious metal, including the capture of distinguishing
characteristics, identifying numbers, markings, writing, or
engravings, etc.
D. In the event that the electronic reporting system malfunctions or is
otherwise not operating, such malfunction or nonoperability must be
reported to the Chief of Police immediately.
E. All transactions during such system malfunction or nonoperability shall
be delivered to the Chief of Police within 24 hours. System malfunctions
or nonoperability of equipment will be corrected within 48 hours.
F. Failure to record each transaction into the designated electronic
reporting system in the format, form, and manner prescribed by the
Chief of Police or failure to maintain reporting equipment is a civil
§ 193-3.1 SANFORD CODE § 193-3.1
153:290
§ 193-3.2. Holding period.
§ 193-4. Posting of laws; display of sign.
Every pawnbroker shall post in a conspicuous location within the place of
business a copy of the applicable statutes of the State of Maine and a copy
of this chapter and will further display within the place of business a sign,
legibly inscribed in large letters in the English language, with the name and
occupation of the pawnbroker.
§ 193-5. State law to apply.
Except to the extent that this chapter contains a contrary provision, all
provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 3960 to 3964-A and 3901 shall be additional
requirements to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 193-5.1. Account of business done; disclosure to consumer.
violation and grounds for the denial, revocation, or suspension of a
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer license.
A. A secondhand dealer may not sell any tangible personal property with
the exception of CDs, DVDs, and video games until the tangible
personal property has remained in the secondhand dealer's possession
for seven days after the date of acquisition by the secondhand dealer,
except if secondhand dealer that determines that the tangible personal
property is not listed as stolen in the designated electronic database as
verified and approved by the Chief of Police.
B. A precious metal dealer may not sell or alter any precious metals until
the precious metals have remained in the precious metal dealer's
possession for 15 days after the date of acquisition by the precious
metal dealer, except that a precious metal dealer that determines that
the precious metals are not listed as stolen in the designated electronic
database as approved and verified by the Chief of Police, may sell or
alter the precious metal 10 days after the date of acquisition.
A. Every pawnbroker shall maintain records for a period of no less than
two years, which shall be made promptly available for inspection at the
principal place of business upon request by a law enforcement officer or
prosecuting attorney, in which the pawnbroker shall enter:
(1) The date, duration, amount, periodic rate of interest, and annual
percentage rate on every loan that is made;
(2) The finance charge, due dates for payment and the total payment
needed to redeem or repurchase the pawned property;
(3) An accurate account and description of the property pawned;
(4) The terms of redemption or repurchase, including any reduction in
the finance charge for early redemption or repurchase and the
§ 193-3.1 LITTERING § 193-5.1
153:291
§ 193-6. License required; violations and penalties.
No person, firm or corporation may engage in the business of pawnbroker
and secondhand dealer without first obtaining a license for each such
purpose from the City. Licenses under this chapter shall not be issued
unless the City Clerk receives affirmation from the Inspection Team that
the applicant's proposed operation meets all applicable requirements. Any
person carrying out such activity without a license is in violation of these
provisions. Failure to comply with any of these requirements shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter and is adequate grounds for the denial,
revocation, or suspension of a license.
§ 193-7. Procedures and fees.
License applications under this chapter shall be processed according to
the procedures established in this chapter, and Chapter 149, Licensing. A
license may be issued after the annual fee required has been paid through
the City Clerk's office. The fee for a license shall be established under
Chapter 149, Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this Code, for pawnbrokers and
secondhand dealers.
§ 193-8. Disqualification.
In addition to the general standards for denial, suspension or revocation of a
pawnshop or secondhand dealer license and the standards for investigation
of applicants pursuant to Chapter 149, Licensing, or other standards found
in the Code or elsewhere, a pawnshop or secondhand dealer license may be
denied, suspended or revoked on one or more of the following grounds:
right of the consumer to at least one extension of one month at the
same rate of interest upon request in writing or in person; and
(5) The name and residence of the consumer.
B. At the time of the pawn transaction, the pawnbroker shall deliver to the
consumer a signed, written disclosure complying with the truth-inlending
provisions of the Maine Consumer Credit Code, Title 9-A,
Article VIII-a, containing the items required by Subsection A and the
name and address of the pawnbroker.
A. Conviction of the applicant, licensee, employee of the licensee or
person representing the licensee of any Class A, Class B, or Class C
crime.
B. Conviction of the applicant, licensee, employee of the licensee or
person representing the licensee of any misdemeanors or crimes
involving dishonesty, such as theft, negotiating a worthless instrument,
forgery, or unsworn falsification.
§ 193-5.1 SANFORD CODE § 193-9
153:292
§ 193-9. Digital video recording equipment.
A secondhand dealer that makes high definition video recordings of their
premises during hours of operation of high quality and placement in a
manner to identify facial features of all customers entering and exiting
the place of business and conducting all transactions may be eligible for a
discount of 50% from the secondhand dealer license fee and waiver of the
obligation to record by way of a digital color photograph, the person's face
making the transaction upon verification and approval by the Chief of Police
that the equipment is operational, of high quality and placement is in the
proper manner. The records must be kept for a minimum of 10 days.
Chapter 198
(RESERVED)
Chapter 200
PUBLIC URINATION AND DEFECATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Toilet facilities at public assemblies — See
Ch. 83.
§ 200-1. Purpose.
The Town Council has determined that it is in the public interest to prohibit
public urination and defecation unless a person, due to either a young age
or a verified medical condition, lacks full control of the bodily functions that
control urination and defecation.
§ 200-2. Prohibited acts; definition.
A. A person commits an offense if the person urinates or defecates:
(1) On public property or in a public place; or
(2) In public view.
B. For the purpose of this section:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access and
includes, but not limited to, streets, roads, alleys, common areas of
schools, hospitals, office buildings, shopping centers, parks and parking
lots.
§ 193-9 LITTERING § 200-3
153:293
§ 200-3. Exceptions.
The enforcement of provisions of § 200-2 shall not apply to the following
individuals who may not be able to adequately control the bodily functions
that control urination and defecation;
§ 200-4. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 209
RESTAURANTS AND MOBILE VENDING UNITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 74. Business licensing — See Ch. 149, Art. I.
§ 209-1. Definitions.
In general, all words, phrases, and terms used in this chapter shall have
their customary and usual meanings; as used in this chapter, the following
words, phrases, and terms shall have the meaning indicated.
MOBILE VENDING UNIT — Any vehicle, cart, and trailer, including a lunch
wagon, which is used for the sale therefrom at retail of any prepared food,
sandwiches, drinks, ice cream or similar dairy product and travels from
place to place for the sale thereof, but does not include vehicles used for the
transportation of milk and dairy products or bread and bakery products for
A. Children seven years of age or younger;
B. Persons of any age who violate this chapter due to a verified medical
condition.
A. Any person violating § 200-2 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of
not more than $250 for the first offense and not more than $500 for a
second or subsequent offense.
B. In addition to the fine stated in Subsection A, any person found to have
committed a violation of § 200-2 may be required to perform community
service to the Town of Sanford.
C. In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be jointly and
severally liable with the minor for payment of all fines and fees.
D. In the case of community service, the minor or adult shall perform at
least 30 hours of community service. In a case where a minor is
assigned community service, at least one parent or guardian of the
minor shall be in attendance a minimum of 50% of the period of
assigned community service. The entire period of community service
shall be performed under the supervision of a community service
provider approved by the Chief of Police.
§ 200-3 SANFORD CODE § 209-1
153:294
sale or delivery to homes and business establishments, and shall include a
mobile vending unit operating for a temporary period in connection with a
fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or other similar gathering.
RESTAURANT — Any restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, short-order cafe,
luncheonette, sandwich stand, soda fountain, catering service and all other
eating or drinking establishments, including kitchens or all other places,
in which food or drink is prepared for sale on the premises or elsewhere,
but not including premises operated by City departments, or charitable and
civic organizations, or by business concerns whose prime purpose is serving
their employees.
VICTUALER — A person who serves food or drink prepared for consumption
on or off the premises, which includes but is not limited to a "restaurant" or
a "mobile vending unit" as herein defined, but specifically shall not include
the operation of a farm stand selling homegrown produce or sale of food
or drink from a temporary sidewalk stand operated by minors immediately
adjacent to their residence.
§ 209-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter apply to victualers within the City of Sanford.
§ 209-3. License required.
No person, firm, or corporation shall operate as a victualer until such
person, firm, or corporation first obtains a license for such purpose from
the City Clerk. Licenses under this chapter shall not be issued unless the
City Clerk receives affirmation from the inspection team that the applicant's
proposed operation meets all applicable requirements. Any person carrying
out such activity without a license is in violation of these provisions. Failure
to comply with any of these requirements shall be deemed in violation
of this chapter and is adequate grounds for the denial, revocation, or
suspension of a victualer license.
§ 209-4. Processing of applications; fees.
License applications under this chapter shall be processed according to
the procedures established in this chapter and Chapter 149, Licensing. A
license may be issued to a victualer after the annual fee required has been
paid through the City Clerk's Office. The fee for a victualer license shall be
established under Chapter 149, Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this Code, for
victualers.
§ 209-5. Application for license.
A. Restaurant application for license. A license application shall be made
to the City Clerk on a form furnished by the City Clerk for such purpose
and shall include in addition to any other required information
established under Chapter 149, Licensing, a copy of a valid State of
Maine food or eating license.
§ 209-1 LITTERING § 209-5
153:295
§ 209-6. Issuance of licenses; conditions.
A license pursuant to this chapter may only be issued to the person named
and for the address or mobile vending unit provided on the approved license
application. Only one license may be issued for each address or mobile unit
and person named on the approved license application. No transfer of a
license is allowed between the names or addresses or mobile units; any
change of ownership or retail address or mobile unit requires a new license.
§ 209-7. Mobile vending units requirements.
Except as otherwise permitted, licensed, or sponsored by the City Council
in connection with a festival or special event approved by the City Council:
B. Mobile vending unit application for license. A license application shall
be made to the City Clerk on a form furnished by the City Clerk for such
purpose and shall include in addition to any other required information
established under Chapter 149, Licensing:
(1) The license plate number of the vehicle and/or trailer, VIN numbers
for vehicle and trailers, copy of vehicle registrations, color pictures
from at least two angles, including maximum length and width;
(2) Copy of a valid State of Maine food or eating license;
(3) Completed State checklist for mobile vending units; and
(4) Certificate of insurance for public liability in the amount of at least
$400,000 for mobile vending units.
A. Mobile vending units and customer queuing may not be situated in a
manner that will obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles,
obstruct an entrance or exit, obstruct a fire lane, or obstruct access to a
fire hydrant;
B. Mobile vending units must be self-contained during operation and shall
provide trash and recycling receptacles in contact with the mobile
vending unit;
C. Mobile vending units may not operate within 150 feet of the property
boundary of any licensed restaurant premises;
D. Mobile vending units shall comply with all parking rules and
regulations and all rules for occupying the street;
E. Mobile vending units may operate from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.;
F. Mobile vending units must be moved to a location more than 100 feet in
distance no less than once every 12 hours;
G. Mobile vending units may not be parked overnight on City streets or in
City parking lots; and
§ 209-5 SANFORD CODE § 209-7
153:296
§ 209-8. Use of streets.
No mobile vending unit shall have any exclusive right to any location in the
public street, nor shall any mobile vending unit be permitted a stationary
location, nor shall any mobile vending unit be permitted to operate in
any congested area where the operation of the mobile vending unit might
impede or inconvenience the public or in such a manner that is a nuisance
to surrounding properties. For the purposes of this chapter, the judgment
of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to
whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced.
§ 209-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms of the
license may be penalized in the following manner:
H. Mobile vending units may operate on private property in all zones
where mobile vending units are allowed with the permission of the
property owner and unless prohibited by an approved site plan or lack
thereof.
A. Temporary suspension. The Code Enforcement Officer or Police
Department, with prior approval of the City Manager or his/her
designee, is authorized to immediately and temporarily suspend any
license. The City Manager or his/her designee shall determine if the
licensed premises has not met the requirements of the license.
B. Revocation. The Code Enforcement Officer or Police Department, with
prior approval of the City Manager or his/her designee, is authorized to
immediately revoke any license. The City Manager or his/her designee
shall determine if the licensed premises has not met the requirements
of the license.
C. Unlicensed victualer. Any person operating any restaurant or mobile
vending unit failing to apply for a victualer license and pay the required
fee shall be in violation of this chapter, and such violation is a civil
penalty enforced by the Police Department and subject to a fine in the
amount of $100 in addition to any other fines for violating this chapter
and the fee for licensing the victualer.
D. Civil penalties. In addition to any other fines or penalties for violating
any provisions of this chapter or the terms of the license, violation of
this chapter is a civil penalty enforced by the Police Department. In any
such proceeding, the City may order that the licensee or unlicensed
victualer abate any violations, pay a penalty between $100 and $2,500
per violation, per day, and pay the court costs, attorneys and expert
witness fees incurred by the City.
§ 209-7 LITTERING § 209-10
153:297
§ 209-10. Appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall act as the Victualer License Board of
Appeals in order to hear appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations
made relative to application and interpretations of this chapter. Appeals to
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be submitted as otherwise set forth in
City Code Chapter 280, Zoning, regarding administrative appeals, subject
to the payment of any fees as may be determined by the municipal officers
from time to time.
§ 209-11. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, or part of this chapter
or of any ordinance included in this Code or through supplementation
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
section, article, or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which
such judgment shall have been rendered.
Chapter 213
SALVAGE DEALERS AND COLLECTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 149. Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers — See
Ch. 193.
§ 213-1. Definitions.
In general, all words, phrases, and terms used in this chapter shall have
their customary and usual meanings; as used in this chapter, the following
words, phrases, and terms shall have the meanings indicated.
JUNK — Old iron, chains, brass, copper, tin, lead, or other base metals,
old rope, old bags, rags, wastepaper, paper clippings, scraps of woolens,
clips, bagging, rubber, and glass, and empty bottles of different kinds
when less than one gross, and all articles discarded or no longer used
as a manufactured article composed of any one or more of the materials
mentioned. "Junk" also includes steel or other scrap ferrous or nonferrous
metal and material, salvaged household items, and salvaged vehicles and
equipment.
SALVAGE COLLECTOR — Any person, firm, or corporation that collects junk
or makes a business of purchasing junk and selling or exchanging that junk
with a salvage dealer. "Salvage collector" does not include any person that,
as part of a commercial enterprise or business, sells pursuant to a written
contract or bill of sale junk in a manufacturing or production process or the
collection of cans and bottles for the purposes of redemption.
§ 209-10 SANFORD CODE § 213-1
153:298
SALVAGE DEALER — Any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the
purchase, sale, exchange, or barter of junk as defined herein, and salvaged
vehicles and equipment which are not sold, bought, or exchanged by a
State-licensed dealer pursuant to 29-A M.R.S.A. § 851 et seq. or Statelicensed
solid waste facility pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. § 1310-N et seq.
Salvage dealing does not include the business of can and bottle redemption.
§ 213-2. Salvage transactions.
§ 213-3. Purchase from minors.
A salvage dealer or salvage collector will not either directly or indirectly
purchase, acquire, or receive, by way of barter or exchange, any junk from
a person who has not attained the age of 18 except when said minor shall be
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian who shall sign the transaction
record in person before said dealer or collector.
§ 213-4. Purchase from known thieves.
§ 213-5. Hold period.
§ 213-6. Records.
A. A salvage collector shall produce documentation of an issued salvage
collector license at the time of a transaction with a salvage dealer.
B. A salvage transaction may be by credit card, debit card, or check. Cash
transactions are not allowed.
C. Salvage transactions do not include the purchase, transfer or otherwise
conveyance between salvage dealers or secondhand dealers.
A. A salvage dealer will not knowingly, either directly or indirectly,
purchase, acquire, or receive, by way of barter or exchange, any junk
from a person known to be a thief or a receiver of stolen property.
B. The Police Department may advise the salvage dealer of any person
previously convicted as a thief or receiver of stolen property.
A. If a law enforcement officer has reasonable suspicion that salvage
material or junk being held by a salvage dealer is stolen or related to
criminal activity, the officer may issue a written order to the salvage
dealer, specifying the scrap metal that must be retained and the length
of time, which may not exceed seven days, that the salvage dealer must
retain the identified salvage material or junk.
B. Prior to the expiration time period of the hold, a law enforcement officer
may impose an additional hold period, which may not exceed seven
days. The law enforcement officer imposing the additional hold shall
provide the salvage dealer a written description of the salvage material
or junk to be retained and the length of time the salvage material or
junk must be retained.
§ 213-1 LITTERING § 213-6
153:299
§ 213-7. License required.
No person, firm or corporation may engage in the business of salvage dealer
or salvage collector without first obtaining a license for each such purpose
from the City. Licenses under this chapter shall not be issued unless the City
Clerk receives affirmation from the Inspection Team that the applicant's
proposed operation meets all applicable requirements. Any person carrying
out such activity without a license is in violation of these provisions. Failure
to comply with any of these requirements shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter and is adequate grounds for the denial, revocation, or suspension
of a license.
§ 213-8. Procedures and fees.
License applications under this chapter shall be processed according to
the procedures established in this chapter and Chapter 149, Licensing. A
A. Salvage dealers shall keep and maintain a record of all transactions for
a period of no less than three years and shall make the records available
to any law enforcement officer.
B. Every transaction record shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the salvage collector. Proof of
identification is required with a driver's license, military
identification card, passport or other form of government-issued
photo identification. The photo identification shall be photocopied
and a record made of the distinct identification number and kind of
photo identification;
(2) The date of the transaction;
(3) A general description of the predominant types of salvaged
material or junk, which shall be made in accordance with the
custom of the trade;
(4) The weight, quantity or volume, recorded in accordance with the
custom of the trade;
(5) The consideration paid;
(6) A signed statement that the seller is the owner or is otherwise
authorized to sell the salvaged material or junk on a form provided
by the salvage dealer that conspicuously bears the warning that
making a false statement is a Class D Crime under 17-A M.R.S.A.
§ 453; and
(7) The make, model, and number and state of issue of the license plate
of the vehicle being used to deliver the salvage material or junk.
C. A transaction does not include a transaction in which a salvage dealer
purchases, transfers, or otherwise conveys metal to a scrap metal
processor.
§ 213-6 SANFORD CODE § 213-8
153:300
license may be issued after the annual fee required has been paid through
the City Clerk's office. The fee for a license shall be established under
Chapter 149, Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this Code, for salvage collectors
and salvage dealers.
Chapter 215
SMOKING AND TOBACCO USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drug-free safe zones — See Ch. 158, Art. III.
§ 213-8 LITTERING § 213-8
153:301

ARTICLE I
Safe Zones
[Adopted 5-3-2016 by Order No. 16-59.08]
§ 215-1. Prohibitions.
Pursuant to its authority, the City does hereby designate all safe zones
prohibited to smoking and tobacco use.
§ 215-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SMOKING — Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette, pipe or joint, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant
product intended for inhalation, including hookahs and marijuana, whether
natural or synthetic, in any manner or in any form. "Smoking" also includes
the use of an electronic smoking device which creates an aerosol or vapor,
in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the
purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking in this policy.
TOBACCO — All tobacco-derived or containing products, including but
not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, cigarillos, bidis, kreteks; all
smokeless and dissolvable tobacco products, including but not limited to,
dip, spit/spitless, chew, snuff, snus and nasal tobacco; and any product
intended to mimic tobacco, containing tobacco flavoring or delivering
nicotine, including but not limited to, electronic nicotine delivery systems,
e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-hookahs, vape pen or any other product name or
descriptor, or the use of any other type of tobacco or nicotine product for
the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of tobacco in this policy. This
does not include products specifically approved by the United States Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) for the purpose of cessation or nicotine
replacement therapy.
§ 215-3. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article may be enforced by any designated
representative of the Health Office or of the Chief of Police.
§ 215-4. Violations and penalties.
Effective May 17, 2016, violation of this article shall be punished by a civil
penalty not to exceed $50 for each occurrence.
§ 215-5. Designation of safe zones.
A. The following are City of Sanford safe zones.
(1) Gowen Park.
(2) Goodall Park.
§ 215-1 LITTERING § 215-5
153:303
(3) Springvale recreation area.
(4) Shaw soccer field.
(5) Gateway Park.
(6) Carpentier Park.
(7) Springvale Park.
(8) Veterans Park.
(9) Airport ball field.
(10) Benton Park.
(11) Sanford Skateboard park.
(12) Sanford trails.
(13) Number 1 Pond.
§ 215-5 SANFORD CODE § 215-5
153:304
ARTICLE II
Tobacco and Paraphernalia Retailing
[Adopted 6-5-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
§ 215-6. Findings.
It is found that licensing tobacco and paraphernalia retailers is appropriate
to ensure that retailers comply with tobacco control laws and business
standards to protect the health, safety and welfare of residents and
especially children and therefore dependence, illnesses, and death
associated with tobacco, marijuana, and other drug use. Additionally:
§ 215-7. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 and the City's
Home Rule Powers as provided for in Article VII-A of the Maine Constitution
and 30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 2101 et seq. and 22 M.R.S.A. § 1556.
§ 215-8. Definitions.
In general, all words, phrases, and terms used in this article shall have their
customary and usual meaning; as used in this article, the following words,
phrases, and terms shall have the meaning indicated.
PARAPHERNALIA — An object or device, including any metal, wooden,
acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens,
permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; water pipes,
carburetion tubes and devices; smoking and carburetion masks; roach clips
(meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana
cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand);
miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; chamber pipes; carburetor
pipes; electronic pipes; air-driven pipes; chillums; bongs; or ice pipes or
chillers, that is not displayed as opposed to nor included within a tobacco
product display.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product that is made from or derived from
tobacco and is intended for human consumption or is likely to be consumed,
whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, or ingested
by any other means, including, but not limited to a cigarette, a cigar, pipe
tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, snus, or an electronic smoking device.
"Tobacco product" includes any component or accessory used in the
consumption of a tobacco product, such as filters, rolling papers, pipes
or liquids used in electronic smoking devices. "Tobacco product" does not
include drugs, devices, or combination products authorized for sale by the
A. A requirement for a tobacco retailer license will not unduly burden
legitimate business activities of retailers who sell or distribute tobacco
products to adults.
B. There is a substantial interest in discouraging the purchase of tobacco
products and paraphernalia by persons under the age of 21.
§ 215-6 LITTERING § 215-8
153:305
United States Food and Drug Administration, as those terms are defined in
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
TOBACCO RETAILER — A retail business within the City of Sanford that
sells tobacco products or paraphernalia for personal consumption or use.
§ 215-9. Applicability.
The provisions of this article apply to tobacco and paraphernalia retailers
within the City of Sanford.
§ 215-10. License required.
§ 215-11. Procedures and fees.
License applications under this article shall be processed according to the
procedures established in this article and Chapter 149, Licensing. A license
may be issued to a tobacco retailer after the annual fee required has been
paid through the City Clerk's office. The fee for a tobacco retailer license
shall be established under Chapter 149, Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this
Code for tobacco retailers.
§ 215-12. Mobile vending prohibited.
No tobacco retailer license may be issued to any seller of tobacco products
that is not in a fixed, permanent location; mobile vending of tobacco
products or paraphernalia is prohibited.
§ 215-13. Sale to or access by minors; age verification.
A. No person, firm, or corporation may offer for sale, sell, furnish, display,
or advertise for tobacco products or paraphernalia unless a tobacco
retailer has first obtained a license for such purpose from the City
Clerk.
B. Licenses under this article shall not be issued unless the City Clerk
receives affirmation from the Inspection Team that the applicant's
proposed operation meets all applicable requirements. Any person
carrying out such activity without a license is in violation of these
provisions. Failure to comply with any of these requirements shall be
deemed a violation of this article and is adequate grounds for the
denial, revocation, or suspension of a tobacco retailer license.
A. Pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 1555-B, Subsection 2, pertaining to tobacco
products, no licensee, or employee or agent of such licensee, shall sell,
furnish, give away, or allow access to tobacco products or paraphernalia
to persons who have not attained 21 years of age, unless the person has
attained 18 years of age as of July 1, 2018.
B. Tobacco products or paraphernalia may not be sold to any person who
has not attained 30 years of age unless the seller first verifies that
§ 215-8 SANFORD CODE § 215-13
153:306
§ 215-14. Tobacco product displays standards.
§ 215-15. Paraphernalia displays standards.
For customer areas or retail stores where persons under the age of 21,
except for store employees:
§ 215-16. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, or part of this article
or of any ordinance included in this Code or through supplementation
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
section, article, or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which
such judgment shall have been rendered.
person's age by means of reliable photographic identification
containing the person's date of birth.
A. Self-service tobacco product displays are prohibited.
B. For customer areas or retail stores where persons under the age of 21,
except for store employees:
(1) May be present, tobacco products must be in locked cabinets
distinct and separated from other products or behind the sale
counter accessible only with store employee assistance.
(2) May not be present, tobacco products may be in cabinets or on
shelves or behind the sale counter accessible only with store
employee assistance.
A. May be present, paraphernalia must be in locked cabinets distinct and
separated from other products accessible only with store employee
assistance.
B. May not be present, paraphernalia may be in cabinets or on shelves or
behind the sale counter accessible only with store employee assistance.
§ 215-13 LITTERING § 215-16
153:307
Chapter 220
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 153.
§ 215-16 SANFORD CODE § 215-16
153:308
ARTICLE I
Deposit, Storage and Transportation
[Amended 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
§ 220-1. Deposit of waste, refuse, rubbish or garbage.
§ 220-1A. (Reserved)
§ 220-2. Outside storage of waste, garbage or refuse.
No person shall keep out of doors any garbage, swill or refuse, or scraps of
meat or fish, or any decayed matter, vegetable or animal, unless confined in
suitable covered containers.
§ 220-3. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this article is a civil violation. The penalty for said offense
shall be $100, plus attorneys' fees, and costs of the proper disposal of the
material.
A. No person shall throw or deposit any garbage, tobacco product, yard
waste, solid waste, prohibited waste, or waste matter, or cause the
same to be thrown or deposited upon any street, sidewalk, alley, gutter,
park, or other public way, or throw or deposit the same in or upon any
premises or vacant lot or in any water, or store or keep the same except
in suitable containers as required by this article or in litter baskets as
supplied by the City or deposited at the transfer station in an
appropriate manner.
B. Where the City has supplied litter baskets, no person shall use the litter
basket for the disposal of large volumes of solid waste from residential
or commercial activity.
§ 220-1 LITTERING § 220-3
153:309

ARTICLE II
Transfer Station
§ 220-4. Removal of items from transfer station.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove items from the transfer station
except that the Public Works Director or designee may organize a swap
shop allowing City residents to remove certain items from the transfer
station that can be reused.
§ 220-5. Junked automobiles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited at the
transfer station old junked or discarded autos or auto bodies unless such
autos or auto bodies are cut up so as to enable the attendant to compact
them.
§ 220-6. Administration.
The supervision and control of the transfer station shall be administered by
the Public Works Director or other person designated by the City Manager.
§ 220-7. Days and hours of operation.
The Public Works Director or other person designated by the City Manager
shall regulate the days and hours when dumping will be permitted at the
transfer station.
§ 220-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-15-2018 by Order No.
18-116-01]
Violation of this article is a civil violation. The penalty for said offense
shall be $100, plus attorneys' fees, and costs of the proper disposal of the
material.
§ 220-4 LITTERING § 220-8
153:311

ARTICLE III
Private Collection, Transportation and Disposal
[Added 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
§ 220-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOLID WASTE — Ordinary household waste, including, but not limited to,
the following: garbage, trash, rubbish, paper, plastic, metal cans, glass,
crockery, cold ashes, and refuse.
WASTE HAULER — A person, firm, corporation, or other entity that
regularly collects and hauls the solid waste or recycling goods of another
person, firm, corporation, or other entity for a fee.
§ 220-10. Transportation over streets.
No person, owner, driver, or private waste hauler of any truck or trailer,
of any size whatsoever, shall transport any solid waste or recycling goods,
including rubbish, refuse, ashes, garbage or putrescible waste or other
waste material, over any public way, street, or place within the limits of the
City except in properly constructed and maintained vehicles or containers.
§ 220-11. Private waste hauler license required.
No person, firm, or corporation shall operate as a waste hauler and collect
or transport solid waste from another person, firm, or corporation for a fee
within the corporate limits of the City without first obtaining a license for
such purpose from the City Clerk. Licenses under this article shall not be
issued unless the City Clerk receives affirmation from the Inspection Team
that the applicant's proposed operation meets all applicable requirements.
Any person carrying out such activity without a license is in violation of
these provisions. Failure to comply with any of these requirements shall be
deemed a violation of this article and is adequate grounds for the denial,
revocation, or suspension of a waste hauler license.
A. No such vehicle or container shall be allowed to become foul or
offensive.
B. Such vehicles and containers shall be covered so as to prevent said
recycling goods, rubbish, refuse, ashes, garbage or other waste
material from being blown or falling into the street while in transit to an
approved disposal facility.
C. No such vehicle or container shall be parked on private property
without a license and as allowed by an approved site plan.
D. No such vehicle or container shall park on a City street or in City
parking lots.
§ 220-9 LITTERING § 220-12
153:313
§ 220-12. Procedures and fees.
License applications under this article shall be processed according to the
procedures established in this article and Chapter 149, Licensing. A license
may be issued to a waste hauler after the annual fee required has been paid
through the City Clerk's office. The fee for a waste hauler license shall be
established under Chapter 149, Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this Code, for
waste haulers.
§ 220-13. Application for license.
A license application shall be made to the City Clerk on a form furnished
by the City Clerk for such purpose and shall include, in addition to any
other required information established under Chapter 149, Licensing, the
following information:
§ 220-14. Placement of dumpsters.
Waste haulers shall meet all dumpster requirements specified in this
chapter when placing dumpsters in compliance with this chapter.
§ 220-15. through § 220-25. (Reserved)
A. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of its
directors and officers;
B. A description of the equipment to be used, including make, model, year
of manufacture and license plate number of said equipment;
C. A certificate of insurance showing evidence of vehicle liability and
comprehensive liability coverage with limits of no less than $400,000;
and
D. A copy of a current waste transporter license with the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 220-12 SANFORD CODE § 220-15
153:314
ARTICLE IV
Dumpsters
§ 220-26. Dumpster requirements.
Any dumpster or waste compactor unit (hereinafter "dumpster"), such as
those used to receive the accumulation of solid waste on premises during
the interval between waste collections, must comply with the following
requirements:
§ 220-27. Violations and penalties. [Added 5-15-2018 by Order No.
18-116-0159]
Violation of this article is a civil violation. Each day that the violation
continues shall be deemed a separate violation. The penalty for said offense
shall be $100, plus attorneys' fees. In addition, the City may bring a civil
action for injunctive relief in a Maine court to abate a violation hereunder.
§ 220-28. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all dumpsters, including, without limitation, those
in place as of the date of adoption of this article.
A. Each dumpster shall be covered at all times by a tight-fitting cover
which is capable of being locked.
B. Each dumpster shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition at all
times with no solid waste on or outside the dumpster or the
surrounding premises.
C. Each dumpster shall be locked during hours of nonuse.
D. Each dumpster shall not be located in the required setback area.
[Added 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
E. Each dumpster shall be visually screened from public streets and
abutting residential properties by its location or by opaque fencing and/
or landscaping. [Added 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-116-01]
F. Each dumpster shall be permanently labeled with the waste hauler's
name and an identification number unique to the waste hauler. Such
permanent label shall be orderly and shall not be drawn in spray paint
without a proper stencil. [Added 5-15-2018 by Order No.
18-116-01]
59.Editor’s Note: This order also repealed former § 220-27, Enforcement.
§ 220-26 LITTERING § 220-28
153:315

ARTICLE V
Residential Solid Waste and Recyclables Collection
§ 220-29. Title.
This article shall be known as the "City of Sanford Residential Solid Waste
and Recyclables Collection Ordinance," hereinafter referred to as "this
article."
§ 220-30. Purpose and authority.
The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the City of Sanford, Maine, by enhancing and maintaining the
quality of the environment and by conserving natural resources through the
regulation of the collection of solid waste and recyclables from residences
pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 et seq. (municipal home rule ordinance
authority), 38 M.R.S.A. § 1301 et seq. (Waste Management Act)60 and 38
M.R.S.A. § 2101 et seq. (solid waste management and recycling).
§ 220-31. Applicability.
This article applies to domestic and residential generators of solid waste
and recyclables located within the City of Sanford.
§ 220-32. Definitions.
The definitions set forth in 38 M.R.S.A. § 1303-C, as amended, apply to this
article. For purposes of this article, the terms below are defined as follows.
Any word not otherwise defined in 38 M.R.S.A. § 1303-C or below shall have
its ordinary meaning.
ACCEPTABLE WASTE — Includes all ordinary household, municipal,
institutional, commercial and industrial wastes which consist primarily of
combustible materials and which are not unacceptable waste and are not
recyclables as defined in this article.
CITY-APPROVED PLASTIC BAGS — Specially marked bags designed for
refuse collection and approved by the Public Works Director, sold by the
City through various commercial vendors and/or City Departments and
imprinted with the City seal.
RECYCLABLES — Include corrugated cardboard in sheets no larger than
two feet by six feet, newspaper, clear glass, aluminum cans, bimetal cans,
magazines, mixed paper, high-density polyethylene, and other items as
added by the Director of Public Works or his designee.
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE — All waste defined as such in the "Waste
Handling Agreement between the City of Sanford, Maine, and Pine Tree
Waste, Inc., and Casella Waste Systems, Inc.," dated December 27, 2012,
and includes, but is not limited to, abandoned or junk vehicles, trailers,
agricultural equipment and boats and parts thereof; tires; hazardous waste;
60.Editor's Note: The Maine Hazardous Waste, Septage and Solid Waste Management Act.
§ 220-29 LITTERING § 220-32
153:317
demolition or construction debris; putrefied waste; pathological waste;
water treatment residues or by-products of any kind; tree stumps; grass
clippings; leaves; brush or yard waste of any kind; brown goods; tannery
and sewer sludge of any kind; waste oil or solvents; box springs, bedsprings,
and mattresses; white goods such as freezers, refrigerators, washing
machines or parts thereof; liquid wastes or sludges; stuffed furniture; fish
nets; automotive batteries; wire, rope, cable, and banding metal; carpets,
rugs and underlayment of any dimension; rope (fiber) greater than six feet;
hose, greater than six feet; wood greater than two feet in any dimension;
wire fencing; pesticides and other organic fluids; magnetic computer tape;
rolled material of any tube length exceeding a rolled diameter of four
inches; and firearms, ammunition and explosives.
§ 220-33. Collection of acceptable waste from residences.
A. Curbside collection of residential solid waste. The City of Sanford or its
agent or contractor will provide weekly curbside collection of
acceptable waste generated by residences located within the City of
Sanford. Effective September 16, 2013, all residential waste must be
placed in City-approved plastic bags acquired from an approved and
authorized vendor. For purposes of this article, "residence" means a
building which contains no more than four dwelling units as defined in
§ 280-5 of Chapter 280, Zoning, of the City Code.
B. Bags shall cost $1 per bag for eight-gallon bags, $1.25 per bag for
fifteen-gallon bags and $2 per bag for thirty-three-gallon bags. The City
Council may adjust the price of bags by amendment of this chapter. The
total net revenue from bag sales shall be used to reduce the net costs of
the City's Environmental Services budget for the next fiscal year and
may not exceed the total amount of the Environmental Services budget
for the next fiscal year and may not exceed the total amount of the
Environmental Services budget.
C. Curbside collection of acceptable waste from residences shall be
subject to the following requirements:
(1) No person shall place acceptable waste on any public street or
sidewalk for collection before the hour of 6:00 p.m. on the day
preceding a regularly or specially scheduled curbside collection of
acceptable waste from residences. Acceptable waste must be
placed at curbside no later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection.
(2) All acceptable waste shall be deposited in City-approved plastic
bags which are tied securely and shall be placed at curbside in a
conveniently accessible place for collection. Bags may not weigh
more than the amount printed on the bag, which is the maximum
weight capacity.
(3) The Director of Public Works shall prepare and publicize a schedule
and routes for curbside collection of acceptable waste from
§ 220-32 SANFORD CODE § 220-33
153:318
§ 220-34. Collection of recyclables from residences.
residences in the City of Sanford, which schedule and routes may
be amended by the Director of Public Works from time to time.
(4) No person shall place unacceptable waste at curbside for
collection.
(5) The City of Sanford may refuse to accept for collection any
acceptable waste which has been placed at curbside for collection
in a manner which does not comply with the requirements of this
article or which is too large to fit into standard containers. The
owner of the residence at which the acceptable waste has been
placed at curbside in such a manner shall be responsible for
disposing of such waste in a proper manner.
(6) The City of Sanford may refuse to accept for collection any
acceptable waste which has been placed at curbside for collection
that includes recyclables as defined in § 220-32.
(7) The owner of each building receiving collection services shall be
responsible for cleaning up any spilled waste within 12 hours of
collection.
(8) The owner of each building receiving collection services shall be
responsible for removing emptied containers from the public rightof-
way within 24 hours of collection.
A. Curbside collection of residential recyclables. The City of Sanford or its
agent or contractor may provide weekly or biweekly curbside collection
of recyclables generated by residences located within the City of
Sanford.
B. Curbside collection of recyclables from residences shall be subject to
the following requirements:
(1) No person shall place recyclables on any public street or sidewalk
for collection before the hour of 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding a
regularly or specially scheduled curbside collection of recyclables
from residences. Recyclables must be placed at curbside no later
than 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection.
(2) All recyclables shall be commingled and shall be placed at curbside
in recycling containers approved by the City. These containers shall
contain only recyclables and shall not contain any acceptable
waste, unacceptable waste, garbage or rubbish.
(3) Any and all recyclables placed at curbside become the property of
the City of Sanford or its agent or contractor and may not be
salvaged, removed or carried off by any person other than the City
of Sanford or its agent or contractors.
§ 220-33 LITTERING § 220-34
153:319
§ 220-35. Municipal collection from certain establishments.
§ 220-36. Violations and penalties.
§ 220-37. Hearings.
Anyone who has had their collection suspended pursuant to § 220-36B shall
be entitled to a hearing before the City Manager, if such request is made in
writing within 15 days of the suspension. The decision of the City Manager
shall be final.
(4) The Director of Public Works shall prepare and publicize a schedule
and routes for curbside collection of recyclables from residences in
the City of Sanford, which schedule may be amended by the
Director of Public Works from time to time.
(5) It shall be unlawful to dispose of or mix recyclable material with
acceptable waste.
A. The City of Sanford and its agents and contractors shall not collect
acceptable waste and recyclables from residences which consist of
buildings containing more than four dwelling units nor from
commercial, public and private institutional and industrial uses and
activities in the City of Sanford.
B. The City of Sanford and its agents and contractors shall only collect
acceptable waste and recyclables from residences that are on Citymaintained
roads.
A. The Director of Public Works or his designee shall enforce this article.
Violation of any of the provisions of this article is a civil violation for
which the violator shall be fined not less than $50 per violation. Each
day that the violation continues shall be deemed a separate violation. In
addition, the City may bring a civil action for injunctive relief in a Maine
court of competent jurisdiction to abate a violation hereunder.
B. In addition to or in lieu of the penalties described in Subsection A, after
one written warning the Director of Public Works or his designee may
suspend the collection of acceptable waste and recyclables from any
residence. Suspension of the collection service to a residence shall be
for an initial term of not more than 30 days. Subsequent violations may
result in a suspension of up to 90 days. During said suspension the
violator is required to dispose of his/her waste lawfully and may be
granted access to the transfer station at the discretion of the Public
Works Director.
§ 220-34 SANFORD CODE § 220-37
153:320
Chapter 226
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public assemblies — See Ch. 83.
Littering — See Ch. 153.
Loitering — See Ch. 158.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 245.
§ 220-37 LITTERING § 220-37
153:321

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 4-11-1977 as §§ 1.12, 5.1, 6.1, 12.18 and 12.19 and Ch. 8
of the 1977 Code]
§ 226-1. Street names.61
The Town Council shall name all roads in the Town of Sanford.62
§ 226-2. Street markers.63
The Town Council are to mark guide boards at the junctions of all roads so
as to show the names of said roads.
§ 226-3. Record of public ways.64
The Town Council shall prepare a complete record of all streets and public
highways, by districts. All data concerning each thoroughfare, beginning
with the laying out thereof, is to be complete as far as records are available,
including length, width, sidewalks and sewers. All future repairs and
improvements and votes of the Town concerning the same, including
expenditures, are to be added to said record.
§ 226-4. Construction or repair of streets and ways.65
A. No person or corporation, or his or its agents and servants, shall break
or dig up the ground in any street or public way in the Town without
obtaining a written permit from the Town Council or Street
Commissioners which shall state the regulations under which the work
shall be done, except the Town Council or Road Commissioners in the
lawful performance of their duties and those acting under their orders,
or the Water District in cases of emergency. Upon the completion of said
work the surface of the street or way shall be restored to a condition
satisfactory to the Town Council or Street Commissioners.
B. Previous to the construction or repair of any street or public way in the
Town, the Town Council or the Street Commissioners shall give
reasonable notice to all persons or corporations, including abutting
owners, who or which are liable to be affected thereby, and after the
aforesaid work of construction or repair is complete, the surface of said
street or way shall not be broken up or disturbed again except in case of
reasonable necessity, and then under the conditions set forth above.
C. The penalty for any violation of this section shall be the forfeiture and
payment for each offense of a fine not exceeding $20.
61.Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
62.Editor's Note: See also Art. II, Road Names and Building Numbers, of this chapter.
63.Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
64.Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
65.Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-1 LITTERING § 226-5
153:323
§ 226-5. Acceptance of streets and ways. [Added 11-16-1982]
No street or way shall be accepted by the Town until such street or way
meets the standards for street design and construction as set forth in
Chapter 275, Subdivision of Land, of the Town Code which is in effect at the
time such street or way is proposed for acceptance.
§ 226-6. Construction of sidewalks.66
The Town Council shall have the power to build a sidewalk from any given
point to a sidewalk already built, where the abutters owning 3/4 of the
frontage on the street will agree to pay for 1/2 of said sidewalk, and the
amount due from those refusing to pay shall be assessed and collected as
taxes.
§ 226-7. Awnings over public ways and sidewalks.
§ 226-8. Dumping of snow or ice on public ways. [Amended
12-4-1979]
Whoever unreasonably deposits or dumps snow or ice within the limits of
any public way within the built-up sections of the Town of Sanford, except
upon the written authority of the municipal officers, shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $50.
§ 226-9. Expectoration.
Spitting on sidewalks in the Villages of Sanford and Springvale is
prohibited, and a fine of $1 shall be imposed upon all guilty of said action.
A. All awnings, whether of cloth or fabric or other material, projecting
from a building over a public sidewalk or way shall not project so that
any part is nearer than 18 inches to the vertical plane of the curbline, or
closer than seven feet to the surface of the sidewalk; shall be safely and
permanently fixed to the building and have no support from the
sidewalk or way; shall be so constructed that they may be swung,
folded, or rolled back with the frame against the building; and shall not
have advertising matter on them other than the name of the owner and
the nature of the business conducted there. All such rules shall apply to
existing as well as new awnings, and failure to observe them shall
constitute a violation of this section.
B. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person
convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $20.
66.Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-5 SANFORD CODE § 226-10
153:324
§ 226-10. Street vending. [Amended 11-16-1993; 1-17-2006]
No person shall, in any part of a public street in the Town of Sanford, carry
on any trade or business, unless the same is especially allowed by law,
without a written permit from the Town Clerk, Town Council or some person
duly authorized to grant the same. Whoever violates the provisions of this
section shall be punished by a fine as follows:
§ 226-11. Throwing balls and other missiles; discharge of
firearms.67 [Amended 12-4-1979]
No person shall play at the game of ball, nor strike any ball with a bat, nor
throw any balls, stones, bricks, clubs, snowballs, frisbees or other missiles,
in any public street, nor discharge any firearms loaded with powder or other
dangerous composition, save in self-defense, in execution of the laws, or for
the destruction of some dangerous animal, in or upon any of the streets,
lanes, or public squares, or within 40 rods of any dwelling house of said
Town, on penalty of not less than $3 for each and every such offense.
§ 226-12. Sledding and skating.
If any person shall, in any street, sidewalk, lane or public square, slide
downhill with any hand sled or other vehicle, or shall skate on any sidewalk
in said Town, without permission of the municipal officers, he shall forfeit
and pay for each offense not less than $1 nor more than $3.
§ 226-13. Use of public ways for cable television systems.68
The municipal officers may contract on such terms and conditions as are
in the best interest of the municipality, including the grant of an exclusive
franchise for a period not to exceed 10 years, for the placing and
maintenance of community antenna television systems and appurtenances
or parts thereof along public ways and including contracts with operators
of such systems which receive the services of television signal transmission
offered by any public utilities using public ways for such transmission.
A. First violation: $50.
B. Second violation: $100.
C. Third violation: $500.
67.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 125, Firearms and Fireworks.
68.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 96, Cable Television.
§ 226-10 LITTERING § 226-13
153:325

ARTICLE II
Road Names and Building Numbers
[Adopted 5-28-1996; amended 2-23-1999; 5-25-1999]
§ 226-14. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to enhance the easy and rapid location of
properties by law enforcement, fire, rescue, postal and emergency medical
services personnel in the Town of Sanford
§ 226-15. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to and consistent with the municipal home
rule powers as provided for in Article VIII, Part 2, Section 1 of the
Constitution of the State of Maine and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001.
§ 226-16. Administration.69
Except as provided in § 226-22, this article shall be administered by the
Planning Board and the Code Enforcement Officer; provided that the Town
Council shall have final authority to assign road names and numbers to all
properties, both on existing and proposed roads, in accordance with the
criteria in §§ 226-17 and 226-18. The Planning Board and Code Enforcement
Officer shall also be responsible for maintaining the following official
records of this article:
§ 226-17. Naming system.
A. A Sanford map for official use showing road names (both public and
private roads) and numbers.
B. An alphabetical list of all property owners as identified by current
assessment records, by last name, showing the assigned numbers.
C. An alphabetical list of all roads (both public and private) with property
owners listed in order of their assigned numbers.
A. All roads that serve two or more properties shall be named regardless
of whether the ownership is public or private. "Road" refers to any
highway, road, street, avenue, lane, private way, or similar paved,
gravel, or dirt thoroughfare. "Property" refers to any property on which
a more or less permanent structure has been erected or could be
placed. A road name assigned by the Town of Sanford shall not
constitute or imply acceptance of the road as a public way.
B. The following criteria shall govern, on a prospective basis, the naming
system:
(1) New roads shall not be assigned a name that already exists in the
same zip code area (e.g., no Pine Road and Pine Lane).
69.Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-14 LITTERING § 226-17
153:327
§ 226-18. Numbering system.
(2) New roads shall not be assigned names that sound similar to
existing or proposed roads. (e.g., Beech Street and Peach Street).
(3) Each road shall have the same name throughout its entire length.
A. Where practicable, numbers shall be assigned every 50 feet along both
sides of the road, with even numbers appearing on the left side of the
road and odd numbers appearing on the right side of the road,
determined by the number origin.
B. The following criteria shall govern, on a prospective basis, the
numbering system:
(1) All number origins shall start from Main Street and work out east
and west or from Route 202 and work out north and south as
appropriate based upon the location and orientation of the road.
Address orientation for new through streets may be configured to
maintain consistency with nearby through streets. The numbering
origin for Main Street shall begin at the Sanford/Shapleigh town
line and proceed to the Sanford/Wells town line. For dead-end
roads and culs-de-sac, numbering shall originate at the intersection
of the adjacent road and terminate at the dead-end or cul-de-sac
terminus. For loop roads that begin and end on the same street,
addressing shall begin from the intersection with the lower address
range.
(2) The number assigned to each structure shall be that of the
numbered interval falling closest to the front door. If the front door
cannot be seen from the main road, the number shall be that of the
interval falling closest to the driveway of said structure.
(3) A structure with one use or occupancy on an individual lot shall
have a separate number for the use or occupancy (e.g., singlefamily
dwelling, restaurant, etc.).
(4) New buildings with two or more residential units shall have a single
numeric street address with individual unit numbers (e.g., 275
Smith Street, Unit 1, Unit 2, Unit 3, etc.). Where individual units
are accessed from an interior hall, the odd unit numbers shall be on
the right side of the hall from the main entrance and even number
units on the left side of the hall from the main entrance.
(5) New nonresidential buildings with separate occupancies shall have
a single numeric street address with individual suite numbers for
each occupancy. The first occupied floor at street level shall use a
100 series, the second occupied level shall use a 200 series, etc.
(e.g., 351 Jones Way, Suite 100, 101, 102, Suite 200, 201). Floors to
be occupied that are below the street level shall use a two-digit
series (e.g., 351 Jones Way, Suite 10, 11, 12). Where individual
suites are accessed from an interior hall, the odd unit numbers
§ 226-17 SANFORD CODE § 226-18
153:328
§ 226-19. Compliance required.
All owners of structures shall, by the date stipulated in § 226-21, display and
maintain in a conspicuous place on said structure the assigned numbers in
the following manner:
§ 226-20. New construction and subdivisions.
All new construction and subdivisions shall be named and numbered in
accordance with the provisions of this article and as follows:
shall be on the right side of the hall from the main entrance
and even number units on the left side of the hall from the main
entrance.
(6) Multiple buildings on one lot shall have one street address with
separate building designations (e.g., 65 Smith Street, Building No.
1, Building No. 2, etc.) followed by the unit or suite numbers where
applicable.
(7) The Code Enforcement Officer may deviate from the procedures
provided above when necessary to accommodate unique
circumstances. Such deviation shall be the minimum necessary to
resolve the situation and maintain compliance with § 226-14 above.
A. Number on the structure or residence. Where the residence or
structure is within 50 feet of the edge of the road right-of-way, the
assigned number shall be displayed on the front of the residence or
structure near the front door or entry.
B. Number on the street line. Where the residence or structure is over 50
feet from the edge of the road right-of-way, the assigned number shall
be displayed on a post, fence, wall, mailbox, or on some structure at the
property line on the same side of the road as the residence or structure
next to the access drive to the residence or structure. Where no access
drive exists, the assigned number shall be placed adjacent to the
walkway to the main entrance.
C. Size and color of number. Numbers shall be displayed in a color
(contrasting to background) and size (no less than three inches high)
and shall be located to be visible from the road as required by this
article.
D. The property owner shall be responsible for displaying the assigned
number and shall remove any different number that might be mistaken
for or confused with the number assigned in conformance with this
article.
A. New construction. Whenever any residence or other structure is
constructed or developed, it shall be the duty of the new owner to
obtain an assigned number from the Code Enforcement Officer. This
shall be done at the time of the issuance of the building permit. For new
§ 226-18 LITTERING § 226-20
153:329
§ 226-21. Effective date; applicability.
This article shall become effective as of July 1, 1999, and shall apply to all
properties, even those in existence at the time of adoption of this article.
At such time that the Town of Sanford notifies property owners of new road
names and addresses as approved pursuant to the February 23, 1999, Town
Meeting vote, property owners shall have 60 days to post the address(es) in
compliance with this article.
§ 226-22. Enforcement.72
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the
provisions of this article. If the Code Enforcement Officer shall find that
any provision of this article is being violated, he shall notify the person
responsible for such violation in writing indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the necessary action to correct it. Any person
aggrieved by a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer may appeal such
decision to the Town Council within 30 days after notice of the decision.
§ 226-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation being the owner or having control or use of
any building or premises that violates any of the provisions hereof shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $100 and appropriate
injunctive relief. Each day such violation is permitted to continue after
notification thereof shall constitute a separate offense.
structures numbering will be installed before final inspection or when
the structure is first used or occupied, whichever comes first. During
construction the site shall be identified with the assigned number
through a temporary posting of the assigned number near the working
vehicle access point from the road. It shall be the duty of the property
owner to notify the post office of a new address at least 30 days before
the effective date of its use.
B. New subdivisions.70 Any prospective subdivider shall show a proposed
road name and lot numbering system in the preapplication submission
to the Planning Board. Approval by the Town Council, after consultation
with the Code Enforcement Officer and the Planning Board, shall
constitute the assignment of road names in the subdivision. On the final
plan showing proposed roads, the applicant shall mark on the plan lines
or dots in the center of the streets every 50 feet to aid in assignment of
numbers to structures subsequently constructed.71
70.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 275, Subdivision of Land.
71.Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
72.Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-20 SANFORD CODE § 226-23
153:330
ARTICLE III
Public Highway Excavations
[Adopted 11-17-1998]
§ 226-24. Authority and title.
This article prepared in accordance with the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 3001 and 23 M.R.S.A. § 3381,73 as amended, shall be known as and may be
cited as the "Ordinance for the Control and Regulation of Public Highway
Excavations Within the Town of Sanford" and shall be referred to herein as
"this article."
§ 226-25. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to control and regulate any and all excavations
upon or in any public highway within the municipality.
§ 226-26. Exceptions.
Nothing in this article shall apply to the municipality's Public Works
Department or to any state or state aid highway construction and/or
maintenance.
§ 226-27. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated. Words not herein defined shall have their commonly accepted
meaning.
APPLICANT — A person as defined in this section who makes application
for a highway excavation permit or any representative of said person(s).
APPLICATION — The form or document supplied by the municipality upon
which an applicant shall supply all information required to apply for an
excavation permit.
BUSINESS DAY — Any day of any given week, except Saturday, Sunday or
any holiday observed by the municipality.
EMERGENCY EXCAVATION — An immediate excavation necessary to
prevent personal injury, death or the loss or disruption of a private or public
utility or service. The applicant shall have the burden of proving that such
an emergency exists.
EXCAVATION — Any operation in which earth, rock, paving or like material
on, around or below the surface of the ground is moved, displaced, dug,
trenched, tunneled or in any similar manner disturbed, except the
agricultural tilling of soil or gardening.
HIGHWAY — Any Town way or public easement, including any sidewalks
located within the boundaries of the way or easement.
73.Editor's Note: Section 3381 of Title 23 was repealed by L. 1999, c. 337.
§ 226-24 LITTERING § 226-27
153:331
MUNICIPALITY — The Town of Sanford.
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS — The Town Council of the municipality. 74
PERMIT — The form or document supplied by the municipality after
approval of an application for highway excavation.
PERMITTEE — That person who has obtained a permit for the excavation
of a highway and shall include any employee(s) or representative(s) of said
person.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, private or public organization,
utility, joint venture or corporation and includes any employee of said
person.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR — That individual so designated and appointed
by the municipal officers. The Public Works Director may appoint or
designate any appropriate person to act in his/her stead.
UNDERGROUND FACILITY — Any item of personal property buried or
placed below ground for use in connection with the storage or conveyance
of water, sewage, electronic, telegraphic or any other type of
communications, electric energy, or oil, gas or other substances and
including but not limited to pipes, sewers, conduits, cables, valves, lines,
wires, manholes, attachments, appurtenances and those parts of poles
below ground. This definition shall not include highway drainage culverts.
§ 226-28. Permit required; application procedure; fees.
A. In accordance with the authority granted in 23 M.R.S.A. § 3381,75 the
municipality requires that any person wishing to cause an excavation of
any highway of the municipality shall first obtain a permit from the
municipality, except as provided below.
B. No permit shall be given for the excavation of new construction or
major maintenance for five years after completion of said construction
unless for emergency excavation. Where the Town contemplates road
construction or major pavement maintenance, such as overlay or
recycling, notice to owners of property not serviced by facilities within
the street shall be given by the Public Works Director. Upon said notice
such owners shall make appropriate arrangements with the respective
utility districts to have services extended to said property if utilities are
located within 200 feet of the nearest property corner. Failure to
provide such utility service shall result in any future utility service
connection work being considered nonemergency.
C. A person who wishes to cause an excavation in any road, street or
thruway located outside the compact line established by the Maine
Department of Transportation, including but not limited to Route 99,
74.Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
75.Editor's Note: Section 3381 of Title 23 was repealed by L. 1999, c. 337.
§ 226-27 SANFORD CODE § 226-28
153:332
Route 109, Route 202 and Route 4, must first acquire any required
application and permit from the Maine Department of Transportation.
D. The excavation application shall include the following:
(1) Name of applicant(s).
(2) Date of application.
(3) Address of applicant.
(4) Location of planned excavation (road name and number).
(5) Purpose and description of the excavation.
(6) Identification of person who will perform the excavation and any
associated work.
(7) Date excavation is to start.
(8) Date of completion of excavation and associated work.
(9) A graphic description of the proposed project.
(10) Utilities and Dig Safe notified, if required.
(11) Location of any nearby churches, businesses, utility poles and/or
cemeteries.
(12) Type of highway surface and estimated area to be excavated.
(13)Name and address of insurance carrier providing liability
insurance.
(14) Any other information required by the Public Works Director due to
the size, nature or location of any particular excavation proposal.
E. Following review of the application and determination of compliance
with the requirements of this article, the Public Works Director or his/
her appointed representative shall issue an excavation permit.
F. There shall be a permit fee of $5, which shall be paid to the municipality
prior to the issuance of an excavation permit. In addition, the following
street opening charges (per square yard) are hereby established in
order to cover the reasonable cost or resurfacing and/or repaving an
excavation opening and shall be paid to the municipality prior to the
issuance of any excavation permit:
(1) Streets paved within the five years immediately prior to the
excavation:
(a) Bituminous concrete four inches or more in depth: $80.
(b) Bituminous concrete less than four inches in depth: $40.
(2) Streets paved five years or more prior to the excavation:
§ 226-28 LITTERING § 226-28
153:333
§ 226-29. Permit conditions.
The excavation permit shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a) Bituminous concrete four inches or more in depth: $65.
(b) Bituminous concrete less than four inches in depth: $40.
(c) Bituminous concrete over portland cement concrete: $35.
(3) Other areas.
(a) Bituminous treated surface or shoulder: $35.
(b) Plain gravel surface: $10.
(c) Grass esplanade: $15.
(d) Bituminous concrete curbing: $10 per linear foot.
(e) Granite curbing removal or realignment: $20 per linear foot.
(f) Granite curbing installation: $30 per linear foot.
(4) Sidewalk.
(a) Bituminous concrete sidewalk: $20 per linear foot.
(b) Portland cement concrete sidewalk: $25 per linear foot.
(c) Brick sidewalk: $25 per linear foot.
(d) Brick sidewalk on concrete base: $30 per linear foot.
(e) Gravel sidewalk: $10 per linear foot.
G. There shall be a minimum charge for any highway excavation
equivalent to three square yards assessed at the appropriate unit rate
established in Subsection F.
H. The municipality shall maintain a record of all excavation applications
and permits. Incidental fees paid to the municipality shall be separately
accounted for and shall constitute a special fund from which the cost of
resurfacing and/or repaving shall be appropriated.
A. Except for emergency excavations, as defined in § 226-27, no
excavation permits will be issued between November 15 of any given
year and April 15 of the following year.
B. Pavement cutting for excavations shall be in straight lines, parallel to
the excavation trench and cut back eight inches on each side beyond
the limits of the excavation trench opening.
C. Responsibility for public safety surrounding the excavation site rests
exclusively with the permittee. Should the Public Works Director or his/
her appointed representative(s) feel that inadequate safety measures
§ 226-28 SANFORD CODE § 226-29
153:334
§ 226-30. Utility companies. [Amended 10-7-2014 by Order No.
14-144.08]
are being used, he/she or they may direct corrective action, which the
permittee shall promptly undertake.
D. The permittee shall be responsible for compliance with any applicable
Occupation Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) requirements.
E. The permittee shall not be permitted to leave open, at any time, any
excavation trench without prior approval from the Public Works
Director or his/her appointed representative. The permittee shall cause
the excavation to be fully and completely filled to the surface of the
surrounding highway before making any further excavation.
F. Any excavated material may be used for backfill so long as the material
contains no rocks or pavement pieces larger than six inches in
diameter. Unsuitable excavated material shall be totally removed from
the excavated site. The final 18 inches of backfill shall be bank-run or
screened gravel having a maximum particle diameter of four inches;
fine sand, loam or clay is not acceptable. The backfill shall be placed in
nine-inch lifts and compacted with power tampers supplying a
minimum energy of 250 pounds per square foot. Backhoe or truck
compaction is unacceptable and shall not be utilized.
G. Prior to the commencement of an excavation project, the permittee
shall obtain and retain for the duration of the excavation project
liability insurance in an amount no less than $300,000. The municipality
shall be named as an additional insured upon the policy, and the
certificate shall indicate that the policy shall not be canceled without 30
days' prior notice to the municipality.
A. All utility companies, including but not limited to cable television,
water, sewer, telephone, gas or power, must comply with the application
process pursuant to Title 35-A M.S.R.A., Public Utilities, Part 2, Public
Utilities, and may also be required to obtain a permit pursuant to
§ 226-28 for excavation or new construction within the rights-of-way.
B. A utility company, including but not limited to cable television, water,
sewer, telephone, gas or power, performing a major opening may obtain
permission from the Public Works Director to perform its own repairs in
excess of 100 linear feet in accordance with the specifications
established in this article. The Public Works Director may require a
utility to have repairs to pavement fixed with an infrared machine. Any
utility company performing its own repairs may be required to provide a
secured guarantee such as a job bond, insurance certificate and/or
escrow account for three years from the date of completion of the work
and shall be responsible for correcting any defects in or repairs to such
work. The utility shall notify the Public Works Director or his/her
appointed representative prior to correcting any problems or making
any repairs to the street opening during this three-year period.
§ 226-29 LITTERING § 226-30
153:335
§ 226-31. Repaving.
C. After an excavation is commenced, the permittee shall carry out with
diligence and expedition all excavation work covered by the permit and
shall promptly complete such work and restore the street or sidewalk as
specified in this article. The permittee shall perform such restoration
work so as not to obstruct, impede or create a safety hazard to public
travel.
D. All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or
in any street shall be piled, and maintained in such manner as not to
endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the
streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those
using streets and adjoining property.
E. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too narrow to
permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, the City shall
have the authority to require that the permittee haul the excavated
material to a storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at the
time of backfilling.
F. Backfilling and compaction of roadway and sidewalk subgrade
materials shall conform to MaineDOT Standard Specification 304.03 in
order to prevent future settling of roadway materials. Additionally,
common borrow materials shall conform to MaineDOT Standard
Specification 703.18 preventing frozen materials, perishable rubbish,
peat and other unsuitable materials from being present in excavation
backfill.
G. After completing the placement, replacement or removal of a pole or an
underground facility pursuant to this article, the public utility or
contractor to the public utility shall remove from the right-of-way any
debris created by the placement or excavation for such utility within
five business days.
H. Whenever the use of a substructure is abandoned, except the
abandonment of service lines designed to serve single properties, the
person or utility owning, using, controlling, or having an interest
therein, shall within 30 days after such abandonment, file with the City
a statement in writing giving in detail the location of the substructure
so abandoned. If such abandoned substructure is in the way, or
subsequently becomes in the way, of an installation of the City or any
other public body, the owner of such substructure, after having been
contacted by the excavator, shall establish if the substructure is
abandoned and make the first cut or tap before allowing the
substructure to be removed by the excavator.
I. Whenever the last utility line has been removed from a pole designating
the pole as abandoned, the person or utility owning, using, controlling,
or having an interest therein, shall within 30 days after such
abandonment remove said pole and repair according to this article.
§ 226-30 SANFORD CODE § 226-31
153:336
§ 226-32. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
Violations of this article may result in the imposition of any one or more of
the following provisions.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the municipality shall pave
all street openings subject to this article.
B. When an excavation made in any highway subject to this article has
been backfilled in accordance with § 226-29F of this article, and upon
the direction of the Public Works Director or his/her appointed
representative(s), the municipality shall cause the excavation trench to
be patched with premixed bituminous material on those highways
which had been previously paved. In those instances where the highway
surface is gravel, the excavator shall grade and maintain a level travel
surface.
A. Any person who causes an excavation in any highway subject to this
article without first obtaining a permit may be punished by a fine of $25
for each offense. Each day of each such violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
B. Any person who causes an excavation of any highway subject to this
article in violation of the requirements of § 226-29 of this article may be
punished by a fine of $50 for each offense. Each day of each such
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
C. If the backfilling or repair of any excavation permitted in accordance
with § 226-28E of this article is improperly executed under the
provisions of § 226-29F of this article and the permittee fails or refuses
to correct such work after oral notification by the municipality, the
municipality shall cause such work to be corrected. The permittee shall
reimburse the municipality for 150% of the costs incurred by the
municipality in undertaking such corrective work. The municipality
shall not issue any excavation permits to any person who owes the
municipality any sums under this section.
D. The Public Works Director or his/her appointed representative shall
enforce this article. Once the Public Works Director has determined
that a violation of any provision of this article has occurred, the Public
Works Director or his/her appointed representative may take any one or
more of the following actions:
(1) Refer the matter to the Town Administrator for legal action.
(2) Issue a stop-work and corrective action order.
(3) Take any corrective action necessary to remedy any defect or
danger created by the unauthorized or improperly executed
excavation when the permittee fails to correct such defect or
danger upon notice from the municipality.
§ 226-31 LITTERING § 226-32
153:337
§ 226-33. Traffic control. [Added 6-17-2014 by Order No. 14-39.02;
amended 10-21-2014 by Order No. 14-143.07]
E. In any enforcement action under this article brought in a court of
competent jurisdiction within this state in which the municipality is the
prevailing party, the municipality shall be entitled, in addition to any
equitable relief, to all costs and expenses incurred in the enforcement
action, including but not limited to reasonable attorney fees, a fine and
such other relief as the court deems proper under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
A. Purpose and general requirements.
(1) The purpose of this section is to establish standards for traffic
control for all construction projects in the right-of-way. This shall be
required by all individuals, organizations, contractors, or other
entities whose work in or adjacent to public rights-of-way affect or
influence vehicular, pedestrian, or any other passage by the public
through the rights-of-way. Levels of traffic control may vary for
each individual project; however, all construction projects shall be
carried out in accordance with principles outlined in the Manual of
Traffic Control Devices, 2009 or latest edition.
(2) Any and all entities who perform construction, excavation or who
otherwise perform earthwork or otherwise take any action which
would hinder the free passage of vehicles, bicyclists or pedestrians
on any street, sidewalk, or public right-of-way within the City of
Sanford shall obtain a highway excavation permit or lane or
shoulder closure permit to be issued in advance by the Director of
Public Works Director or his or her designee. The fee for the permit
shall be as designated in Chapter 226, Article III.
B. Highway excavation permit application criteria. An application for a
highway excavation permit under this section shall be made upon such
forms as may be developed by the Public Works Director. All
applications under this section shall be filed with the Public Works
Director no less than 24 hours, weekends and holidays excluded, prior
to the commencement of any work or the placement of any obstruction
in the City of Sanford streets or rights-of-way. Exceptions to this delay
may be granted at the discretion of the Public Works Director; however,
the Director may make provision for permits to be granted in
emergency situations under such terms as he or she determines.
C. Authority of the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director, or
his designee, shall have authority to interpret this article and require
any amount of traffic control measures on any project requiring a
highway excavation permit, or other work within a public right-of-way,
in order to provide safety to vehicular traffic, pedestrians, or other
vehicles. The Public Works Director or his designee shall also have the
authority to require any changes or revisions to the approved initial
traffic control provisions or devices, including, but not limited to,
requiring the presence of uniformed police officers, during the project
§ 226-32 SANFORD CODE § 226-33
153:338
as changing conditions and safety concerns warrant. In certain
situations, and at his or her discretion, the Public Works Director may
also allow reduction or relaxation of some criteria described herein.
Any such reduction or relaxation shall not relieve any contractor,
person or entity of their legal responsibilities to protect the public and
any and all property from injury or damage. Failure by the permittee,
contractor, person, or entity to provide such measures to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Director may result in enforcement
action as indicated herein.
D. Traffic control and safety plan.
(1) In addition to the requirements of Chapter 226, Article III,
§ 226-28D, all applicants for a public highway excavation permit
shall provide a traffic control and safety plan ("the plan") for review
and approval by the Director of Public Works or designees. The
plan shall demonstrate the measures to be employed to control
vehicular traffic and protect pedestrians, bicyclists, people in
handicapped devices and the public in general. The plan shall be a
hard copy document and may consist of a narrative and sketches,
aerial photograph sketches, or a diagram showing the signage,
barricades, channelization devices, such as barrels or cones,
positions of flaggers, and other devices to be used. The narrative
shall include a plain statement of what actions will be taken by the
permittee to protect personal safety and property which could be
affected by the work to be performed under the permit.
(2) Elements of the plan, and implementation of the plan or any
possible variations of the plan in the field, shall be in conformance
with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control and Devices, latest
edition (hereinafter, "MUTCD"). Unless otherwise allowed by the
Public Works Director, all applications under this article shall be
filed with the Public Works Director no less than 24 hours,
weekends and holidays excluded, prior to the commencement of
any work or the placement of any obstruction in the City streets or
rights-of-way; except, however, the Director of Public Works shall
make provision for permits to be granted in emergency situations
under such terms as determined by him or her.
(3) The permittee shall in general maintain safe crossings for two lanes
of vehicle traffic at all street intersections where possible and safe
crossings for pedestrians. The contractor or entity shall provide
traffic control such that no traffic crosses a roadway center line, or
creates a dangerous condition at a street intersection.
Channelization devices, such as cones and signs for traffic
direction, may be employed to alter locations of the two travel lanes
and create a temporary center line if this is proposed in the plan or
allowed by the Director of Public Works or his designee. If any
excavation is made across any public street or sidewalk, adequate
crossings shall be maintained for vehicles and for pedestrians. It
shall be the duty of every permittee cutting, performing excavation,
§ 226-33 LITTERING § 226-33
153:339
or moving of construction equipment in or upon any public place,
to place and maintain barriers, warning devices and signage
necessary to provide for safety of the general public.
E. Properly trained and competent flagger. The term "properly trained and
competent flagger" shall mean a person who is either certified by Maine
DOT or who otherwise meets formal training and/or experience criteria
approved by the Public Works Director to be considered as being
properly trained and competent. The Public Works Department shall
promulgate and maintain a list of properly trained and competent flag
personnel and/or their companies on file for public view. To be included
on the approved list, written documentation shall be provided by the
flaggers or their companies demonstrating the individuals' training and
experience. Applicants for highway excavation permits shall choose
flagging personnel from this list, or shall provide documentation of
other flaggers they wish to employ as properly trained and competent
flaggers.
F. Requirements for maintaining two-way traffic.
(1) As determined by the Public Works Director, whenever necessary to
protect personal safety and property, including, but not limited to,
cases where vehicular traffic crosses or is likely to cross over any
roadway center line, any permittee under this article may be
required to retain the services of either uniformed police officers or
properly trained and competent flaggers as defined herein. Within
the traffic control and safety plan, the permittee shall also indicate
locations for any other protective or channelization devices, such
as barriers, traffic cones, direction signs, advance warning signs,
or other measures as may be required by the Public Works Director.
(2) Unless it is demonstrated to his or her satisfaction that two-way
traffic can be allowed in both directions at the same time, the
Public Works Director may permit an entity to temporarily reduce
the number of travel lanes to a single lane, provided that properly
trained and competent flaggers are used to direct and control
traffic. Detours shall be allowed only with the approval of the Public
Works Director. All traffic control methods and devices shall comply
with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition.
G. Uniformed police officers required. Pursuant to the traffic control
standards established herein, all individuals, organizations,
contractors, or other entities, to include work performed by or under
contract with the City, the Sanford Water District or the Sanford
Sewerage District, any permit issued pursuant to this section may
require the use of uniformed police officers under the following
circumstances:
(1) The Public Works Director or his designee determines that
circumstances exist creating a public safety concern such that the
use of uniformed police officers shall be required. The Public Works
§ 226-33 SANFORD CODE § 226-33
153:340
Director shall obtain the conferment of the Chief of Police or
Assistant Chief of Police in evaluating the need for uniformed police
details or any additional traffic control to provide acceptable public
safety measures.
(2) If the Public Works Director and Chief of Police or Assistant Chief of
Police deem it necessary to protect public safety, a police traffic
detail in conformance with Sanford Police Department standards
shall be required on the following streets: Main Street, Lebanon
Street, Washington Street, Cottage Street, High Street, School
Street, Oak Street, Pleasant Street, River Street, and Route 4.
Other roads may be added to this list. The decision on whether a
uniformed police officer detail is required shall be made by the
Public Works Director, who may consult with and receive advice
from the Sanford Police Chief or Assistant Police Chief.
(3) If the Public Works Director in conferment with the Chief of Police
or Assistant Chief of Police deems it necessary to protect public
safety, a police traffic detail will be required for any traffic control
activities within an intersection controlled by a traffic signal device
when not operational, unless the intersection is adequately
controlled using properly trained and competent flaggers and the
traffic control measures meet all standards within the latest edition
of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. In such cases, if
he or she determines that public safety is still not adequate at the
intersection, the Public Works Director may require that uniformed
police officers are necessary for additional safety.
(4) All costs for police details that occur on any construction project in
public ways shall be subject to Sanford Police Department policies
and procedures.
H. City held harmless. All entities initiating and performing the earthwork
project in the City of Sanford, whether or not in compliance with the
conditions of the highway excavation permit shall bear all risk and
responsibility for incidents and occurrences within the duration of said
projects. The City of Sanford shall be held harmless for all events and
claims arising from said projects.
I. Enforcement.
(1) The City of Sanford shall make such inspections for all working
projects as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of this
article. The City shall have the authority to promulgate and cause
to be enforced such rules, policies, and regulations as may be
reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this
article.
(2) If, in their judgment, the Director of Public Works, Chief of Police or
Assistant Chief of Police observe a project in a public way, or
crossing a public way, that is out of compliance with the traffic and
safety plan or otherwise unreasonably jeopardizing public safety,
§ 226-33 LITTERING § 226-33
153:341
the Public Works Director, Chief of Police or Assistant Chief of
Police shall carry out one or more of the following procedures:
(a) Carry out or arrange for a stop-work order for the project until
traffic control is effectively brought into compliance.
(b) Issue a written or verbal warning to the responsible permittee,
contractor, person or entity stating that the project needs to
comply with this article to avoid a stop-work order, including, if
necessary, additional traffic control and safety measures to be
employed.
(c) Direct that the project's traffic control will require uniformed
police officers in accordance with this article and the Sanford
Police Department's practices and procedures. The entity or
contractor shall be solely responsible for fees assessed for the
presence of uniformed police officers. Utilization of police
officers shall not relieve any other traffic control requirements
required by this article.
(3) Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
a violation and subject to a fine of not more than $500.
§ 226-33 SANFORD CODE § 226-33
153:342
Chapter 230
TAXATION
§ 226-33 LITTERING § 226-33
153:343

ARTICLE I
Exemption of Military Personnel From Vehicle Excise Tax
[Adopted 12-20-2016 by Order No. 16-159.08]
§ 230-1. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. § 1483-A, which expressly
authorizes such ordinances.
§ 230-2. Grant of exemption.
Vehicles owned by a resident of this municipality who is on active duty
serving in the United State Armed Forces and who is either permanently
stationed at a military or naval post, station or base outside this State
or deployed for military service for a period of more than 180 days and
who desires to register that resident's vehicle(s) in this State are hereby
exempted from the annual excise tax imposed pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A.
§ 1482.
§ 230-3. Application for exemption.
To apply for this exemption, the resident must present to the Municipal
Excise Tax Collector certification from the commander of the resident's
post, station or base, or from the commander's designated agent, that the
resident is permanently stationed at that post, station or base or is deployed
for a period of more than 180 days.
§ 230-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEPLOYED FOR MILITARY SERVICE — Has the same meaning as in 26
M.R.S.A. § 814(1)(A).
UNITED STATES ARMED FORCES — Includes the National Guard and the
Reserves of the United States Armed Forces.
VEHICLE — Has the same meaning as in 36 M.R.S.A. § 1481(5) and does
not include snowmobiles as defined in 12 M.R.S.A. § 13001.
§ 230-5. When effective; duration.
This article shall take effect immediately upon enactment by the municipal
legislative body unless otherwise provided and shall remain in effect unless
and until it or 36 M.R.S.A. § 1483-A is repealed.
§ 230-1 LITTERING § 230-5
153:345
Chapter 232
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Business licenses — See Ch. 149, Art. I. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 245.
§ 232-1. Title; statutory authority; purpose.
§ 232-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings
as set out herein, unless the context clearly demonstrates otherwise:
DISQUALIFYING CRIMINAL CONVICTION — Any conviction for any
criminal offense punishable by imprisonment for any period of time,
whether or not the sentence was imposed or served, but shall not include
any conviction which is shown to have been set aside on appeal or
collaterally or for which a pardon, certificate of rehabilitation or the
equivalent under the law of the sentencing jurisdiction has been granted
or which is not rationally related to the purposes of owning or operating a
taxicab.
OPERATION WITHIN THE CITY OF SANFORD — The act or business of
picking up persons in a taxicab within the City of Sanford for transportation
to locations within or outside the City, except that the provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to a motor vehicle licensed by another municipality
to operate as a taxicab which is operated within the City of Sanford in
response to:
OPERATOR — A person to whom a license to operate a taxicab has been
issued.
A. This chapter shall be known as the "Ordinance to Regulate and License
the Operation of Taxicabs Within the City of Sanford" and is enacted
pursuant to the authority granted to the City now or hereafter by
general law, including 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3009.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the number and operation of
taxicabs and those operating taxicabs within the City of Sanford
through a licensing procedure in order to promote the general welfare
and public safety.
A request to transport passengers from a point of destination within the
City to another municipality but not to a point of destination within the
City, provided that such drivers shall not cruise, park or stand for the
purpose of soliciting passengers within this City; or
A.
A request to convey a passenger from such other municipality to the
City.
B.
§ 230-5 SANFORD CODE § 232-2
153:346
OWNER — A person owning and/or leasing for use any taxicab used in the
taxi business.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity.
TAXICAB — Any motor vehicle designed and used for the transportation of
persons for compensation, the destination and route of which are under the
direction and control of the passengers. Excluded from this definition are
buses and vehicles commonly referred to as "stretch limousines."
TAXICAB BUSINESS LICENSE — The permission or license granted to a
business seeking to engage in providing taxis for hire to the general public.
TAXICAB OPERATOR'S LICENSE — The permission or license granted to
an individual allowing that individual to operate a taxicab within the City of
Sanford when such license is required under the terms of this chapter.
TAXICAB VEHICLE LICENSE — The permission or license granted to the
owner of any taxicab used in the taxi business authorizing said vehicle to
engage in the taxi business.
§ 232-3. Licenses required.
No person shall operate, cause to be operated, lease, rent or otherwise
provide for use a taxicab within the City of Sanford without such taxicab
owner and the operator thereof having first obtained all licenses required
from the City Council as provided herein.
§ 232-4. Application for taxicab business license.
A. An application for a taxicab business license shall be filed with the City
Clerk upon forms provided by the Clerk. The application shall provide
the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The address location of the dispatch center and garage.
(3) A signed consent to allow the Sanford Police Department to
investigate and verify all information submitted as part of the
application.
(4) Proof of adequate public liability insurance as required under this
chapter.
(5) A detailed description of the company logo, design, insignia,
wording and coloring that will appear on any vehicles licensed
under the applicant's name.
(6) Evidence that the applicant corporation, business, partnership or
other legal entity is in good standing to operate within the State of
Maine, if so required.
(7) A listing of all principals in the business or corporation, if
applicable.
§ 232-2 LITTERING § 232-4
153:347
§ 232-5. Application for taxicab operator's license.
An application for a taxicab operator's license shall be filed with the City
Clerk upon forms provided by the Clerk. The application shall be verified
under oath and shall provide the following requirements:
§ 232-6. Application for taxicab vehicle license.
An application for a taxicab vehicle license shall be filed with the City Clerk
upon forms provided by the Clerk. The application shall be verified under
oath and shall provide the following requirements:
(8) A listing of all rates to be charged and the method of computation.
(9) Such further information as the City Council may require.
B. Upon receipt of the report and comments from the Chief of Police, the
City Clerk shall forward the application and all supporting
documentation to the City Council for action. The Council shall consider
the application during a public hearing at its next available meeting.
Said public hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper of general
distribution at least seven days prior to the hearing.
C. The Council shall review the application with respect to location of the
business and adverse impacts to surrounding properties from noise,
odor, fumes, traffic congestion or other causes. Following a hearing, the
Council can grant a license, grant a license with certain conditions or
deny the application. If the Council denies an application, it shall issue
written findings within 10 days of the decision.
D. Aggrieved parties shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of the
Council to Superior Court.
A. The name, address and date of birth of the applicant.
B. Any prior experience in the transportation of passengers.
C. Proof of a valid motor vehicle license and whether any license held by
the applicant is presently revoked or has been revoked during the three
years preceding the application and the reasons for any such
revocations.
D. The applicant's prior traffic and police record, if any.
E. The consent to allow the Sanford Police Department to investigate and
verify the information submitted in the application.
F. Two photographs of the applicant of such size as the Clerk may specify.
G. Proof of adequate public liability insurance as required by this chapter.
H. Such further information as the City Council may require.
§ 232-4 SANFORD CODE § 232-6
153:348
§ 232-7. Issuance or denial of licenses; term.
A. The name, address and date of birth of the owner of the vehicle or of all
principal officers of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation,
including the clerk of the corporation, together with the address of a
business office or principal place of business.
B. The make, type, year, vehicle identification number and license plate
number of each vehicle for which a taxicab vehicle license is being
sought and the address of the garage or site where the vehicle will be
stationed when not in service.
C. A state inspection sticker issued within the 30 days prior to the date of
application.
D. Adequate proof showing the vehicle to be currently registered and
licensed within the State of Maine.
E. Proof of adequate public liability insurance as required by this chapter.
F. A detailed description of the graphic design, insignia, wording and
coloring which will appear on the vehicle, if licensed.
G. Such further information as the City Council may require.
A. Taxicab operator's license.
(1) Upon receipt of a completed application for a taxicab operator's
license, the City Clerk shall refer the same to the Chief of Police or
his designee to verify the information set forth therein and to
report and comment on the same to the Clerk within 30 days. The
Chief of Police will ensure that the information contained on the
application is valid, and the fee for such investigation and taxicab
inspection shall be established by the Council after public hearing.
(2) Upon receipt of the report and comments from the Chief, the Clerk
shall either issue or deny a license based on the standards in this
chapter. Any decision of the Clerk can be appealed to the City
Council. The initial application fee for each license shall constitute
the first year's license fee, and the license shall be in effect for the
remainder of the calendar year in which the license is issued.
Written findings for any denial shall be prepared by the Clerk
within 10 business days of the decision.
B. Taxicab vehicle license.
(1) Upon receipt of a completed application for a taxicab operator's
license, the City Clerk shall refer the same to the Chief of Police or
his designee to verify the information set forth therein and to
report and comment on the same within seven days.
(2) Upon receipt of the report and comments from the Chief, the Clerk
shall either issue or deny a license based on the standards in this
§ 232-6 LITTERING § 232-7
153:349
§ 232-8. Standards for denial.
Any license applied for under this chapter shall be denied by the Council or
Clerk under the following circumstances:
chapter. Any decision of the Clerk can be appealed to the City
Council. The initial application fee for each license shall constitute
the first year's license fee, and the license shall be in effect for
the remainder of the calendar year in which the license is issued.
Written findings for any denial shall be prepared by the Clerk
within 10 business days of the decision.
C. License renewal. Licenses may be renewed only by the City Clerk after
a review of a new application updating all required information.
Licenses issued by the City Council shall be renewed by the City
Council following a new application.
A. Taxicab vehicle license.
(1) If the applicant is other than the registered owner of the vehicle;
(2) If any of the principals of the applicant corporation or any person
having an actual ownership interest or management authority
therein has a disqualifying criminal conviction;
(3) If the applicant has had a taxicab vehicle license revoked within the
three previous years; or
(4) Failure to have an approved taxicab business license.
B. Taxicab operator's license.
(1) If the applicant has not attained the age of 18 years;
(2) If the applicant has been given a disqualifying criminal conviction
at any time during the five years immediately preceding the
application or if the applicant has been imprisoned at any time
during said period for a disqualifying criminal conviction, provided
that said conviction was for an offense which is rationally related to
the purpose of licensing taxicab operators;
(3) If the applicant has been convicted, at any time during the three
years immediately preceding the application, of criminal speeding,
reckless driving, driving to endanger, operating under the
influence, attempting to operate under the influence, operating
under suspension or an equivalent offense in any other jurisdiction
or if the applicant's privilege to operate a motor vehicle in any
jurisdiction has been revoked at any time during said period for any
reason; or
(4) If the applicant has been convicted of criminal speeding, reckless
driving, driving to endanger, operating under the influence,
attempting to operate under the influence or operating under
§ 232-7 SANFORD CODE § 232-8
153:350
§ 232-9. Temporary licenses.
Upon an application for a taxicab operator's license, the City Clerk may
issue a thirty-day temporary license which shall carry all the privileges of
a permanent license. During this thirty-day period, the Clerk shall request
of the Chief of Police an investigation of the information contained in the
application for an operator's license. This temporary license may be revoked
by the City Clerk upon a determination that any of the standards of this
chapter have been violated by the operator or if the investigation by the
Police Chief reveals that the applicant does not meet the qualifications to
receive a permanent operator's license.
§ 232-10. Suspension or revocation of licenses.
suspension while operating any vehicle licensed under this chapter
for the five years immediately preceding the date of application.
C. Taxicab business license.
(1) If the Council determines that the proposed business location will
have an undue adverse impact on surrounding property owners;
(2) If the Council determines that the applicant has had a taxicab
business license revoked in the past three years;
(3) If the applicant business or corporation is not licensed and in good
standing to do business in the State of Maine;
(4) If any of the principals of the applicant corporation or any person
having an actual ownership interest or management authority
therein has a disqualifying criminal conviction;
(5) If the applicant has had a taxicab business license revoked within
the three previous years; or
(6) If the applicant is not current for all personal property taxes and/or
fees owed to the City of Sanford.
A. A license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or
suspended by the City Council upon the recommendation of the Chief of
Police if the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter or has violated any ordinances of the City of Sanford or the laws
of the United States or the State of Maine, the violations of which
reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the operator to offer public
transportation.
B. Prior to suspension or revocation, the City Council shall hold a public
hearing to determine all the facts relating to the suspension or
revocation of the license. The holder of the license shall be given notice
of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be
heard before the City Council at the hearing to consider suspension or
revocation.
§ 232-8 LITTERING § 232-11
153:351
§ 232-11. Standards for suspension or revocation.
A. Any license issued under the terms of this chapter may be suspended or
revoked by the City Council upon a determination by the City Council
that the licensee:
(1) Knowingly took a longer route to his or her destination than was
necessary, unless so requested by the passenger;
(2) Knowingly conveyed any passenger to a place other than that
which the passenger specified;
(3) Solicited or caused another person to solicit taxicab passenger
business in any manner whatsoever when such proposed business
is not related to the provision of taxicab services;
(4) Transported any person other than the passenger first engaging
the taxicab without the express consent of such passenger;
(5) Drove a taxicab when not clean and neat in appearance;
(6) Failed to remain in the operator's compartment of the taxicab at all
times that the taxicab was in service or was waiting to be hired,
other than to assist a passenger or his or her bags into or out of the
taxicab, or permitted any person other than the operator and a
passenger or passengers to remain in the taxicab at any such time,
except a trainee, if a licensed taxicab operator;
(7) Refused to transport any orderly person upon request, unless all
licensed taxicabs are engaged (if no taxicab is available at the time
a request for taxicab service is telephoned to a dispatch center, the
dispatch service shall offer to arrange with the caller for
transportation by the next available taxicab);
(8) Charged more than the maximum fare specified in the application
on file with the City Clerk's office;
(9) Failed to notify the Clerk of any change of any material fact set
forth in the application for such license;
(10) Removed from a taxicab or obscured or caused to be removed from
a taxicab or obscured any notices required under this chapter;
(11) Knowingly gave incorrect information on the license application;
(12) Refused to provide and use a certified child safety seat when
transporting any child that would have been required to be in a
child safety seat in the child's parent's vehicle; or
(13) Refused transportation to any person based on age, sex, religion,
color, creed, national origin, destination, handicap or because of
the presence of children.
§ 232-11 SANFORD CODE § 232-11
153:352
§ 232-12. Maintenance of taxicabs; required equipment.
All taxicabs operating within the City of Sanford shall adhere to the
following requirements at all times:
B. In addition to the provisions of Subsection A above, a taxicab operator's
license may be suspended or revoked upon a determination that the
driver engaged in any loud argument, fight or other disturbance;
harassed, threatened or assaulted another person; intentionally
damaged, destroyed or threatened to damage or destroy any property;
or in any other manner engaged in conduct detrimental to the orderly
and efficient transportation of passengers.
C. Maximum suspensions of taxicab operators' licenses shall be as follows:
three days for the first violation, seven days for the second violation and
15 days for the third violation within a twelve-month period. Fourth
violations shall result in revocation of the taxicab operator's license and
may be the basis for further action with respect to the taxicab vehicle
license.
D. In addition to the provisions of Subsection A above, a taxicab business
license may be suspended or revoked upon a determination that:
(1) The taxicab business licensee or any person employed or connected
with such licensee has operated a taxicab without a current and
valid taxicab operator's license;
(2) There have been repeated violations by the operators of vehicles
licensed to the same licensee resulting in more than four
suspensions in any twelve-month period;
(3) The taxicab business licensee permitted or caused a taxicab
operator to operate a taxicab with knowledge of or in disregard of
that operator's loss or suspension of his motor vehicle license by
the Secretary of State;
(4) The taxicab business licensee permitted or caused a taxicab
operator to operate a taxicab with knowledge of or in disregard of
that operator's intoxication; or
(5) The taxicab business licensee permitted or caused a taxicab to
operate within the City which was unsafe or in unsound condition.
E. A taxicab vehicle license may be suspended or revoked upon a finding
by the City Council that:
(1) The City has been notified by the licensee's insurance carrier that
the insurance policy covering the vehicle in question has lapsed,
been suspended or has been terminated; or
(2) It has been determined by the license inspector that the vehicle in
question is no longer fit for service as a taxicab.
§ 232-11 LITTERING § 232-12
153:353
§ 232-13. Display of license.
A taxicab operator shall display his or her taxicab operator's license,
complete with name and picture, in a place within the cab which is clearly
visible to passengers at all times when the cab is in service.
§ 232-14. Display of rates.
A. Taxicabs shall at all times be clean and in good repair inside and out
and shall be maintained at all times in compliance with the laws of the
State of Maine relating to passenger vehicles and the rules and
regulations of the State Commissioner of Transportation enacted
pursuant thereto.
B. Taxicabs that compute fare through the use of a taximeter shall have
those meters installed so as to give an accurate reading of all the car's
movements and so as not to be subject to tampering. Any meters used
shall be tested, approved and sealed by the State Sealer of Weights and
Measures. Said meters shall indicate fare and mileage by means of
legible figures which are electrically illuminated during the period
between sunset and sunrise, which fare shall be calculated in
accordance with the fare posted on the vehicle and on file in the
application on file with the City Clerk.
C. Every taxicab operating in the City shall be equipped with an exterior
light affixed to the roof thereof, which shall be covered with a
translucent fixture marked with the word "Taxi" in legible lettering and
which shall be operated during the period between sunset and sunrise.
D. Every taxicab shall be conspicuously marked, in letters not less than
1 1/2 inches in height, with the word "Taxicab," "Taxi" or "Cab" and the
owner's name or trade name or, in lieu of such name or trade name,
with a design or monogram containing the owner's name or trade name.
Such design or monogram shall be not less than eight inches in
diameter.
E. Every taxicab shall be conspicuously marked, in numbers not less than
1 1/2 inches in height, with a vehicle number, which shall correspond to
the vehicle license number issued by the City Clerk, such number to be
unique to all taxicabs licensed by the City of Sanford.
F. All taxicabs shall have access to a certified child safety seat, for use
when transporting children required to be placed in such a seat.
G. All handicapped-accessible taxicabs licensed in the City of Sanford to
pick up or drop off passengers must have a restraint system or straps
designed to hold a wheelchair and passenger securely in place. Every
operator of a handicapped-accessible taxicab licensed to operate within
the City is to be trained by the employer in the appropriate and safe
application of said restraint system or strap and to hold the passengers
securely in a wheelchair.
§ 232-12 SANFORD CODE § 232-14
153:354
§ 232-15. Rates.
§ 232-16. Insurance.
A. All taxicabs shall have the rates to be charged clearly displayed on the
exterior of the vehicle, as well as on the interior of the vehicle, and be
clearly marked either "metered taxi" or "zone taxi" on the exterior of
the vehicle.
B. The maximum rate of fare charged by the taxicab and any lesser rate
actually charged by the taxicab shall be advertised on both back doors
of the taxicab, in lettering no less than one inch in height.
C. Every taxicab shall be equipped with a sign which shall be located in
the interior of the taxicab and maintained in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to all passengers therein and which shall state, in letters
no less than 1/4 inch in height, the following:
Passenger Information
If you have a complaint about the services you have received or the
fare you have been charged, please fill out a complaint form and
submit to the Chief of Police. You can obtain a complaint form by
contacting the Sanford Police Department located at 935 Main Street
or by calling 324-9170.
A. The fare to be charged by a taxicab business shall be clearly described
in the application for a taxicab business license. Upon any changes to
the rate, the City Clerk and Police Chief shall be notified.
B. There shall be no charge for the transportation of the carry-on bags or
parcels of a passenger.
A. No taxicab vehicle license shall be issued to any licensed taxicab
business until the applicant files with the Clerk satisfactory proof of
liability insurance coverage for liability arising out of the operation of
the taxicab. Insurance shall clearly cover the vehicle and all occupants
under all operating conditions, including but not limited to by
employees of the owner, lease arrangements or any other similar
arrangement. The insurance coverage shall be in conformance with
minimum State guidelines.
(1) In the case of vehicles constructed with capacity for more than four
persons behind the driver, permanent alterations to the vehicle
must be made in order to be considered a taxi.
(2) The City Council may require higher insurance liability coverage if
it deems necessary.
(3) The insurance company issuing the policy shall contain a provision
for the automatic and immediate notification by the insurance
company to the City of Sanford of cancellation, amendment or
expiration of the insured's policy. If the insurance coverage
§ 232-14 LITTERING § 232-16
153:355
§ 232-17. Inspections; removal from service.
The license inspector may require any licensee to present a taxicab for
inspection whenever the inspector deems such inspection necessary. The
inspection shall be performed as soon as practicable, at a location to be
determined by the City of Sanford. If a vehicle fails to pass this inspection,
the license inspector may, in writing, order a taxicab removed from service,
provided that a reinspection shall be scheduled as soon as possible, but in
no case more than three days thereafter. There shall be a charge of $10 for
the first reinspection and a charge of $25 for each reinspection thereafter of
any taxicab ordered removed from service for any violation which is deemed
by the license inspector to represent a serious threat to the health or safety
of passengers. Any licensee aggrieved by such an order may appeal the
decision of the license inspector to the City Council, which shall hear the
appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting date.
§ 232-18. Notices.
When notice is required to be given to an applicant or holder of a license
issued pursuant to this chapter and notice by mail is used, the City Clerk
may use the address set forth in the application on file. Proof of a certified
or registered mailing to said address shall create the presumption of receipt
by the applicant on the expiration of five days from the date of mailing.
§ 232-19. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The Sanford Police Department shall have the primary duty to enforce this
chapter. Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall pay a fine
not exceeding $50 for the first such offense in any calendar year and $100
for each subsequent offense in the same calendar year. Any licensed owner
or operator who violates any of the provisions of the foregoing sections
shall, in addition to said penalty, thereupon become subject to suspension
or forfeiture of his/her/its license thereafter.
§ 232-20. Additional regulations.
During the life of the license, the licensee shall be required to conform to
any new regulations duly adopted by the City Council.
§ 232-21. (Reserved)
terminates, expires or is suspended, the taxicab vehicle license or
the taxicab operator's license shall terminate and expire and shall
be immediately returned by the owner to the Clerk. Thereafter, the
license may only be reinstated upon proof of retaining insurance as
required herein.
B. In all cases, the operator and the owner shall both be insured to the
limits established by this section or by a higher amount if deemed
necessary by the Council.
§ 232-16 SANFORD CODE § 232-22
153:356
§ 232-22. When effective; time limit for compliance.
This chapter shall become effective 30 days from its adoption, as provided
by Section 2.09c of the Sanford City Charter. For any initial vehicle license
issued under this chapter, the licensee shall have 60 days to conform to
the terms herein, excepting the requirements regarding the provision of
child safety seats, for which the applicant shall have 90 days to comply.
Subsequent licenses shall only be issued upon proof of compliance.
§ 232-23. Fees.
Code Section Service Fee
§ 232-4A Application for taxicab business
license
$60
§ 232-5 Application for taxicab operator's
license
$40
nonrefundable
§ 232-6 Application for taxicab vehicle
license
$10
nonrefundable
Transfer of license $10
§ 232-7 Taxicab inspection and background
check
$50
Chapter 245
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 178.
§ 232-22 LITTERING § 232-23
153:357

ARTICLE I
Words and Phrases
§ 245-1. Definitions.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for
the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this article, except when the context otherwise requires.
B. Whenever any words and phrases used herein are not defined herein
but are defined in the state laws regulating the operation of vehicles,
any such definition there shall be deemed to apply to such words and
phrases used herein, except when the context otherwise requires.
ALLEY — A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear
or side of lots or buildings in urban districts and not intended for the
purpose of through vehicular traffic.
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT — All streets and portions of streets
within the area designated.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Every vehicle designed, maintained or used
primarily for the transportation of property.
CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY — Every highway, street or roadway
in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and persons
have no legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points
only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority
having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway.
DRIVER — Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS — Any fireman, fire ward,
engineerman, volunteer and those appointed under special laws or
emergencies.
LANED ROADWAY — A roadway which is divided into two or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named
herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight savings time, as may
be in current use in this municipality.
PARK — The leaving of a vehicle, whether occupied or unoccupied,
otherwise than temporarily, for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
PASSENGER AND FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONES — Spaces
adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the
loading or unloading of passengers, commercial freight, or materials.
PATROL/TRAFFIC UNIT — The Patrol/Traffic Unit of the Police
Department of this municipality or, in the event that a Patrol/Traffic
Unit is not established, then said term whenever used herein shall be
deemed to refer to the Police Department of this Town.
§ 245-1 LITTERING § 245-1
153:359
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot.
POLICE OFFICER — Any officer of the Police Department, any
constable, or any person authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to
make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY — Every way or place in private
ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having
express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed
in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian
approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and
proximity as to give rise to danger of collision, unless one grants
precedence to the other.
ROADWAY — That portion of a highway improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the
term "roadway" as used herein shall refer to any such roadway
separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
SAFETY ZONE — The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so
marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all
times while set apart as a safety zone.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curblines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for
use by pedestrians.
STAND — The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or unoccupied,
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving
or discharging passengers.
URBAN DISTRICTS —
Beginning at the intersection of Elm Street and a power transmission
line 0.35 mile north of Fenway Avenue; thence southeasterly via said
power transmission line to Beaver Hill Road 0.16 mile from Elm Street;
thence southeasterly to Railroad Avenue at its intersection with Beaver
Hill Road; thence southerly to the junction of Pleasant Street (State
Route 224) and River Street;
Thence southeasterly to Shaw Road at a power transmission line 0.26
mile from June Street; thence southeasterly via said power
transmission line to Cottage Street (U.S. Route 202) 0.19 mile east of
the entrance to the Goodall Memorial Hospital; thence southeasterly
to Grammar Street at a point 0.22 mile northeast of July Street, point
of reference utility pole #21 south side of street; thence southeasterly
to the intersection of a power transmission line and northeasterly
extension to the alignment of Brompton Street; thence southeasterly
to the junction of High and Rushton Streets;
§ 245-1 SANFORD CODE § 245-1
153:360
Thence southerly to School Street, at a point 0.58 mile east of Mousam
River; thence southerly to Main Street (State Route 109) at a point
0.32 mile southerly of Old Mill Road;
Thence southwesterly to the intersection of Westview Drive and
Eastview Drive; thence northwesterly to Old Mill Road, point of
reference utility pole J-12 1/2/17 north side of road; thence northerly
to Great Works River; thence northwesterly via said river through
Berwick Street and Oakdale Cemetery to the north boundary of said
cemetery;
Thence northwesterly to Lebanon Street (U.S. Route 202) at a culvert
0.03 mile west of Foch Street; thence northerly through the junction
of Hanson Ridge and Howe Road to the intersection of a westerly
extension of the alignment of Hanson Street; thence northwesterly to
Oak Street (State Route 11-A) at a culvert 0.25 mile from Brookwood
Avenue;
Thence northwesterly to the junction of Main Street (State Route 11)
and Deering Neighborhood Road; thence northerly via south right-ofway
boundary of State Route 11 to the Shapleigh town line; thence
easterly to Stanley Road 0.19 mile east of Route 11; thence easterly
crossing the Mousam River to the intersection of Elm Street and a
power transmission line 0.35 mile north of Fenway Avenue, the point
of beginning.
Also on Route 4 beginning 0.67 mile south of New Dam Road,
Inventory Road #801, at utility pole #305/1115 east side of road and
extending north to New Dam Road.
Also, beginning at the junction of State Route 4 and Inventory Road
#801 (New Dam Road) extending southeasterly 0.73 mile to utility
pole #102 south side of road, at the trailer park entrance.
Note: Bridges, if any, bisected by the compact urban zone line are in
the rural area.
§ 245-1 LITTERING § 245-1
153:361

ARTICLE II
Patrol/Traffic Administration
§ 245-2. Police Department established.
The Sanford Police Department was established by a Maine State
Legislative Act in 1935, Acts and Resolves Chapter 53, page 503.
§ 245-3. Patrol/Traffic Unit established.
There is hereby established in the Police Department of this municipality a
Patrol/Traffic Unit to be under the control of an officer of police appointed
by and directly responsible to the Chief of Police.
§ 245-4. Duties of Patrol/Traffic Unit.
The Patrol/Traffic Unit, with such assistance as may be rendered by the
other divisions or units within the Police Department shall:
§ 245-5. Records of traffic violations.
§ 245-6. Patrol/Traffic Unit to investigate accidents.
It shall be the duty of the Patrol/Traffic Unit, assisted by other police officers
in the Department, to investigate traffic accidents and to arrest and to assist
in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing
or contributing to such accidents.
A. Enforce the traffic provisions of this chapter and the state vehicle laws.
B. Make arrests for traffic violations.
C. Investigate accidents.
D. Cooperate with the Traffic Engineer and other municipal officials in the
administration of traffic laws and in developing methods to improve
traffic conditions.
E. Carry out those duties imposed upon it by this chapter.
A. The Police Department or the Patrol/Traffic Unit thereof shall keep a
record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of this municipality or of
the state vehicle laws of which any person has been convicted, together
with a record, shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations
and the total of each.76 Said record shall accumulate during at least a
three-year period, and from that time on the record shall be maintained
complete for at least the most recent three-year period.
B. All such records and reports shall be public records.
76.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 245-2 LITTERING § 245-7
153:363
§ 245-7. Traffic accident studies.
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the
Patrol/Traffic Unit shall cooperate with the Traffic Engineer in conducting
studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. (The Maine
State Highway Commission provides technical assistance on request.)
§ 245-8. Traffic accident reports.
The Patrol/Traffic Unit shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic
accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed
alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and
information of the Traffic Engineer.
§ 245-9. Drivers' files to be maintained.
§ 245-10. Traffic report.
The Patrol/Traffic Unit shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall
be incorporated into the annual police report. Such report shall contain
information on traffic matters in the municipality as follows:
§ 245-11. Funeral processions.
The Traffic Unit shall recommend a type of pennant or other identifying
insignia to be displayed upon, or other method to be employed to identify,
the vehicles in funeral processions.
A. The Police Department or the Patrol/Traffic Unit thereof shall maintain
a suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions,
and complaints reported for each driver, which shall be filed
alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned.
B. Said Unit shall study the cases of all such drivers charged with frequent
or serious violations of the traffic laws or involved in frequent traffic
accidents or any serious accident and report such information to the
Department of Motor Vehicles or other appropriate state agencies.
C. Such records shall accumulate during at least a three-year period, and
from that time on such records shall be maintained complete for at least
the most recent three-year period.
A. The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the
number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data.
B. The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data
on the safety activities of the police.
C. The plans and recommendations of the Unit for future traffic safety
activities.
§ 245-7 SANFORD CODE § 245-12
153:364
§ 245-12. Traffic Engineer.
The office of Traffic Engineer is hereby established. The Municipal Engineer
shall serve as Traffic Engineer, in addition to his other functions, and shall
exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this
chapter.
§ 245-13. Emergency and experimental regulations.
§ 245-14. Complaints.77
The Town Council will receive complaints having to do with traffic matters.
Complaints or actions before the Council will receive a response within a
thirty-day period.
A. The Chief of Police, by and with the approval of the Traffic Engineer and
the State Highway Commission, is hereby empowered to make
regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic
ordinances of this Town and to make and enforce temporary or
experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions.
No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for
more than 90 days.
B. The Traffic Engineer may test traffic control devices under actual
conditions of traffic.
77.Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 245-12 LITTERING § 245-14
153:365

ARTICLE III
Enforcement and Obedience to Traffic Regulations
§ 245-15. Authority of Police and Fire Department officials.
§ 245-16. Compliance required.
It is unlawful and an infraction for any person to do any act forbidden or fail
to perform any act required in this chapter.
§ 245-17. Obedience to police and fire officials.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any police officer or Fire Department official.
§ 245-18. Public employees to obey traffic regulations.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned
or operated by the United States, this state, or any county, town, district,
or any other political subdivision of the state, subject to such specific
exceptions as are set forth in this chapter or in the State Vehicle Code.
§ 245-19. Authorized emergency vehicles.
§ 245-20. Certain nonmotorized traffic to obey traffic regulations.
A. It shall be the duty of any police officer to enforce all traffic laws of this
municipality and all of the state vehicle laws.
B. Police officers are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand
or signal, in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of
a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic as conditions may require,
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
C. Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct
or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.
A. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call, or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected
violator of the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a
fire alarm, may park or stand irrespective of the provisions of this
chapter.
B. The foregoing provision shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty of park or stand with due regard for
the safety of all persons, nor shall such provision protect the driver
from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
A. Every person propelling any pushcart upon a roadway shall be granted
all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the
§ 245-15 LITTERING § 245-20
153:367
§ 245-21. Use of coasters, roller skates, skateboards and similar
devices restricted.
No person upon roller skates or a skateboard or riding in or by means of any
coaster, toy vehicle, motorized toy vehicle, or similar device shall go upon
any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so
crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject
to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply
upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized herein.
driver of a vehicle by this chapter and by the "rules of the road" portion
of the State Vehicle Code, except these provisions which by their nature
have no application.
B. Every person riding an animal or driving an animal-drawn vehicle upon
a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of
the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except
those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no
application.
§ 245-20 SANFORD CODE § 245-21
153:368
ARTICLE IV
Traffic Control Devices
§ 245-22. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain official traffic control devices
when and as required under the traffic ordinances of this municipality
to make effective the provisions of said ordinances and may place and
maintain such additional official traffic control devices as he may deem
necessary to regulate, warn, or guide traffic under the traffic ordinances of
this municipality or the State Vehicle Code. The installation of traffic control
devices on state-aid and state highways shall be subject to State Highway
Commission approval.
§ 245-23. Specifications for traffic control devices.
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to specifications
approved by the State Highway Commission. All signs and signals required
hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as
to type and location throughout the municipality. All traffic control devices
so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this
chapter shall be official traffic control devices.
§ 245-24. Obedience to official traffic control devices.
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic
control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the
exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle.
§ 245-25. When required for enforcement purposes.
§ 245-26. Presumption of legality.
Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position
approximately conforming to the requirements of this chapter, such devices
shall hereby be determined to have been so placed by the official act or
direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.
A. No provision of this chapter for which official traffic control devices are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and
place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position
and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
B. When a particular section does not state that official traffic control
devices are required, such section shall be effective even though no
devices are erected or in place.
§ 245-22 LITTERING § 245-27
153:369
§ 245-27. Authority to establish play streets.78
The Town Council shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof
a play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway
indicating and helping to protect the same.
§ 245-28. Restrictions on play streets.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof
as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street
or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within such closed area, and then any said driver shall
exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
§ 245-29. Crosswalks and safety zones.
§ 245-30. Traffic lanes.
The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the
roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is
necessary. On state-aid and state highways, the authority of the Traffic
Engineer is subject to State Highway Commission approval.
A. The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to:
(1) Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where,
in his opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing
the roadway and at such other places as he may deem necessary.
(2) Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
B. On state-aid and state highways, the authority of the Traffic Engineer is
subject to approval by the State Highway Commission.
78.Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 245-27 SANFORD CODE § 245-30
153:370
ARTICLE V
Speed Regulation
§ 245-31. State speed laws applicable.
The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable
upon all streets within this municipality.
§ 245-32. Regulation of speed by traffic signals.
The Traffic Engineer is authorized, subject to State Highway Commission
and State Police approval, to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to
permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds
slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable with the district
or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.
§ 245-31 LITTERING § 245-32
153:371

ARTICLE VI
Turning Movements
§ 245-33. Authority to place devices altering normal course for
turns.
The Traffic Engineer is authorized to place official traffic control devices
within or adjacent to intersections, and such course to be traveled as so
indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law. On stateaid
and state highways, the authority of the Traffic Engineer is subject to
State Highway Commission approval.
§ 245-34. Authority to place restricted turn signs.
The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections
at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-turn and shall
place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be
prohibited between certain hours of any days and permitted at other hours,
in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or the signs
may be removed when such turns are permitted. On state-aid and state
highways, the authority of the Traffic Engineer is subject to State Highway
Commission approval.
§ 245-33 LITTERING § 245-34
153:373

ARTICLE VII
One-Way Streets and Alleys
§ 245-35. Authority to sign one-way streets and alleys.
Whenever any ordinance of this municipality designates any one-way street
or alley, the Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice
thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are
in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall
be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
§ 245-36. Use of one-way streets and alleys.
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys so designated,
vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs
indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every
intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited
(Schedule 1).79
§ 245-37. State approval.
On state-aid and state highways, installation of one-way street signs is
subject to State Highway Commission approval.
79.Editor's Note: Schedule 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 245-35 LITTERING § 245-37
153:375

ARTICLE VIII
Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 245-38. Through streets designated.
Those streets and parts of streets described in Schedule 280 and made a
part hereof are hereby declared to be through streets for the purpose of this
section.
§ 245-39. Signs required at through streets.
Whenever this chapter designates and describes a through street, it shall
be the duty of the Traffic Engineer to place and maintain a stop sign, or on
the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at any intersection, a
yield sign, on each and every street intersecting such through street, unless
traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic control
signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two such streets or
at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so
designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of said
streets, as may be determined by the Traffic Engineer, upon the basis of an
engineering and traffic study.
§ 245-40. Designation of other intersections.
The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate
intersections where a particular hazard exists upon other than through
streets and to determine whether:
§ 245-41. State approval.
On state-aid and state highways, the designation of through streets and the
installation of stop and yield signs are subject to State Highway Commission
approval.
A. Vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such intersection, in
which event he shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every such place
where a stop is required; or
B. Vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at
such intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected a yield
sign at every place where obedience is required.
80.Editor's Note: Schedule 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 245-38 LITTERING § 245-41
153:377

ARTICLE IX
Miscellaneous Driving Rules
§ 245-42. Entering intersection or crosswalk.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there
is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or sidewalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
to proceed.
§ 245-43. Driving through funeral or other procession.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral
or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such
vehicles are conspicuously designated, as required in this chapter. This
provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by
traffic control signals or police officers.
§ 245-44. Drivers in procession.
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand
edge of the roadway as practicable and safe.
§ 245-45. Funeral processions to be identified.
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such
by a pennant or other identifying technique, i.e., headlights on, or by such
other method as may be recommended by the Patrol/Traffic Unit.
§ 245-46. Permit required for certain parades and processions.
No organized procession or parade containing three or more persons or
three or more vehicles, except the armed forces, the Police Department,
and Fire Department, shall occupy, march, or proceed along any way except
in accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and such other
regulations as are set forth herein which may apply.
§ 245-47. Unlawful riding.
No person shall ride in any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed
or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to any
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to persons riding
within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
§ 245-42 LITTERING § 245-47
153:379

ARTICLE X
Pedestrians' Rights and Duties
§ 245-48. Crossing at right angles.
Except where otherwise indicated by a crosswalk or other official traffic
control device, a pedestrian shall cross a roadway at right angles to the curb
or by the shortest route to the opposite curb.
§ 245-49. Prohibited crossing.
In accordance with applicable state law.
§ 245-50. Drivers to exercise due care to pedestrians.
In accordance with applicable state law.
§ 245-48 LITTERING § 245-50
153:381

ARTICLE XI
Bicycles
§ 245-51. Operation and equipment.
§ 245-52. Parking.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street, other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
§ 245-53. Riding on sidewalks.
A. No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any public street or
highway or across any sidewalk except in a careful and prudent manner
and at a reasonable rate of speed. Persons riding bicycles shall observe
all traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto, signal for all turns,
ride at the right-hand side of any street or highway, and pass only to the
left when passing slow-moving vehicles, with the exception that a pass
may be made to the right when slow-moving vehicles are about to make
left-hand turns. No person shall operate or propel any bicycle without
having at least one hand on the handlebars thereof. No person shall ride
or propel a bicycle with any passenger where said bicycle is designed to
carry only one person. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at
one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
B. No person riding or operating a bicycle shall hold onto any vehicle
while said vehicle is in a moving motion. No person shall ride or propel
a bicycle on any street or highway of the Town after dark, unless the
same shall be equipped with sufficient light, attached to the front of
said bicycle, visible from the front thereof not less than 200 feet, and
properly lighted, nor without a rear tail light or, in lieu of, a reflector
attached to and visible from the rear of said bicycle for a distance of 50
feet. No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any street or highway
or across any sidewalk in the Town abreast or to the left of any person
so riding or propelling another bicycle.
A. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
B. The Chief of Police is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk or
roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, and
when such signs are in place no person shall disobey the same.
C. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible
signal before overtaking and passing such a pedestrian.
§ 245-51 LITTERING § 245-54
153:383
§ 245-54. Registration required.
No resident shall operate or use a bicycle propelled wholly or in part by
muscular power upon any streets or public highways of the Town of Sanford
without first obtaining form the Sanford Police Department a registration
card and bicycle registration sticker.
§ 245-55. Issuance of registration.
The Sanford Police Department is hereby authorized and directed to issue,
upon written application, bicycle registrations which shall be effective for
an indefinite period, upon issue. Said registration shall entitle the owner
to operate such bicycle for which the registration has been issued upon
any streets, alleys, and public ways, exclusive of the sidewalks within the
business districts thereof, in the Town of Sanford.
§ 245-56. Reflective stickers.
The Town of Sanford, under the direction of the Sanford Police Department,
shall provide reflective stickers, together with registration cards. The
Sanford Police Department will be responsible for the registration records
and enforcing this article. The reflective stickers and registration cards
shall have numbers indicated thereon in numerical order, beginning with
the number one, and shall have letters "SSBR" indicated thereon (Sanford-
Springvale bicycle registration). Such reflective stickers shall be suitable
for attachment to the frames of bicycles. It shall be the duty of the Sanford
Police Department to attach one such reflective sticker to each bicycle and
to issue a corresponding registration card to the owner. Such sticker shall
remain attached to and during the ownership period of such registration.81
The Police Department shall keep a record of the date of issuance of each
registration, the person to whom issued, and the number thereon.
§ 245-57. Duties of bicycle owners.
It shall be the duty of every person who owns a bicycle in the Town of
Sanford, prior to operating or propelling said bicycle upon any street or
highway in the Town of Sanford, to register said bicycle with the Sanford
Police Department. It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers
ownership of any bicycle to report such sale or transfer by returning to the
Police Department the registration card issued to such person as having
the registration issued thereof, together with the name and address of the
person to whom said bicycle was sold or transferred. It shall be the duty of
the purchaser or transferee of such bicycle to apply for a new registration
within five days of said transfer or sale.
§ 245-58. Duties of dealers of bicycles.
A. It shall not be required of dealers of bicycles to register said bicycles
that are for sale in business establishments thereof.
81.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 245-54 SANFORD CODE § 245-58
153:384
§ 245-59. Refusal to issue registration.
The Sanford Police Department is authorized to refuse any application for
bicycle registration if said bicycle does not meet minimum standards in
safety and equipment required thereon. The following standards will be
required on all bicycles operated or propelled on any street or highway
of the Town of Sanford prior to the issuance of registration cards and
registration stickers:
§ 245-60. Removal of numbers.
No person shall willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate, or alter
the number of any bicycle frame registered pursuant to this article.
§ 245-61. Destruction of stickers.
No person shall remove, destroy, mutilate, or alter any registration sticker,
seal, or registration card during the time in which such sticker, seal, or
registration card is operative. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the
Police Department from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on
which no serial numbers can be found or on which the number is illegible
or insufficient for identification purposes.
§ 245-62. Times of registration.
Bicycles shall be registered at the Sanford Police Department on
Wednesdays and Saturdays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
§ 245-63. Fees.
There shall be no fee for bicycle registration.
B. It shall be the duty of dealers of bicycles to register said bicycles that
are being used on a rental basis prior to allowing said bicycles to be
ridden or propelled on any street or highway in the Town of Sanford.
A. Handlebars and tight grips.
B. Good tires.
C. Good seat.
D. Good brakes.
E. Tight wheels.
F. Headlight and reflectors (night operation only).
G. Tight spokes and all spokes must be present.
§ 245-58 LITTERING § 245-64
153:385
§ 245-64. Impoundment of bicycles.
The Sanford Police Department, or any member thereof, may impound
and retain possession of any bicycle operated in violation of any of the
provisions of this article, and for impoundment of unregistered bicycles
retain possession of the same until registered by the owner.
§ 245-65. Unclaimed bicycles.
Any bicycle that has been in possession of the Sanford Police Department
for a period of 90 days and is not claimed by the owner will be disposed of
by the direction of the Chief of Police of Sanford. One item will be printed
in the local newspaper(s) for one week prior to the disposal of said bicycle
or bicycles giving a complete description of the bicycle or bicycles and
stating that said bicycle(s) will be disposed of if not claimed by a given date.
The Chief of Police will cause to have printed in the local newspaper a list
of disposed bicycles, indicating a description of the bicycles and place of
disposition, i.e., charity organization, etc.
§ 245-66. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person or persons maliciously removing, destroying, or mutilating
or altering any registration card, fender stickers or seals during which
time such registration cards, fender stickers or seals are operative shall
be summonsed to the 10th District Court, Western York Division, in
Springvale on such and if found guilty will be subject to a fine of not
more than $10. Any portion of this fine shall be used to reimburse the
owner of said bicycle who may have suffered such loss of said bicycle.
B. Any person of the age of 17 or over who violates any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more
than $10. The Chief of Police, when satisfied that a juvenile under the
age of 17 years has ridden a bicycle in violation of any of the provisions
of this article, may impound the bicycle for a period not to exceed five
days for the first offense and for a period not to exceed 30 days for any
subsequent offense.
§ 245-64 SANFORD CODE § 245-66
153:386
ARTICLE XII
Angle Parking
§ 245-67. Designation of streets where angle parking is permitted.
§ 245-68. Obedience to angle parking signs or markings.
On those streets which have been signed or marked by the Traffic Engineer
for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at
an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or
markings.
§ 245-69. Permits for loading or unloading at an angle to the curb
in business districts.
A. The Traffic Engineer shall determine upon what streets angle parking
shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, but such angle
parking shall not be indicated upon any state-aid or state highway
within the municipality unless the State Highway Commission has
determined by resolution or order entered in its minutes that the
roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without
interfering with the free movement of traffic.
B. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where
passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the
left side of the street.
A. The Police Department is authorized to issue special permits to permit
the backing of a vehicle to the curb in a business district for the purpose
of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms
and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the
owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall
grant to such person the privilege as stated and authorized herein.
B. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of
the special terms or conditions of any such permit.
§ 245-67 LITTERING § 245-69
153:387

ARTICLE XIII
Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited in Specified Places
§ 245-70. Parking not to obstruct traffic.
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such
a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of
the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
§ 245-71. Parking in alleys.
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under
such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property.
§ 245-72. On-street parking prohibition. [Amended 12-20-2005;
6-13-2006; 8-21-2007; 11-18-2008]
A. The Director of Public Works (or his designee) may declare that an
emergency exists any time during the calendar year. The emergency
shall be announced by notifying local radio and television media, by
notifying other public safety departments of the Town, and by other
appropriate methods. The declaration of an emergency shall be
accompanied by a ban on on-street parking. The announcement shall
include the duration of the parking ban and that parking is prohibited
on any public way until the parking ban is lifted.
B. The Public Works Director (or his designee) shall also have the
discretion to declare long-term parking bans if snow accumulation or
public safety issues warrant emergency action in order to allow for the
efficient removal of snow and ice. The Director may issue these bans
Town-wide or on specific streets and areas as deemed necessary.
C. No vehicle shall be parked at any time during a declared snow
emergency so as to interfere with or hinder the removal of snow from
said public street or way. Any person restricting the Town snow
plowing, loading and hauling operation or any person parking a vehicle
in violation of a "No Parking" sign placed on any street or way by the
Public Works Department shall be subject to a fine under general
penalties of the Code of the Town of Sanford, Maine, or applicable
statutes or regulations of the State of Maine.
D. The parking of vehicles is prohibited between the hours of 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m. from December 1 to April 1 on all of the following arterials:
Route 202 (Lebanon Street), Winter Street, Cottage Street, Washington
Street, River Street, Twombley Road, School Street, High Street,
Grammar Street, Grammar Road, Route 224 and Pleasant Street, Oak
Street, Jagger Mill Road, Old Mill Road, Emery Street, Main Street,
§ 245-70 LITTERING § 245-72
153:389
§ 245-73. Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose
of:
§ 245-74. Parking adjacent to schools.
§ 245-75. Parking prohibited on narrow streets.
§ 245-76. Standing or parking on one-way streets.
The Traffic Engineer is authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side of
any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when
such signs are in place no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such
left-hand side in violation of any such sign.
Roberts Street, Beacon Street, Kimball Street, Berwick Road, Berwick
Avenue, Shaw Road, Mt. Hope Road and New Dam Road.
E. The Sanford Police Department is authorized to enforce the parking
restrictions of this article. Notwithstanding any citations, fines or other
penalties that may be issued or adjudged, the police officer acting to
enforce these restrictions may also cause any vehicle parked in
violation of this section to be removed from the street in accordance
with the provisions of Article XVII of this chapter.
A. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
B. Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repair necessitated
by an emergency within a reasonable time.
A. The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no
parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school
property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic
or create a hazardous situation.
B. When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of
a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no person
shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.
A. The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no
parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed
20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the
width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet.
B. When officials signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow
streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any
such street in violation of any such sign.
§ 245-72 SANFORD CODE § 245-77
153:390
§ 245-77. Standing or parking on one-way roadways.
In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic
is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand
or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless
signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The Traffic Engineer
is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon
the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving
notice thereof.
§ 245-78. No stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or
congested places.
A. The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate,
by proper signs placed, places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which
the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would create unusual
delay to traffic.
B. When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as
authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any
such designated place.
§ 245-77 LITTERING § 245-78
153:391

ARTICLE XIV
Stopping for Loading or Unloading Only
§ 245-79. Traffic Engineer to designate curb loading zones.
The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine the location of
passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain
appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which
the provisions of this section are applicable.
§ 245-80. Permits for curb loading zones.
The Traffic Engineer shall not hereafter designate or sign any curb loading
zone upon special request of any person unless such person makes
application for a permit for such zone and for two signs to indicate the ends
of each such zone. The Traffic Engineer, upon granting a permit and issuing
such signs, shall collect from the applicant and deposit in the municipal
treasury a service fee of $50 per year or fraction thereof and may, by
general regulations, impose conditions upon the use of such signs, and for
reimbursement of the municipality for the value thereof in the event of
their loss or damage, and for their return in the event of misuse or upon
expiration of a permit. Every permit shall expire at the end of one year.
§ 245-81. Standing in passenger curb loading zone.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of
time, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, in
any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the
regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only
for a period not to exceed that which is reasonable.
§ 245-82. Standing in freight curb loading zone.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials, in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone
during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect.
In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 20
minutes, or when reasonable time permission is given by a police officer.
§ 245-83. Traffic Engineer to designate public carrier stops and
stands.
The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized and required to establish bus
stops, bus stands, taxi stands, and stands for other passenger commoncarrier
motor vehicles on such public streets, in such places and in such
numbers as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience
to the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand, or other
stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. These shall be listed in
Schedule 3.82
§ 245-79 LITTERING § 245-84
153:393
§ 245-84. Stopping, standing and parking of buses regulated.
§ 245-85. Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.
In the time restricted for use for bus or taxicab stands, no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a
taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand has been officially
designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger
vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such
zone.
A. The operator of a bus, except a school bus or a bus granted permission
by the Chief of Police, shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided
herein.
B. The operator of a bus, except school buses, shall not stop such vehicle
upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers, other than at a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading
zone, so designated as provided herein, except in the case of any
emergency.
C. The operator of a bus, except school buses, shall enter a bus stop, bus
stand, or passenger loading zone on a public street in such manner that
the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall
be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not farther
than 18 inches from the curb, so as not to unduly impede the movement
of other vehicular traffic. It shall be permissible, in the case of loading
or unloading handicapped persons, to allow such vehicles to park in
such a manner to allow discharge of such persons.
82.Editor's Note: Schedule 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 245-84 SANFORD CODE § 245-85
153:394
ARTICLE XV
Stopping, Standing or Parking Restricted or Prohibited on Certain
Streets.
§ 245-86. Applicability.
The provisions of this article prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle
shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on
official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
official traffic control device.
§ 245-87. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
§ 245-88. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the streets described in Schedule 4 and made a part
of this chapter.83
§ 245-89. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain
streets. [Amended 12-20-2016 by Order No. 16-149.07]
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule 13, or any day
except Sundays and public holidays, within the district or upon any of the
streets described in said Schedule 13 and made a part of this chapter.84
§ 245-90. Parking time limited on certain streets.
A. When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person
shall park a vehicle for longer than two hours at any time between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays, within the
district or upon any of the streets described in Schedule 9.85 (See also
Subsection B below.)
B. When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person
shall park a vehicle for longer than one hour at any time between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays, within the
district or upon any of the streets described in Schedule 8.86
83.Editor's Note: Schedule 4 is included at the end of this chapter.
84.Editor's Note: Schedule 13 is included at the end of this chapter.
85.Editor's Note: Schedule 9 is included at the end of this chapter.
86.Editor's Note: Schedule 8 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 245-86 LITTERING § 245-90
153:395
§ 245-91. Parking signs required.
Whenever by this chapter or any other ordinance of this municipality any
parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets,
it shall be the duty of the Traffic Engineer to erect appropriate signs giving
notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless said signs
are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense.
§ 245-92. Parking during snow emergencies.
Parking is prohibited during snow emergencies along routes designated as
snow emergency routes by the Traffic Engineer.
C. When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person
shall park a vehicle for longer than 30 minutes at any time between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays, within the
district or upon any of the streets described in Schedule 7.87
87.Editor's Note: Schedule 7 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 245-90 SANFORD CODE § 245-92
153:396
ARTICLE XVI
Regulating Classes of Traffic on Certain Highways
§ 245-93. Commercial vehicles prohibited from using certain
streets.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any
commercial vehicle exceeding 10,000 pounds gross weight at any time upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule 8, made a part
of this chapter, except that such vehicles may be operated thereon for the
purpose of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise, and then only
by entering such street at the intersection nearest the destination of the
vehicle and proceeding thereon no further than the nearest intersection
thereafter.
§ 245-94. Restriction upon use of streets by certain vehicles.
§ 245-95. State approval.
On state-aid and state highways, the installation of signs is subject to State
Highway Commission approval.
§ 245-95.1. Vehicle weight restrictions on posted ways. [Added
4-4-2017 by Order No. 17-41.06]
A. The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate
those heavily traveled streets upon which shall be prohibited the use of
the roadway by motor-driven cycles, bicycles, horse-drawn vehicles, or
other nonmotorized traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving
notice thereof.
B. When signs are so erected giving notice thereof, no person shall
disobey the restriction stated on such signs.
A. Purpose and authority. The purpose of this "Ordinance Restricting
Vehicle Weight on Posted Ways" (hereinafter, the "section") is to prevent
damage to town ways and bridges in the City of Sanford and Village of
Springvale which may be caused by vehicles of excessive weight, to
lessen safety hazards and the risk of injury to the traveling public, to
extend the life expectancy of town ways and bridges, and to reduce the
public expense of their maintenance and repair. This section is adopted
pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3009 and 29-A M.R.S.A. §§ 2395 and 2388.
B. Definitions. The definitions contained in Title 29-A M.R.S.A. shall
govern the construction of words contained in this section. Any words
not defined therein shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
C. Restrictions and notices.
(1) The municipal officers may, either permanently or seasonally,
impose such restrictions on the gross registered weight of vehicles
as may, in their judgment, be necessary to protect the traveling
§ 245-93 LITTERING § 245-95.1
153:397
public and prevent abuse of the highways, and designate the City
ways and bridges to which the restrictions shall apply.
(2) Whenever notice has been posted as provided herein, no person
may thereafter operate any vehicle with a gross registered weight
in excess of the restriction during any applicable time period on
any way or bridge so posted unless otherwise exempt as provided
herein.
(3) Pursuant to 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2395, the notice shall contain, at a
minimum, the following information: the name of the way or bridge,
the gross registered weight limit, the time period during which the
restriction applies, the date on which the notice was posted, and
the signatures of the municipal officers. The notice shall be
conspicuously posted at each end of the restricted portion of the
way or bridge in a location clearly visible from the traveled way.
(4) Whenever a restriction expires or is lifted, the notices shall be
removed wherever posted. Whenever a restriction is revised or
extended, existing notices shall be removed and replaced with new
notices. No person may remove, obscure or otherwise tamper with
any notice so posted except as provided herein.
D. Exemptions.
(1) The following vehicles are exempt under State law:
(a) Any vehicle delivering home heating fuel and operating in
accordance with a permit issued by the MDOT under 29-A
M.R.S.A. § 2395(4) and, when necessary during a period of
drought emergency declared by the Governor, any vehicle
transporting well-drilling equipment for the purpose of drilling
a replacement well or for improving an existing well on
property where that well is no longer supplying sufficient
water for residential or agricultural purpose and operating in
accordance with a permit issued by the MDOT under 29-A
M.R.S.A. § 2395 (4-A).
(2) The following vehicles are also exempt under the specific
provisions of this section:
(a) Any vehicle or combination of vehicles registered for a gross
weight of 23,000 pounds or less.
(b) Any vehicle or combination of vehicles registered for a gross
weight in excess of 23,000 pounds and traveling without a load
other than tools or equipment necessary for the proper
operation of the vehicle. This exemption does not apply to
special mobile equipment. It shall be a defense to a violation of
this subsection if the combined weight of any vehicle or
combination of vehicles registered for a gross weight in excess
§ 245-95.1 SANFORD CODE § 245-95.1
153:398
of 23,000 pounds and its load is in fact less than 23,000
pounds.
(c) Maine DOT vehicles or other vehicles authorized by Maine
DOT or a municipality or county to maintain the roads under
their authority.
(d) Authorized emergency vehicles as defined in 29-A M.R.S.A.
§ 2054, school buses, a wrecker towing a disabled vehicle of
legal weight from a posted highway, and vehicles with three
axles or less under the direction of a public utility and engaged
in utility infrastructure maintenance or repair.
(e) Any two-axle vehicles registered for a gross weight in excess of
23,000 pounds and less than or equal to 34,000 pounds that
are carrying any of the special commodities may operate
without a permit. Special commodities includes any of the
following:
[1] Home-delivered heating fuel (oil, gas, coal, stove-size
wood that is less than 36 inches in length, propane and
wood pellets);
[2] Petroleum products;
[3] Groceries;
[4] Bulk milk;
[5] Solid waste;
[6] Animal bedding;
[7] Returnable beverage containers;
[8] Sewage from private septic tanks or porta-potties; or
[9] Medical gases.
E. Permits.
(1) The owner or operator of any vehicle not otherwise exempt as
provided herein may apply in writing to the municipal officers for a
permit to operate on a posted way or bridge notwithstanding the
restriction. The municipal officers may issue a permit only upon all
of the following findings:
(a) No other route is reasonably available to the applicant;
(b) It is a matter of economic necessity and not mere convenience
that the applicant use the way or bridge; and
(c) The City has determined whether the applicant is required to
provide tendered cash, a bond, or other suitable security
running to the municipality in an amount sufficient, in the
§ 245-95.1 LITTERING § 245-95.1
153:399
City's judgment, to repair any damage to the way or bridge
which may reasonably result from the applicant's use of same.
(2) Even if the municipal officers make the foregoing findings, they
need not issue a permit if they determine the applicant's use of the
way or bridge could reasonably be expected to create or aggravate
a safety hazard or cause substantial damage to a way or bridge
maintained by the municipality. They may also limit the number of
permits issued or outstanding as may, in their judgment, be
necessary to preserve and protect the highways and bridges.
(3) In determining whether to issue a permit, the municipal officers
shall consider the following factors:
(a) The gross registered weight of the vehicle;
(b) The current and anticipated condition of the way or bridge;
(c) The number and frequency of vehicle trips proposed;
(d) The cost and availability of materials and equipment for
repairs;
(e) The extent of use by other exempt vehicles; and
(f) Such other circumstances as may, in their judgment, be
relevant.
(4) The municipal officers may issue permits subject to reasonable
conditions, including but not limited to restrictions on the actual
load weight and the number or frequency of vehicle trips, which
shall be clearly noted on the permit.
F. Administration and enforcement. This section shall be administered and
may be enforced by the municipal officers or their duly authorized
designee (such the Director of Highways or Director of Public Works).
G. Penalties. Any violation of this section shall be a civil infraction subject
to a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $1,000. Each violation
shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to any fine, the
municipality may seek restitution for the cost of repairs to any damaged
way or bridge and reasonable attorney fees and costs. Prosecution shall
be in the name of the municipality and shall be brought in the Maine
District Court.
H. Amendments. This section may be amended by the municipal officers at
any properly noticed meeting.
I. Severability; effective date.
(1) In the event any portion of this section is declared invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions shall continue in
full force and effect.
§ 245-95.1 SANFORD CODE § 245-95.1
153:400
(2) This section shall take effect immediately upon enactment by the
municipal officers at any properly noticed meeting.
§ 245-95.1 LITTERING § 245-95.1
153:401

ARTICLE XVII
Enforcement
§ 245-96. Violations and penalties.
A. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person
found guilty of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $100 and not less than $50 for each
offense; provided, however, that for parking violations a person may
elect, in lieu of such penalty, to waive his right to a court appearance by
paying in full the applicable parking ticket waiver fee listed below at
least 24 hours prior to the court date shown on the face of the ticket:
(1) No parking zone: $10.
(2) Wrong side of street: $10.
(3) Too close to hydrant: $25.
(4) Double parking: $15.
(5) All-night parking.
(a) First to fourth ticket: $15 each.
(b) Fifth ticket and any subsequent ticket within a year of first
ticket: $100 each.
(6) Bus stop: $10.
(7) Blocking driveway: $10.
(8) Parking in crosswalk: $15.
(9) Improper parking: $10.
(10) Overtime parking: $10.
(11) Parking in designated handicapped spaces: $50.
(12) Other: $10.
(13) Snow emergency: $50.
(14) Unreasonable deposit of snow/ice: $50.
(15) Impeding traffic: $10.
(16) Vehicular trespassing: $15.
(17) Fire lane: $50.
B. All fines and penalties collected under this chapter shall be paid into the
Town treasury, and the Town Council is authorized to employ all such
procedures authorized by law which it deems prudent to collect the
same.88
§ 245-96 LITTERING § 245-97
153:403
§ 245-97. Obedience to regulations required.
It shall be unlawful and in violation of this chapter for any person to cause,
allow, or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such
person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this
chapter, provided that the fact that a vehicle is unlawfully parked shall be
prima facie evidence of the unlawful parking of such vehicle by the person
in whose name such vehicle is registered. Further, any vehicle parked in
violation of this chapter (whether because of length of time, place, or the
manner in which said vehicle is parked) is declared to be an obstruction in
such street or public way and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic.
§ 245-98. Obedience to police and fire officials.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer or Fire Department official.
§ 245-99. General authority of Police and Fire Department officials.
§ 245-100. Traffic citation forms.
A. It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department or such
officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police to enforce all street traffic
laws of the Town and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street
traffic in the Town.
B. Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by the
Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand
or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of
a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as
conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic
laws.
C. Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire or similar
public safety incident, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic
or similar public safety incident in the immediate vicinity.
A. The Town shall provide books or forms to include traffic citation forms
for notifying alleged violators to appear and answer charges of violating
traffic laws and ordinances in the District Court. Such books may
include serially numbered sets of citations in the form prescribed by the
Chief of Police.
B. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the issuance of such books
to individual members of the Police Department. The Chief shall require
a written receipt for every book so issued and shall maintain a record of
every such book and each set of citations contained therein.
88.Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 245-97 SANFORD CODE § 245-101
153:404
§ 245-101. Issuance of citations.
Except when authorized or directed under state law to immediately take a
person before a magistrate or other court official for the violation of any
traffic laws, a police officer who halts a person for such violation, other
than for the purpose of giving him a warning or warning notice, and does
not take such person into custody under arrest shall take such person's
name and address, the operator's license number, the registered number
of the motor vehicle involved, and such other pertinent information as
may be necessary. The officer shall then issue to such person in writing
on the original form provided by the Town a traffic citation containing a
notice to answer to the charge against him in the District Court as soon
as practicable after such alleged violation. The alleged violation shall be
specified in the citation.
§ 245-102. Disposition of citations; records.
§ 245-103. Cancellation of citations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any
traffic citation in any manner other than as provided by this article.
§ 245-104. Removal of tickets or citations from vehicles.
No person shall remove from any vehicle a traffic law violation ticket or
notice of citation placed on or in such vehicle by a police officer of the Town,
A. Every police officer, upon issuing an original traffic citation to an
alleged violator of any provision of the motor vehicle laws of this state
or of any traffic ordinance of the Town, shall deposit the copy of the
citation with his immediate superior officer, who shall make a police
blotter record of it.
B. The citation shall be disposed of in accordance with those laws of the
state which govern the procedures in the District Court.
C. The Chief of Police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained in
connection with every traffic citation issued by a member of the Police
Department a record of the disposition of the charge by the District
Court or its Traffic Violations Bureau.
D. The Chief of Police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained a
record of all warrants issued by the District Court or by any other court
on traffic violation charges and which are delivered to the Police
Department for service and of the final disposition of all such warrants.
E. It shall be unlawful and official misconduct for any member of the Police
Department or other officer or public employee to dispose of, alter or
deface a traffic citation or any copy thereof, or the record of the
issuance or disposition of any traffic citation, complaint or warrant, in a
manner other than as required by this section.
§ 245-101 LITTERING § 245-104
153:405
except for the purpose of answering such notice or citation as required
therein.
§ 245-105. Illegally parked vehicles without drivers.
Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped
in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by ordinances of the Town
or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration
number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which
may identify its user and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic
citation on a form provided by the Town.
§ 245-106. Impoundment.
A. Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to remove a
vehicle from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of
safety or to a garage designated or maintained by the Police
Department or otherwise maintained by the Town under the
circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
(1) When any vehicle is left unattended upon a bridge, viaduct or
causeway, where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic.
(2) When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the
vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an
extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
(3) When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked
illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic.
(4) When a vehicle is parked in a manner obstructing snow removal.
B. Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in
this section and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the
registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner
thereof, such officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice
in writing to such owner of the fact of such removal, the reasons thereof
and the place to which such vehicle has been removed. In the event any
such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such notice shall be
given to the proprietor of such garage.
C. Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street under this section
and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or
for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as
hereinbefore provided, and in the event the vehicle is not returned to
the owner within a period of three days, then and in that event the
officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of
such removal by mail to the State Department, whose duty it is to
register motor vehicles, and shall file a copy of such notice with the
proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored.
§ 245-104 SANFORD CODE § 245-106
153:406
Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the
date, time and place from which removed, the reasons for such
removal, and the name of the garage or place where the vehicle is
stored.
D. In the event of any impoundment under this section, the owner of the
vehicle must pay all outstanding charges assessed against him under
this chapter, including but not limited to reasonable towing and
impoundment fees.
§ 245-106 LITTERING § 245-106
153:407

ARTICLE XVIII
General Regulations
§ 245-107. Standing or parking in roadway.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel
to the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic, and with the
curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the roadway,
except as provided elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 245-108. Stopping in certain places; trespassing; impeding traffic.
§ 245-109. Emerging from private driveway.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private driveway, automobile
service station or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to
driving onto the sidewalk and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
A. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic, when there exists an emergency, etc.,
or in compliance with any direction of a police officer or traffic control
device, in any of the following places:
(1) On a sidewalk.
(2) In front of a public or private driveway.
(3) Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
(4) On a crosswalk.
(5) Within 20 feet of the nearest corner of the curbs at an intersection.
(6) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
(7) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street or double parked, so called.
(8) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway.
(9) At any place where official signs prohibit parking or stopping.
B. Trespassing. Parking of vehicle by trespassing on private or Townowned
property is prohibited.
C. Impeding traffic. No vehicle shall be permitted to remain stationary
within the limits of the streets or public ways of the Town in such a
manner as to constitute a traffic hazard or to impede or to obstruct the
free movement of traffic thereon.
§ 245-107 LITTERING § 245-110
153:409
§ 245-110. Motor vehicles not to be driven on sidewalk.
The driver of any motor vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area,
except at a permanent or temporary driveway.
§ 245-111. Clinging to moving vehicles.
Any person riding, clinging, or therefor being dragged upon any motorcycle,
coaster, sled, skis, toboggan, roller skates, skateboard, or any toy vehicle
shall not attach the same or him/herself to any moving vehicle upon any
roadway.
§ 245-112. Crossing fire hose.
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire
Department when laid down on any street or private driveway, to be used at
any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official
in command.
§ 245-113. Unlawful parking.
No vehicle or combination of vehicles, except when permission of the Chief
of Police is granted, in excess of 20 feet in length shall remain parked in
controlled or regulated parking areas prohibited in Schedules 5, 6, and 7
for more than 20 minutes on any public way within the urban limits of the
Town.
§ 245-114. Loud, unusual or unnecessary noise.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon any street or way, or in any
other place, so as to make a loud, unusual, unnecessary noise against the
peace, quiet, or good order of the Town.
§ 245-115. Transportation of waste material.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated upon any public way
a vehicle with a load unless such load is fastened, secured, confined, or
loaded to prevent any possibility, reasonable to be anticipated, of any
portion of said load falling to the ground. The word "load" as used in
this section shall include but shall not be limited to paper, wood products,
rubbish, refuse, ashes, garbage, or other waste material.
§ 245-116. Unreasonable deposit of snow or ice.
Whoever unreasonably deposits or drops snow or ice within the built-up
sections of the Town of Sanford, except upon the written authority of the
municipal officers, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $20.
§ 245-116.1. to § 245-116.4. (Reserved)
§ 245-116.5. Toll booth fund-raisers. [Added 12-4-2007]
§ 245-110 SANFORD CODE § 245-116.5
153:410
A. A maximum of four toll booth fund-raisers may be allowed annually by
affirmative action of the Town Council until December 31, 2009, after
which time they shall be prohibited, except that the Council may allow a
toll booth fund-raiser to raise funds for national disasters and other
extraordinary events.
B. All toll booth participants shall comply with the following rules,
although the Town Council may require additional restrictions:
(1) All participants must be at least 18 years of age.
(2) All toll booths will be held on Route No.09 in front of the Junior
High School.
(3) Applicants must provide a traffic plan approved by the Sanford
Police Department that gives motorists an opportunity to bypass
the toll booth.
(4) All participants must wear traffic safety vests.
§ 245-116.5 LITTERING § 245-116.5
153:411

ARTICLE XIX
Interpretation
§ 245-117. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter relating to the operation of vehicles refer
exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon highways, except where a
different place is specifically referred to in a given section.
§ 245-118. Uniformity of interpretation.
This chapter shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its
general purpose to make uniform the law of those local authorities which
enact it.
§ 245-119. Effect of headings.
Article and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to
govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or extent
of the provisions of any article or section hereof.
§ 245-120. Short title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the "Sanford Traffic Ordinance."
§ 245-121. Chapter not retroactive.
This chapter shall not have a retroactive effect and shall not apply to any
traffic accident or judgment arising therefrom, or to any violation of the
motor vehicle ordinances of this Town, occurring prior to the effective date
of this chapter.
§ 245-122. Certification and publication.
The Clerk shall certify to the passage of this chapter and cause all or such
parts hereof to be published as may be required by the Constitution and
laws of this state.
§ 245-117 LITTERING § 245-122
153:413

ARTICLE XX
Schedules
§ 245-123. Schedule 1: One-way streets and alleys.
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys so designated,
vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated directions when signs
indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every
intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
§ 245-124. Schedule 2: Through ways and streets.
A street or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential
right-of-way and at the entrance to which vehicular traffic from intersecting
highways is required by law to yield the right-of-way to vehicles on such
through streets in obedience to a stop sign, yield sign, or other official
traffic control device, when such signs or devices are erected as provided
by law.
A. Sanford.
Name of Street Location
Andrew Avenue From the intersection of Andrew Avenue and
Main Street to the intersection of Nancy
Avenue and Andrew Avenue
Angola Street From the intersection of Angola Street and
Main Street through its intersection with East
Street and on to East Street
Avon Street From the intersection of Avon Street and Main
Street through its intersection with Whitcomb
Avenue and on to Whitcomb Avenue
Bateman Street From the intersection of Grammar Street and
Bateman Street to the intersection of Putnam
Street and Bateman Street and from the
intersection of Bateman Street and Putnam
Street to the intersection of Brompton Street
and Bateman Street
Bates Street From the intersection of Bates Street and Yale
Street to the intersection of Bowdoin Street
and Bates Street
Bauneg Beg Road From the intersection of Bauneg Beg Road
and Mount Hope Road to the Sanford-North
Berwick town line
Beacon Street From the intersection of Kimball Street and
Beacon Street to the intersection of Berwick
Street and Beacon Street
§ 245-123 LITTERING § 245-124
153:415
Name of Street Location
Bernier Road From the intersection of Bernier Road and
New Dam Road to the Sanford-Alfred town
line
Berwick Avenue From the intersection of Lebanon Street and
Berwick Avenue to the intersection of Berwick
Street and Berwick Avenue
Berwick Road From the intersection of Main Street and
Berwick Road to the intersection of Berwick
Street and Berwick Avenue
Berwick Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Berwick Street to the intersection of Berwick
Street and Kimball Street and from the
intersection of Berwick Street and Kimball
Street to the Sanford-North Berwick town line
Bodwell Street From the intersection of School Street and
Bodwell Street to the intersection of Pioneer
Avenue and Bodwell Street
Boothby Avenue From the intersection of Main Street and
Boothby Avenue to its northeastern terminus
Bowdoin Street From its western terminus to the intersection
of Yale Street and Bowdoin Street
Boyd Street From the intersection of Cottage Street and
Boyd Street to the intersection of North
Avenue and Boyd Street
Breary Avenue From the intersection of Main Street and
Breary Avenue to its southwestern terminus
Breton Avenue From the intersection of Main Street and
Breton Avenue through its intersection with
Kent Street and on to Kent Street
Brompton Street From the intersection of High Street and
Brompton Street to its northeastern terminus
Brook Street From the intersection of River Street and
Brook Street to the intersection of Cottage
Street and Brook Street and from the
intersection of Cottage Street and Brook
Street to the intersection of High Street and
Brook Street
Carver Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Carver Street to its western terminus
Central Avenue From the intersection of Central Avenue and
Nowell Street to its intersection with Pioneer
Avenue and on to Pioneer Avenue
§ 245-124 SANFORD CODE § 245-124
153:416
Name of Street Location
Charles Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Charles Street through its intersection with
Hope Street and on to Hope Street
Clinton Street From the intersection of Clinton Street and
Main Street through its intersection with
Raymond Street and on to Raymond Street
Cotswald Street From the intersection of Cotswald Street and
Brunell Avenue to the intersection of Route 99
and Cotswald Street and from the intersection
of Route 99 and Cotswald Street through its
intersection with Pierce Avenue and on to
Pierce Avenue
Cottage Street From the intersection of River Street and
Cottage Street to the Sanford-Alfred town line
Country Club Road
No. 2
From the intersection of Route 4 and Country
Club Road No. 2 to the southern intersection
of Route 4 and Country Club Road No. 3
Cove Street From the intersection of Cove Street and
Riverview Street through its intersection with
Riverbank Street and on to Riverbank Street
Davis Avenue From the intersection of Cottage Street and
Davis Avenue to the intersection of Spruce
Street and Davis Avenue
Deborah Avenue From the intersection of Deborah Avenue and
Nancy Avenue to its northeastern terminus
Dexter Street From the intersection of Schuler Street and
Dexter Street to the intersection Carver Street
and Dexter Street
Dorrington Avenue From the intersection of Main Street and
Dorrington Avenue to its northeastern
terminus
Eagle Drive From the intersection of Eagle Drive and Main
Street to its northeastern terminus.
East Street From the intersection of School Street and
Elm Street to the intersection with Angola
Street and onto Angola Street
Elm Street From the intersection of School Street and
Elm Street to the intersection of Pioneer
Avenue and Elm Street
Emerson Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Emerson Street to the intersection of Emerson
Street and Trafton Street
§ 245-124 LITTERING § 245-124
153:417
Name of Street Location
Emery Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Emery Street to the intersection of School
Street and Emery Street and from the
intersection of School Street and Emery Street
through its intersection with Yale Street and
on to Yale Street
Essex Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Essex Street to the intersection of School
Street and Essex Street
Farview Drive From the intersection of Farview Drive and
Main Street through its intersection with
Mountainview Drive and on to Mountainview
Drive
Field Street From the intersection of Field Street and
River Street through its intersection with
Riverview Street and on to Riverview Street
Freemont Street From the intersection of Ridgeway Avenue and
Freemont Street to the intersection of Kimball
Street and Front Street
George Avenue From the intersection of Bateman Street and
George Avenue to its northeastern terminus
Glen Street From the intersection of Berwick Road and
Glen Street through its intersection with
Emerson Street and on to Trafton Street
Goodwin Mills Road From the intersection of Goodwin Mills Road
and New Dam Road to the Sanford-Alfred
town line
Grace Lane From the intersection of Grace Lane and Mills
Road through its intersection with Booker's
Loop and on to Booker's Loop
Grammar Road From the intersection of Grammar Road and
Route 202 to the intersection of Grammar
Road and Route 4
Grammar Road From the intersection of High Street and
Grammar Street to the intersection of
Grammar Street and Grammar Road
Grand Avenue From the intersection of Lincoln Street and
Grant Avenue to the intersection of Summer
Street and Grant Avenue
Grandview Avenue From the intersection of Charles Street and
Grandview Avenue through its intersection
with Douglas Street and on to Douglas Street
§ 245-124 SANFORD CODE § 245-124
153:418
Name of Street Location
Gregory Drive From its western intersection with School
Street to its intersection with School Street
Grove Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Grove Street to the intersection of Mitchell
Street and Grove Street
Grove Avenue From the intersection of School Street and
Grove Avenue to the intersection of Pioneer
Avenue and Grove Avenue
Hanson ridge Road From the intersection of Hanson Ridge Road
and Lebanon Street to the intersection of
Route 11A and Hanson Ridge Road and from
the intersection of Route 11A and Hanson
Ridge Road to the Sanford-Shapleigh town
line
Harding Street From the intersection of Bateman Street and
Harding Street to its northeastern terminus
Henry Avenue From the intersection of Henry Avenue and
Nason Street thorough its northeastern
terminus
Highland Avenue From the intersection of Sherburne Street and
Highland Avenue through its intersection with
Montreal Street and on to Montreal Street
High Street From the intersection of River Street and High
Street to the intersection of Route 4 and High
Street
Hillcrest Drive From the intersection of June Street and
Hillcrest Drive through its intersection with
Morning Street and on to July Street
Holly Street From the intersection of Holly Street and
Hillcrest Drive through its intersection with
Pleasant Street and on to Pleasant Street
Horace Mills Road From the Wells-Sanford town line to the
intersection of the Sam Allen and the Horace
Mills Road
Hutchinson Street From the intersection of School Street and
Hutchinson Street to its southern terminus
Island Avenue From its northern terminus to the intersection
of Thompson Street and Island Avenue and
from the intersection of Island Avenue and
Thompson Street to the intersection of High
Street and Island Avenue
§ 245-124 LITTERING § 245-124
153:419
Name of Street Location
Jackson Street From the intersection of School Street and
Jackson Street to the intersection of Pioneer
Avenue and Jackson Street and from the
intersection of Pioneer Avenue and Jackson
Street through its intersection with Kempton
Terrace and on to Kempton Terrace
Jagger Mill Road From the intersection of Jagger Mill Road and
Route 4 to the intersection of Route 109 and
Jagger Mill Road
Javica Lane From the intersection of Javica Lane and
Route 4 to its northern terminus
July Street From the intersection of July Street and
Grammar Street through its intersection with
Hillcrest Drive and on to Hillcrest Drive
June Street From the intersection of Shaw Road and June
Street to the intersection of Cottage Street
and June Street and from the intersection of
Cottage Street and June Street to the
intersection of Grammar Street and June
Street
Kempton terrace From the intersection of Kempton Terrace and
Emery Street through its intersection with
Jackson Street and on to Jackson Street
Kent Street From the intersection of School Street and
Kent Street through its intersection with
Breton Avenue and on to Breton Avenue
Kilby Street From the intersection of Oxford Street and
Kilby Street to the intersection of Kimball
Street and Kilby Street
Kimball Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Kimball Street to the intersection of Lebanon
Street and Kimball Street
Lautel Street From the intersection of Brook Street and
Laurel Street to the intersection of River
Street and Laurel Street
Lebanon Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Lebanon Street to the Lebanon-Sanford town
line
Leighton Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Lenox Street to the intersection of School
Street and Lenox Street
§ 245-124 SANFORD CODE § 245-124
153:420
Name of Street Location
Lincoln Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Lenox Street to the intersection of William
Oscar Emery Drive and Lincoln Street
Lizotte Road From the Intersection of Lizotte Road and
Route 202 to the Sanford-Lebanon town line
Main Street From the Sanford-Wells town line to the
intersection of Route 4 and Main Street and
from the intersection of Main Street and
Route 4 to the intersection of Main Street and
Washington Street and from the intersection
of Main Street and Washington Street to the
intersection of Main Street and Lebanon
Street and from the intersection of Main
Street and Lebanon Street to the intersection
of Main Street and Bridge Street and from the
intersection of Main Street and Bridge Street
to the Sanford-Shapleigh town line
Massachusetts Avenue From the intersection of Massachusetts
Avenue and Main Street through its
intersection with New Hampshire Street and
on to New Hampshire Street
Maurice Avenue From the intersection of Essex Street and
Maurice Avenue through its intersection with
Normand Avenue and on to Normand Avenue
May Street From the intersection of Sherburne Street and
May Street to the intersection of Grammar
Street and May Street
Milton Avenue From the intersection of Main Street and
Milton Avenue to its southwestern terminus
Minerva Avenue From the intersection of Main Street and
Minerva Avenue to is northeastern terminus
Mitchell Street From the intersection of North Street and
Mitchell Street to the intersection of Charles
Street and Mitchell Street
Montreal Street From the intersection of Montreal Street and
June Street through its intersection with
Highland Avenue and on to Highland
Morris Street From the intersection of Dexter Street and
Morris Street to its southwestern terminus
Mountainview Drive From the intersection of Westview Drive and
Mountainview Drive through its intersection
with Farview and on to Farview Drive
§ 245-124 LITTERING § 245-124
153:421
Name of Street Location
Mount Home Road From the intersection of Route 202 and Mount
Hope Road to the intersection of Berwick
Street and Mount Hope Road
Nancy Avenue From the intersection of Nancy Avenue and
Milton Avenue to its southeastern terminus
Nason Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Nason Street to the intersection of Lebanon
Street and Nason Street
New Hampshire
Street
From the intersection of New Hampshire
Street and Berwick Road through its
intersection with Massachusetts Avenue and
on to Massachusetts Avenue
Normand Avenue From the intersection of Normand Avenue and
Main Street through its intersection with
Maurice Avenue and on to Maurice Avenue
North Avenue From the intersection of Vaness Street and
North Avenue to the intersection of Cottage
Street and North Avenue and from the
intersection of Cottage Street and North
Avenue to the intersection of High Street and
North Avenue
North Street From the intersection of Grandview Avenue
and North Street to the intersection of North
Street and Main Street
Nowell Street From the intersection of Jackson Street and
Nowell Street to the intersection of Grave
Avenue and Nowell Street
Old Mill Road From the intersection of the Old Mill Road and
Main Street to the intersection of Old Mill
Road and Berwick Street
Old Post Road From its northern intersection with Route 4 to
its southern intersection with Route 4
Old Route 109 From its western intersection with Route 109
to its eastern intersection of Route 109
Oxford Street From the intersection of Lebanon Street and
Oxford Street to the intersection of Kimball
Street and Oxford Street
Pine Avenue From the intersection of Pine Avenue and
Berwick Street through its intersection with
Pleasant Street and on to Pleasant Street
§ 245-124 SANFORD CODE § 245-124
153:422
Name of Street Location
Pioneer Avenue From the intersection of Washington Street
and Pioneer Avenue to the intersection of
Emery Street and Pioneer and from the
intersection of Emery Street and Pioneer
Avenue through its intersection with Central
Avenue and on to Central Avenue
Pond Street From the intersection of Pond Street and
Riverview Street through its intersection with
Riverbank Street and on to Riverbank Street
Putnam Street From the intersection of Raymond Street and
Lenox Street through it intersection with
Clinton Street and on to Clinton Street
Ridgeway Avenue From the intersection Oxford Street and
Ridgeway Avenue to the intersection of
Lebanon Street and Ridgeway Avenue
Ridley Road From the intersection of Route 224 and Ridley
Road to the Sanford-Alfred town line
Riverside Avenue From the intersection of Riverside Avenue and
Washington Street to the intersection of
Winter Street and Riverside Avenue and from
the intersection of Riverside Avenue and
Winter Street through its intersection with
William Oscar Emery Drive and on to William
Oscar Emery Drive
River Street From the intersection of Shaw's Ridge Road
and River Street to the intersection of Cottage
Street and River Street and from the
intersection of Cottage Street and River Street
through its intersection with Washington
Street and on to Washington Street
Riverview Street From its southern terminus through its
intersection with Field Street and on to Field
Street
Roberts Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Roberts Street to the intersection of Berwick
Street and Roberts Street
Route 99 From the intersection of Route 99 and Route
109 to the Sanford-Kennebunk town line.
Sam Allen Road From the intersection of Route 109 and the
Sam Allen Road through its intersection with
Mills Road and on to Mills Road
§ 245-124 LITTERING § 245-124
153:423
Name of Street Location
School Street From the intersection of Washington Street
and School Street to the intersection of School
Street and Emery Street and from the
intersection of School Street and Emery Street
to the intersection of Route 4 and School
Street
Schuler Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Schuler Street through its intersection with
Downs Street and on to Downs Street
Shawmut Avenue From the intersection of Emerson Street and
Shawmut Avenue to the intersection of
Berwick Road and Shawmut Avenue
Shaw Road From the intersection of River Street, Brook
Street and Shaw Road to the intersection of
Shaw Road and Shaw's Ridge Road
Shaw's Ridge Road From the intersection of Shaw's Ridge Road
and Route 202 through its intersection with
Pleasant Street and on to Pleasant Street
Shaw Street From the intersection of Berwick Street and
Shaw Street to the intersection of Kimball
Street and Shaw Street.
Sherburne Street From the intersection of North Avenue and
Sherburne Street to the intersection of June
Street and Sherburne Street
Smith Road From the intersection of Smith Road and
Route 202 to the Sanford-Lebanon town line
Spruce Street From the intersection of Cottage Street and
Spruce Street to the intersection of High
Street and Spruce Street
State Street From the intersection of Main Street and
State Street to the intersection of Lebanon
Street and State Street
Summer Street From the intersection of Main Street and
State Street to the intersection of Lebanon
Street and State Street
Sunset Road From the intersection of the Sunset Road and
the Sacopee Road to the intersection of the
Frank Blanchard Road and the Sunset Road
§ 245-124 SANFORD CODE § 245-124
153:424
Name of Street Location
Theriault Street From the intersection of Theriault Street and
Brunell Avenue to the intersection of Route 99
and Theriault Street and from the intersection
of Route 99 and Theriault Street to the
intersection of Pierce Avenue and Theriault
Street
Thompson Street From the intersection of Brook Street to the
intersection of North Avenue and Thompson
Street.
Tibbetts Avenue From the intersection of Main Street and
Tibbetts Avenue to the intersection of School
Street and Tibbetts Avenue
Trafton Street From the intersection of Trafton Street and
Roberts Street through its intersection with
Emerson Street and on to Glen Street
Vaness Street From the intersection of Brook Street and
Vaness Street to the intersection of June
Street and Vaness Street
Washington Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Washington Street through its intersection
with River Street and on to River Street
West Elm Street From the intersection of West Elm Street and
Main Street through its intersection with
Seneca Avenue and on to Seneca Avenue
Westview Drive From the intersection of Westview Drive and
Mountainview Drive to the intersection of
Main Street and Westview Drive
Weymouth Street From the intersection of Weymouth Street and
Leighton Street through its intersection with
Leighton Street and on to Leighton Street
Whicher's Mill Road From the intersection of Route 99 and
Whicher's Mill Road to the Sanford-Alfred
town line
Whitcomb Avenue From the intersection of Whitcomb Avenue
and York Street through its intersection with
Avon Street and on to Avon Street
Whitman Street From the intersection of Whitman Street and
Shaw Road to the intersection of Vaness
Street and Whitman Street
William Oscar Emery
Drive
From the intersection of River Street and
William Oscar Emery Drive through its
intersection with Riverside Avenue and on to
Riverside Avenue
§ 245-124 LITTERING § 245-124
153:425
Name of Street Location
William Street From the intersection of William Street and
Main Street through its intersection with
Henry Avenue and on to Henry Avenue
Winslow Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Winslow Street to the intersection of Shawmut
Avenue and Winslow Street
Winter Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Winter Street to the intersection of River
Street and Winter Street
Yale Street From the intersection of High Street and Yale
Street through its intersection with Emery
Street and on to Emery Street
York Street From the intersection of Main Street and York
Street to the intersection of School Street and
York Street
Yvonne Street From the intersection of Berwick Street and
Yvonne Street to the intersection of Berwick
Road and Yvonne Street
B. Springvale.
Name of Street Location
Auburn Street From the intersection of Auburn Street and
Main Street through its intersection with
Nelson Road and on to Nelson Road
Barbara Street From the intersection of Barbara Street and
Sherburne Street to the intersection of Beaver
Hill Road and Barbara Street
Beaver Hill Road From the intersection of Beaver Hill Road and
Payne Street to its westerly terminus at
Nasson College Hilltop House
Belaire Drive From the intersection of Belaire Drive and
Main Street through its intersection with
Eastman Road and on to Eastman Road
Bradeen Street From the intersection of Kirk Street and
Bradeen Street to the intersection of Oak
Street and Bradeen Street
Bridge Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Bridge Street through its intersection with
Pleasant Street and on to Pleasant Street
Butler Street From the intersection of Butler Street and
Merrill Street through its intersection with
Irving Street and on to Irving Street
§ 245-124 SANFORD CODE § 245-124
153:426
Name of Street Location
Cheney Street From the intersection of Grove Street and
Cheney Street to its southwestern terminus
Eastman Road From the intersection of Eastman Road and
Thomas Street through its intersection with
Belaire Drive and on to Belaire Drive
Edmund Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Edmund Street to the intersection of Howard
Street and Edmund Street.
Ellis Street From the intersection of Prospect Street and
Ellis Street through its intersection with
Marginal Way and on to Marginal Way
Ellsworth Street From the intersection of Prospect Street and
Ellsworth Street through its intersection with
Marginal Way and on to Marginal Way
Elm Street From the intersection of Beaver Hill Road,
Payne Street and Elm Street to the Sanford-
Shapleigh town line
Frank Blanchard Road From the intersection of the Hanson's Ridge
Road to the Sanford-Lebanon town line
Frost Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Frost Street through the intersection of
Mousam Street and on to Mousam Street
Goodwin Street From the intersection of Goodwin Street and
Mill Street through its intersection with
Dorsey Street and on to Dorsey Street
Green Street From the intersection of Green Street and
Lucerne Street through its intersection with
Verona Street and on to Verona Street
Grove Street From the intersection of Oak Street and Grove
Street through its intersection with Kirk
Street and on to Kirk Street
Harris Street From the intersection of Payne Street and
Harris Street to the intersection of Allen
Street and Harris Street
Howard Street From the intersection of Oak Street and
Howard Street through its intersection with
Roles Street and on to Roles Street
Jamieson Street From the intersection of Jamieson Street and
Sherburne Street to the intersection of
Barbara Street and Jamieson Street
Kirk Street From the intersection of Main Street and Kirk
Street through its intersection with Grove
Street and on to Grove Street
§ 245-124 LITTERING § 245-124
153:427
Name of Street Location
Lawrence Street From the intersection of Lawrence Street and
Sherburne Street to the intersection of
Webster Street and Lawrence Street
Littlefield Road From the intersection of Littlefield Road and
Elm Street through its intersection with
Morrison Road and on to the Morrison Road
Lucerne Street From the intersection of Ellsworth Street and
Lucerne Street to the intersection of Marginal
Way and Lucerne Street
Madison Street From the intersection of Madison Street and
Main Street through its intersection with
Nelson Road and on to Nelson Road
Marginal Way From the intersection of Access Way and
Marginal Way through its intersection with
Ellis Street and on to Ellis Street
Merrill Street From the intersection of Merrill Street and
Main Street through its intersection with
Butler Street and on to Butler Street
Mill Street From the intersection of Main Street and Mill
Street to the intersection of Payne Street and
Mill Street
Mousam Street From the intersection of the former S&E
Railroad and Mousam Street through its
intersection with Frost Street and on to Frost
Street
Oak Street From the intersection of Main Street and Oak
Street to the intersection of Route 202 and
Oak Street
Payne Street From the intersection of Mill Street and
Beaver Hill Road and Payne Street to the
intersection of Payne Street and Pleasant
Street
Pine Street From the intersection of Pine Street and Mill
Street to its northwestern terminus
Pleasant Street From the intersection of Bridge Street, Payne
Street and Pleasant Street through its
intersection with Shaw's Ridge Road and on to
Shaw's Ridge Road
Prospect Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Prospect Street through its intersection with
Marginal Way and on the Marginal Way
§ 245-124 SANFORD CODE § 245-124
153:428
§ 245-125. Schedule 3: Bus stops, taxi stands, handicapped parking
and loading zones.
The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized and required to establish bus
stops, taxi stands, handicapped parking and loading zones for other
passenger common carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such
places and in such numbers as he shall determine to be of the greatest
Name of Street Location
Railroad Avenue From the intersection of Pleasant Street and
Railroad Avenue through its intersection with
Gebung Road and on to the Gebung Road to
the Sanford-Alfred town line
Rankin Street From the intersection of Main Street and
Rankin Street to southwestern terminus
Reed Street From the intersection of Reed Street and
Payne Street to Proulx Court and continuing
on Proulx Court to the intersection of Proulx
Court and Mill Street
Riverbank Court From the intersection of Mill Street and
Riverbank Court to its northwestern terminus
Roles Street From the intersection of Mill Street and Roles
Street through its intersection with Howard
Street and on to Howard Street
Sacopee Road From the Sanford-Lebanon town line to the
Sanford-Acton town line
Sherburne Street From the intersection of Sherburne Street and
Pleasant Street through its intersection with
Carpenter Street and on to Carpenter Street
Stanley Road From the intersection of Main Street and the
Stanley Road to the Sanford-Shapleigh town
line
Thomas Street From the intersection of Thomas Street and
Main Street to its southwestern terminus
Turner Street From the intersection of Lucerne Street and
Turner Street through its intersection with
Hoyt Street and on to Hoyt Street
Verona Street From the intersection of Verona Street and
Ellsworth Street through its intersection with
Green Street and on to Green Street
Webster Street From the intersection of Webster Street and
Pleasant Street to the intersection of Barbara
Street and Webster Street
Weeman Street From the intersection of Pleasant Street and
Weeman Street to its northwestern terminus
§ 245-124 LITTERING § 245-125
153:429
benefit and convenience to the public, and they shall be designated by
appropriate signs.
Name of Street Location
Bridge Street, Springvale On the southeasterly side beginning at a point
100 feet from Main Street extending easterly
60 feet
On the northerly side beginning at a point 125
feet easterly from Main Street extending
easterly 60 feet
Main Street, Sanford On the westerly side of Main Street from a
point 36 feet south of the entrance to the socalled
Genest parking lot and extending
southerly for a distance of 24 feet, one space
Main Street, Springvale Westerly side of Main Street, starting at a point
10 feet North of the Main Street-Mill Street
crosswalk and extending in a northerly
direction for 24 feet.
Easterly side of Main Street from a point 4 feet
north of CMP Pole J-15 and extending in a
northerly direction for 24 feet
Westerly side of Main Street from a point 144
feet in a southerly direction from the
intersection of Edmund Street and Main Street
and extending south for a distance of 24 feet
On the westerly side beginning at a point 160
feet from Oak Street extending northerly 60
feet to a point 220 feet from Oak Street
Roberts Street, Sanford On the northerly side, starting from a point 30
feet from Main Street and extending westerly
for 25 feet
§ 245-126. Schedule 4: Parking prohibited at all times in
designated places.
Parking is prohibited at all times on certain streets or on portions of certain
streets. When signs are erected giving notice thereof no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any streets described in this schedule.
A. Village of Sanford.
Name of Street Side Location
Acorn Street
[Added 8-9-2011]
SoutheastFrom Main Street in a northeasterly
direction a distance of 340 feet to the
side property line of the Walgreens
parcel
Brook Street West From Cottage Street to High Street
§ 245-125 SANFORD CODE § 245-126
153:430
Name of Street Side Location
High Street South From Island Avenue to Bates Street
Lebanon Street NorthwestFrom Main Street in a westerly
direction for a distance of 58 feet 7
inches
Lebanon Street SoutheastFrom Main Street to Berwick Avenue
Main Street
[Amended
11-19-1991]
East From a point 20 feet south of the
southerly mall entrance and extending
northerly to St. Ignatius Street
Main Street NortheastFrom 220 Main Street (the Nutter
Agency) to Central Square
Main Street
[Amended
11-19-1991]
NortheastFrom the northwesterly corner of the
Sanford Institution for Savings building
to St. Ignatius Street
Main Street
[Added 8-9-2011]
NortheastFrom Winter Street (Route 202) to
Acorn Street
Main Street SouthwestStarting 48 feet 9 inches (bus stop)
southerly of the Berwick Street
intersection and continuing southerly
for a distance of 206 feet
Main Street
[Added 8-9-2011]
SouthwestFrom Lord Street to Lebanon Street
(Route 202)
Main Street SouthwestFrom Roberts Street to West Elm
Street
Pioneer Avenue East From Washington Street to a point
opposite Bodwell Street
Pioneer Avenue
[Added 8-1-2017
by Order No.
17-102.13]
NortheastBeginning at a location at the midpoint
of a 48-foot wide asphalt driveway at
20 — 22 Pioneer Avenue where it
intersects Pioneer Avenue and
extending 101 feet to the southeast and
84 feet to the northwest of said
midpoint, for a total distance of 185
feet
Riverside Avenue
[Added 8-1-2017
by Order No.
17-102.13]
NortheastFrom the western side of the northern
driveway for the St. Ignatius Parish
Hall, extending in a northwesterly
direction for a distance of 85 feet
Riverside Avenue
[Amended
11-19-1991]
West From St. Ignatius Street to the
intersection of Washington Street
Roberts Street North From the Main Street intersection and
extending westerly for a distance of 30
feet
§ 245-126 LITTERING § 245-126
153:431
Name of Street Side Location
Roberts Street North From the Main Street intersection and
extending westerly for a distance of 55
feet; also, from a point which is 175
feet westerly from the Main Street
intersection and extending to the Shaw
Street intersection
Roberts Street
[Amended
7-16-2013]
South From the Main Street intersection for a
distance of 226 feet (to the property
corner)
St. Ignatius Street
[Added 8-1-2017
by Order No.
17-102.13]
NorthwestFrom Main Street in an easterly
direction for a distance of 278 feet
St. Ignatius Street
[Amended
11-19-1991]
South From Main Street in an easterly
direction for a distance of 258 feet
Washington Street NorthwestFrom Central Square to Mill Square
B. City of Sanford.
Name of Street Side Location
East Street West From a point 57 feet from the
intersection of East Street and North
Street and extending northerly for a
distance of 47 feet
Gerrish Drive East Between poles J75.4 and J75.5 for a
distance of 132 feet
Indian Ledge Drive
[Added
4-18-2006]
Both From the intersection of Mousam
Street and Witham Street for a
distance of 300 feet
Kimball Street -- Beginning at the northwesterly corner
of Shaw Street and proceeding on
Kimball Street for a distance of 152
feet
Kimball Street South From Main Street to Shaw Street
Oak Street Northeast From the intersection of Main Street
and Oak Street extending east on Oak
Street for a distance of 172 feet
Oxford Street South Beginning at the intersection of
Oxford and Lebanon Streets for a
distance of 450 feet (same side as
Edison School)
Park Street South For a distance of 82 feet
§ 245-126 SANFORD CODE § 245-126
153:432
§ 245-127. Schedule 5: Crosswalks and safety zones identified by
signs.
The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to designate and maintain, by
appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway,
crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians
crossing the roadway and at such other places as the Traffic Engineer may
deem necessary
§ 245-128. Schedule 6: Fifteen-minute parking.
When signs are erected in each block giving notice hereof, no person shall
park a vehicle for longer than 15 minutes at any time between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and 9:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. Friday, except holidays as designated by signs.
Name of Street Side Location
Shaw Road [Added
8-7-2012]
Both From Shaw’s Ridge Road
southwesterly to a point 515 feet
southwesterly of the intersection of
Spur Road
West Elm Street South Beginning at the southwesterly
curbing of West Elm Street and
proceeding westerly on West Elm
Street for a distance of 194 feet to
CMP pole J2
Witham Street
[Added
4-18-2006]
West From the junction of Main Street to
Mousam Street/Indian Ledge Drive
C. Village of Springvale.
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street [Added
8-1-2017 by Order
No. 17-102.13]
Northeast From Mill Street in a northerly
direction for a distance of 135 feet
Mill Street North Proceeding in an easterly direction
from Main Street for a distance of
425 feet
Oak Street North Beginning at a point 90 feet westerly
from Main Street to Bradeen Street
(405 feet)
Oak Street South From Main Street to Howard Street a
distance of 844 feet.
§ 245-126 LITTERING § 245-129
153:433
§ 245-129. Schedule 7: Thirty-minute parking.
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle for longer than 30 minutes at any time between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and 9:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. Friday, except holidays as designated by signs.
§ 245-130. Schedule 8: One-hour parking.
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle for longer than one hour at any time between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and 9:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. Friday, except holidays as designated by signs.
§ 245-131. Schedule 9: Two-hour parking.
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle for longer than two hours at any time between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and 9:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. Friday, except holidays as designated by signs.
A. Roberts Street, Sanford: on the southerly side from Pole J71 westerly
for a distance of 76 feet.
B. Oak Street, Springvale: on the northerly side beginning at a point 20
feet from Main Street and proceeding westerly on Oak Street for a
distance of 60 feet (three spaces).
C. Main Street, Springvale:
(1) On the westerly side beginning at a point 15 feet northerly on Main
Street from Oak Street for a distance of 40 feet (two spaces).
(2) Beginning at a point 250 feet from Oak and Main Streets and
continuing for 344 feet, with the exception of one crosswalk (four
spaces).
(3) Beginning at a point 394 feet from Oak Street and proceeding
northerly on Main Street for a distance of 20 feet (one space).
(4) Beginning at a point 450 feet northerly on Main Street and
continuing for 60 feet (three spaces) for a total of 510 feet.
(5) On the easterly side, beginning 20 feet from the southeasterly
curbing of Mill Street and proceeding southerly on Main Street for
a distance of 484 feet (18 spaces).
A. Main Street, Sanford: in front of Goodall Library, beginning at a point
24 feet from the northeasterly curbing of Elm Street and proceeding
northerly on Main Street for a distance of 144 feet.
B. Washington Street, Sanford: on the southeasterly side from SB Emery
Court to Pioneer Avenue. [Added 8-6-2013]
§ 245-129 SANFORD CODE § 245-131
153:434
§ 245-132. Schedule 10: Emergency tow-away zones.
Where signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle on any street at any time so designated by signs reading "No
Parking - Snow Emergency Tow-Away Zone" between the period of
November 15 and April 1.
A. Water Street, Springvale:
(1) On the westerly side.
(2) On the easterly side from a point 30 feet from the intersection of
Payne and Water Streets northerly to the intersection of Mill and
Water Streets.
(3) On the northerly side of Riverside Avenue adjacent to Gateway
Park. [Added 5-5-2015 by Order No. 15-42.07]
(4) Northerly side of Pioneer Avenue from 35 feet easterly of the
intersection of Washington Street and then easterly for a distance
of not less than 160 feet. [Added 5-5-2015 by Order No.
15-42.07]
(5) Easterly side of Washington Street starting at the intersection of SB
Emery Court and Washington Street northerly to the intersection of
Church Street. [Added 5-5-2015 by Order No. 15-42.07]
(6) Easterly side of Washington Street starting at Church Street
northerly to the intersection of Pioneer Avenue. [Added 5-5-2015
by Order No. 15-42.07]
A. Sanford.
Name of Street Side Location
Berwick Street South From Main Street to Kimball Street
High Street South From Island Avenue extension to
Bates Street
Island Avenue East From High Street to Russell Street
Lebanon Street North From Main Street to Nason Street
Pioneer Avenue West From Washington Street to Emery
Street except in the immediate area
of Rosa's takeout
School Street East Starting at a point 113 feet south of
Washington Street southerly to
Emery Street
§ 245-131 LITTERING § 245-133
153:435
§ 245-133. Schedule 11: Paid permit parking.
Parking is controlled and allowed for by the purchase of a permit, the
price to be determined by the Traffic Commission, which shall permit such
purchaser thereof to park a motor vehicle in a designated parking space.
§ 245-134. Schedule 12: Mid-Town Mall parking lot. [Added
3-6-2012]
§ 245-135. Schedule 13: Parking prohibited during certain hours.
[Added 12-20-2016 by Order No. 16-149.07]
A. One-hour parking permitted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. Monday through Saturday and 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Friday,
except holidays, as designated by signs, with the exception of one
handicapped parking space, Schedule 3.
(1) Main Street, Sanford.
(a) Westerly side from a point 60 feet north of Roberts Street to a
point 36 feet south of the so-called Genest parking lot.
(b) Easterly side from a point 55 feet north of Washington Street
south of the southerly entrance to the Urban Renewal Mall
parking lot.
(c) Center two interior rows of parking in the Lower Mid-Town
Mall Parking Lot from the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. for
the allowance of overnight parking. [Added 5-5-2015 by
Order No. 15-42.07]
A. Public parking is permitted in the Mid-Town Mall parking lot except as
described below:
(1) Parking a vehicle for longer than two hours at any time between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except
holidays, shall be prohibited in certain sections of the parking lot.
These sections will be designated by signs and are more fully
described in Exhibit A.89
(2) No person shall park a vehicle in the Mid-Town Mall parking lot
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. except for the spaces
dedicated within § 245-133 by permit granted. [Amended
5-5-2015 by Order No. 15-42.07]
A. Overnight parking is prohibited for the following areas between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
(1) Any of the parks, malls, school properties or cemeteries unless
specific permission is granted by the City Council or City Council
designee.
89.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the City offices.
§ 245-133 SANFORD CODE § 245-135
153:436
Chapter 252
WOOD, SALE OF
§ 252-1. Violations and penalties.
No person shall, within the Town, sell or offer for sale any wood or deliver
any wood sold therein other than by cord measure, eight cord feet, or 128
cubic feet to the cord or a proportionate part thereof, under penalty of not
less than $5 nor more than $25 for every such offense.
Chapter 256
YARD SALES AND FLEA MARKETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 149. Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers — See
Ch. 193.
§ 256-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the public by regulating yard sales and flea markets so as to prevent the
disturbance or disruption of the residential and retail environment present
throughout the City.
§ 256-2. Applicability.
This chapter does not prohibit isolated or casual sales of personal items by
individuals of households to other individuals of households.
A. A yard sale is a method by which a resident or homeowner may sell or
dispose of unwanted items of tangible personal property and
correspondingly provide an opportunity for other persons to purchase
bargains.
B. Unregulated allowances of yard sales in the City present an opportunity
for abuse in that some persons may be conducting business activities
under the guise of having a yard sale.
C. Nonregulated and recurring yard sales and flea markets cause
annoyances to citizens in the City and congest the City's streets.
D. Nonregulated yard sales and flea markets can impact businesses with
fixed places of business.
§ 245-135 WOOD, SALE OF § 256-3
252:437
§ 256-3. Definitions.
In general, all words, phrases, and terms used in this chapter shall have
their customary and usual meanings; as used in this chapter, the following
words, phrases, and terms shall have the meanings indicated.
DONATED PERSONAL PROPERTY — The personal property of persons
other than those residing on the residential premises where such sale
is to take place, such personal property being donated to or such sale
being conducted by a tax-exempt religious or charitable organization and
the entire proceeds from such sale being donated to or retained by the
sponsoring tax-exempt religious or charitable organization.
FLEA MARKET — An event, transaction, occurrence, or regular business
at which an owner, sponsor, or lessee at a premises makes space available
to a person or persons who sells new, consignment, and/or used tangible
personal property at retail or wholesale to the public on a daily, weekend,
occasional, temporary, or permanent basis. A person, firm, or corporation
selling tangible used or secondhand personal or collector's items to the
general public in a temporary manner, without a fixed place of business is a
flea market and not a yard sale.
FLEA MARKET VENDOR — Any person who sells tangible personal
property at a flea market.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES — A building having at least one dwelling unit,
and the lot of land associated therewith and any accessory structures.
YARD SALE — The sale of tangible personal property from any given lot,
whether conducted indoors or outdoors. A yard sale is also known as a
"garage sale," "barn sale," "lawn sale," "rummage sale," or "moving sale" or
other such names for similar sales or activities.
§ 256-4. Yard sale permit required.
No person shall sell, offer for sale, or offer for free from any residential
premises or tax-exempt religious or charitable organization premises, as
defined herein, except as permitted by this chapter. Only the sale of donated
personal property, as defined herein, and the sale of tangible personal
property owned, used and maintained for personal use only by the seller
and not for resale to the public shall be permitted to be sold from residential
premises or tax-exempt religious or charitable organization premises, and
only after issuance to the seller of a permit for such purposes. Permits under
this chapter shall not be issued unless the City Clerk receives affirmation
from the Inspection Team, that the applicant's proposed operation meets all
applicable requirements. Any person carrying out such activity without a
permit is in violation of these provisions. Failure to comply with any of these
requirements shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and is adequate
grounds for the denial, revocation, or suspension of a permit.
§ 256-3 SANFORD CODE § 256-5
252:438
§ 256-5. Limitations on number of permits and days of operation.
No yard sale permit shall be issued for sales of personal property upon
residential premises or tax-exempt religious or charitable organization
premises for a period of more than four calendar days in one calendar
year, and no more than four permits shall be issued for such sales upon a
residential premises in any one calendar year.
§ 256-6. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sales of tangible personal
property made under court order or process.
§ 256-7. Procedures and fees.
Applications under this chapter shall be processed according to the
procedures established in this chapter and Chapter 149, Licensing. A
permit may be issued after the annual or daily fee required has been paid
through the City Clerk's office. The fee shall be established under Chapter
149, Licensing, § 149-1.4, Fees, of this Code, for a yard sale permit, flea
market, and flea market vendor.
§ 256-8. Flea market license required.
No person, firm or corporation may engage in the business of conducting
a flea market, or engage in the business of flea market vending without
first obtaining licenses for such purpose from the City. Licenses under
this chapter shall not be issued unless the City Clerk receives affirmation
from the Inspection Team that the applicant's proposed operation meets all
applicable requirements. Any person carrying out such activity without a
license is in violation of these provisions. Failure to comply with any of these
requirements shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and is adequate
grounds for the denial, revocation, or suspension of a license.
§ 256-9. Operation of flea markets.
A. Any flea market must report the names and addresses of all flea market
vendors in such flea market and the number of times the vendor has
participated in the flea market since the previous March 1 to the City
Clerk within three days after any such flea market.
B. Purchasing of goods by a flea market vendor from any person, except
another flea market vendor at a flea market prior to the opening of the
flea market to the general public, is prohibited.
C. Food will not be sold at a flea market, unless all applicable licenses have
been obtained.
D. Persons under the age of 18 will not be allowed to obtain a flea market
vendor license unless permission has been given by that person's
parent or legal guardian at the time of application.
§ 256-5 WOOD, SALE OF § 256-9
252:439
Part III: Land Use Legislation
Chapter 265
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 90.
Shoreland zoning — See Ch. 270.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 275.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 265-1. Purpose and establishment.
A. Certain areas of the Town of Sanford, Maine are subject to periodic
flooding, causing serious damages to properties within these areas.
Relief is available in the form of flood insurance as authorized by the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. Therefore, the Town of Sanford,
Maine has chosen to become a participating community in the National
Flood Insurance Program, and agrees to comply with the requirements
of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended)
as delineated in this chapter.
B. It is the intent of the Town of Sanford, Maine to require the recognition
and evaluation of flood hazards in all official actions relating to land use
in the floodplain areas having special flood hazards.
C. The Town of Sanford has the legal authority to adopt land use and
control measures to reduce future flood losses pursuant to 30-A
M.R.S.A. §§ 3001 - 3007, 4352, 4401 - 4407, and Title 38 MRSA, Section
440.
D. The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid
Act, provides that areas of the Town of Sanford having a special flood
hazard be identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
and that floodplain management measures be applied in such flood
hazard areas. This chapter establishes a Flood Hazard Development
Permit system and review procedure for development activities in the
designated flood hazard areas of the Town of Sanford, Maine.
E. The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A and AE, are identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a report titled "Flood
Insurance Study-Town of Sanford, Maine, York County," dated July 20,
1998, which report, with accompanying "Flood Insurance Rate Map"
dated July 20, 1998, which are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
§ 256-9 SANFORD CODE § 265-2
252:440
§ 265-2. Permit required.
Before any construction or other development (as defined in § 265-12),
including the placement of manufactured homes, begins within any areas
of special flood hazard established in § 265-1, a Flood Hazard Development
Permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer. This permit
shall be in addition to any other permits which may be required pursuant to
the codes and ordinances of the Town of Sanford, Maine.
§ 265-3. Application for permit.
The application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be submitted
to the Code Enforcement Officer and shall include the following
(Subsections H through K(2) apply only to new construction and substantial
improvements):
A. The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and
contractor;
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site;
C. A site plan showing the location of existing and/or proposed
development, including but not limited to structures, sewage disposal
facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut and filled, and lot
dimensions;
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or development;
E. A statement of the cost of the development including all materials and
labor;
F. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
G. Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or
development;
H. The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD), or to a locally established datum in Zone A only, of the:
(1) base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved
structures, which is determined:
(a) in Zone AE, from data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study
- Town of Sanford, Maine", as described in § 265-1; or
(b) in Zone A:
[1] from any base elevation data from federal, state, or other
technical sources (such as FEMA's Quick-2 model, FEMA
265/July 1995), including information obtained pursuant to
§ 265-6K, and § 265-8D;
[2] from the contour elevation extrapolated from a best fit
analysis of the floodplain boundary when overlaid onto a
§ 265-2 WOOD, SALE OF § 265-3
252:441
§ 265-4. Application fee and expert's fee.
USGS Quadrangle Map or other topographic map
prepared by a Professional Land Surveyor or registered
professional engineer, if the floodplain boundary has a
significant correlation to the elevation contour line(s); or,
in the absence of all other data,
[3] to be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of the
floodplain boundary and a line perpendicular to the
shoreline which passes along the ground through the site
of the proposed building;
(2) highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the
proposed building;
(3) lowest floor, including basement, and whether or not such
structures contain a basement; and,
(4) level, in the case of non-residential structures only, to which the
structure will be floodproofed;
I. A description of an elevation reference point established on the site of
all developments for which elevation standards apply as required in
§ 265-6;
J. A written certification by a Professional Land Surveyor; registered
professional engineer or architect that the base flood elevation and
grade elevations shown on the application are accurate;
K. The following certifications as required in § 265-6 by a registered
professional engineer or architect:
(1) a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA From 81-65, 01/03, as
amended), to verify that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential
structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of
§ 265-3H(4), § 265-6G, and other applicable standards in § 265-6;
(2) a Hydraulic Openings Certificate to verify that engineered
hydraulic openings in foundation walls will meet the standards of
§ 265-6L(2)(a);
(3) a certified statement that bridges will meet the standards of
§ 265-6M;
(4) a certified statement that containment walls will meet the
standards of § 265-6N;
L. A description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or
relocated as a result of the proposed development; and,
M. A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each
applicable development standard in § 265-6 will be met.
§ 265-3 SANFORD CODE § 265-4
252:442
§ 265-5. Review of standards for flood hazard development permit
applications.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
A. A nonrefundable application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for all
minor development and fifty dollars ($50.00) for all new construction or
substantial improvements shall be paid to the Town of Sanford, and a
copy of a receipt for the same shall accompany the application.
B. An additional fee may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer and/
or Zoning Board of Appeals needs the assistance of a professional
engineer or other expert. The expert's fee shall be paid in full by the
applicant within ten (10) days after the Town submits a bill to the
applicant. Failure to pay the bill shall constitute a violation of this
chapter and be grounds for the issuance of a stop-work order. An expert
shall not be hired by the municipality at the expense of an applicant
until the applicant has either consented to such hiring in writing or
been given an opportunity to be heard on the subject. An applicant who
is dissatisfied with a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer may
appeal that decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
C. The Town Council shall establish by order, after prior notice and public
hearing, a fee schedule for all permits required by this Ordinance and
for such other zoning fees as the Town Council deems appropriate.
A. Review all applications for a flood hazard development permit to assure
that proposed developments are reasonably safe from flooding and to
determine that all pertinent requirements of § 265-6 (Development
Standards) have been or will be met;
B. Utilize, in the review of all Flood Hazard Development Permit
applications:
(1) the base flood and floodway data contained in the "Flood Insurance
Study-Town of Sanford, Maine," as described in § 265-1;
(2) in special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and
floodway data not provided, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data from federal, state, or other technical sources,
including information obtained pursuant to §§ 265-3H(1)(b),
265-6K and 265-8D, in order to administer § 265-6 of this chapter;
and,
(3) when the community establishes a base flood elevation in a Zone A
by methods outlined in § 265-3H(1)(b), the community shall submit
that data to the Maine Floodplain Management Program in the
State Planning Office.
C. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood
hazard areas shown on the maps described in § 265-1 of this chapter;
§ 265-4 WOOD, SALE OF § 265-5
252:443
D. In the review of Flood Hazard Development Permit applications,
determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those
federal, state, and local government agencies from which prior
approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to
Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334;
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental
Protection, and the Maine Floodplain Management Program in the
State Planning Office prior to any alteration or relocation of a water
course and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency;
F. If the application satisfies the requirements of this chapter, approve the
issuance of one of the following Flood Hazard Permits based on the type
of development:
(1) A two part Flood Hazard Development Permit elevated structures.
Part I shall authorize the applicant to build a structure to and
including the first horizontal floor only above the base flood level.
At that time the applicant shall provide the Code Enforcement
Officer with an Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional
Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer or architect based
on the Part I permit construction, "as built," for verifying
compliance with the elevation requirements of § 265-6, Subsections
F, G or H. Following review of the Elevation Certificate data, which
shall take place within seventy-two (72) hours of receipt of the
application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue Part II of the
Flood Hazard Development Permit. Part II shall authorize the
applicant to complete the construction project; or,
(2) Flood Hazard Development Permit for Floodproofing of Non-
Residential Structures that are new construction or substantially
improved non-residential structures that are not being elevated but
that meet the floodproofing standards of § 265-6G(1)(a), (b), and
(c). The application for this permit shall include a Floodproofing
Certificate signed by a registered professional engineer or
architect; or,
(3) Flood Hazard Development Permit for Minor Development for all
development that is not new construction or a substantial
improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or
additions, whose value is less than fifty percent (50%) of the market
value of the structure. Minor development also includes, but is not
limited to accessory structures as provided for in § 265-6J, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations,
storage of equipment or materials, deposition or extraction of
materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water
supply facilities that do not involve structures and non structural
projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves
and piers.
§ 265-5 SANFORD CODE § 265-5
252:444
§ 265-6. Development standards.
All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following
applicable standards:
G. Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all Flood Hazard
Development Permit Applications, corresponding Permits issued, and
data relevant thereto, including reports of the Zoning Board of Appeals
on variances granted under the provisions of § 265-9 of this chapter,
and copies of Elevation Certificates, Floodproofing Certificates,
Certificates of Compliance and certifications of design standards
required under the provisions of §§ 265-3, 265-6 and 265-7 of this
chapter.
A. All Development - All development shall:
(1) be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation (excluding piers and docks), collapse or lateral movement
of the development resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
(3) use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage; and
(4) use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during flooding conditions.
B. Water Supply - All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems.
C. Sanitary Sewage Systems - All new and replacement sanitary sewage
systems shall be designed and located to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the
system into floodwaters.
D. On-Site Waste Disposal Systems - On-site waste disposal systems shall
be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during floods.
E. Watercourse Carrying Capacity - All development associated with
altered or relocated portions of a watercourse shall be constructed and
maintained in such a manner that no reduction occurs in the flood
carrying capacity of the watercourse.
F. Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any
residential structure located within:
§ 265-5 WOOD, SALE OF § 265-6
252:445
(1) Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
to at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation.
(2) Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to
at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation utilizing
information obtained pursuant to § 265-3H(1)(b), § 265-5B; or
§ 265-8D.
G. Non-Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any
non-residential structure located within:
(1) Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
to at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or together
with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall:
(a) be floodproofed to at least one (1) foot above the base flood
elevation so that below that elevation the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water;
(b) have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and
(c) be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing design and methods of construction are
in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be
provided with the application for a Flood Hazard Development
Permit as required by § 265-3K and shall include a record of
the elevation above mean sea level to which the structure is
floodproofed.
(2) Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to
at least one foot above the base flood elevation utilizing information
obtained pursuant to § 265-3H(1)(b); 265-5B; or § 265-8D, or
(a) together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, meet the
floodproofing standards of § 265-6G(1).
H. Manufactured Homes - New or substantially improved manufactured
homes located within:
(1) Zone AE shall:
(a) be elevated such that the lowest floor (including basement) of
the manufactured home is at least one (1) foot above the base
flood elevation;
(b) be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured masonry
slab or foundation walls, with hydraulic openings, or may be
reinforced piers or block supports, any of which support the
manufactured home so that no weight is supported by its
wheels and axles; and,
§ 265-6 SANFORD CODE § 265-6
252:446
(c) be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to:
[1] over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four (4)
corners of the manufactured home, plus two (2) additional
ties per side at intermediate points (manufactured homes
less than fifty [50] feet long require one [1] additional tie
per side); or by
[2] frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five (5)
additional ties along each side at intermediate points
(manufactured homes less than fifty [50] feet long require
four [4] additional ties per side).
[3] all components of the anchoring system described in
§ 265-6H(1)(c)[1] and [2] shall be capable of carrying a
force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds.
(2) Zone A shall:
(a) be elevated on a permanent foundation, as described in
§ 265-6H(1)(b), such that the lowest floor (including basement)
of the manufactured home is at least one (1) foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to
§§ 265-3H(1)(b); 265-5B; or 265-8D; and
(b) meet the anchoring requirements of § 265-6H(1)(c).
I. Recreational vehicles located within:
(1) Zone AE shall either:
(a) be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days,
(b) be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions; or,
(c) permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring
requirements for "manufactured homes" in § 265-6H(1).
J. Accessory Structures - Accessory Structures, as defined in § 265-12,
located within Zones AE and A, shall be exempt from the elevation
criteria required in § 265-6F & G above, if all other requirements of
§ 265-6 and all the following requirements are met. Accessory
Structures shall:
(1) be five hundred (500) square feet or less and have a value less than
three thousand dollars ($3,000);
§ 265-6 WOOD, SALE OF § 265-6
252:447
(2) have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation;
(3) have hydraulic openings, as specified in § 265-6L(2), in at least two
different walls of the accessory structure;
(4) be located outside the floodway;
(5) when possible be constructed and placed on the building site so as
to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters and be
placed further from the source of flooding than is the primary
structure; and,
(6) have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electric
service disconnect shall be located above the base flood elevation
and when possible outside the Special Flood Hazard Area.
K. Floodways.
(1) In Zone AE riverine areas, encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvement, and other development
shall not be permitted within a regulatory floodway which is
designated on the community's "Flood Insurance Rate Map" unless
a technical evaluation certified by a registered professional
engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments will
not result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) In Zones AE, and A riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway
is designated, encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvement, and other development shall not be
permitted in the floodway as determined in § 265-6K(3) unless a
technical evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer
is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
development and anticipated development:
(a) will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one (1) foot at any point within the community; and,
(b) is consistent with the technical criteria contained in Chapter 5
entitled "Hydraulic Analyses", Flood Insurance Study -
Guidelines and Specifications for Study Contractors, (FEMA
37/January 1995, as amended).
(3) In Zones AE, and A riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway
is designated, the regulatory floodway is determined to be the
channel of the river or other water course and the adjacent land
areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain as
measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of
the floodplain.
L. Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor - New construction or
substantial improvement of any structure in Zones AE and A that meets
§ 265-6 SANFORD CODE § 265-6
252:448
the development standards of this § 265-6 including the elevation
requirements of § 265-6, Subsections F, G or H, and is elevated on
posts, columns, piers, piles, "stilts," or crawl-spaces may be enclosed
below the base flood elevation requirements provided that all the
following criteria are met or exceeded:
(1) Enclosed areas are not basements as defined in § 265-12;
(2) Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of flood water. Designs for meeting this requirement must
either:
(a) be engineered and certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect; or
(b) meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of
not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of
the enclosed area;
[2] the bottom of all openings shall be below the base flood
elevation and no higher than one (1) foot above the lowest
grade; and
[3] openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves,
or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
entry and exit of flood waters automatically without any
external influence or control, such as human intervention,
including the use of electrical and other non-automatic
mechanical means;
(3) The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and,
(4) The enclosed areas are used solely for building access, parking of
vehicles, or storage.
M. Bridges - New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge in
Zones AE and A shall be designed such that:
(1) when possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the
pilings, or columns) is elevated to at least one (1) foot above the
base flood elevation; and
(2) a registered professional engineer shall certify that:
(a) the structural design and methods of construction shall meet
the elevation requirements of this section and the floodway
standards of § 265-6K; and
(b) the foundation and superstructure attached thereto are
designed to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due
to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on
§ 265-6 WOOD, SALE OF § 265-6
252:449
§ 265-7. Certificate of compliance.
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no
structure which is constructed or substantially improved shall be occupied
until a Certificate of Compliance is issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
subject to the following provisions:
all structural components. Water loading values used shall be
those associated with the base flood.
N. Containment Walls - New construction or substantial improvement of
any containment wall located within:
(1) Zones AE and A shall:
(a) have the containment wall elevated to at least one (1) foot
above the base flood elevation;
(b) have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and,
(c) be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions
of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the
application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit, as
required by § 265-3K.
O. Wharves, Piers and Docks - New construction or substantial
improvement of wharves, piers, and docks are permitted in Zones AE
and A, in and over water and seaward of the mean high tide if the
following requirements are met:
(1) wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local,
state, and federal regulations; and
(2) for commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered professional
engineer shall develop or review the structural design,
specifications, and plans for the construction.
A. For New Construction or Substantial Improvement of any elevated
structure, the applicant shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer
an elevation certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor,
registered professional engineer, or architect for compliance with
§ 265-6, subsections F, G or H.
B. The applicant shall submit written notification to the Code Enforcement
Officer that the development is complete and complies with the
provisions of this chapter.
C. Within ten (10) working days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall:
§ 265-6 SANFORD CODE § 265-7
252:450
§ 265-8. Review of subdivision and development proposals.
The Planning Board or Site Plan Review Committee shall, when reviewing
subdivisions, applications for site plan approval, and other proposed
developments that require review under other federal law, state law or local
ordinances or regulations and all projects on five (5) or more acres, or in the
case of manufactured home parks divided into two (2) or more lots, assure
that:
§ 265-9. Appeals and variances.
The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Sanford may, upon written
application of an aggrieved party, hear and decide appeals from
determinations of the Code Enforcement Officer in the administration or
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The Zoning Board of Appeals
(1) review the Elevation Certificate and the applicant's written
notification; and,
(2) upon determination that the development conforms to the
provisions of this chapter, shall issue a Certificate of Compliance.
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damages.
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
D. All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in a
riverine floodplain, floodway data. These determinations shall be based
on engineering practices recognized by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
E. Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan
approval requiring that structures on any lot in the development having
any portion of its land within a Special Flood Hazard Area, are to be
constructed in accordance with § 265-6 of this chapter. Such
requirement will be included in any deed, lease, purchase and sale
agreement, or document transferring or expressing an intent to
transfer any interest in real estate or structure, including but not
limited to a time-share interest. The condition shall clearly articulate
that the municipality may enforce any violation of the construction
requirement and that fact shall also be included in the deed or any
other document previously described. The construction requirement
shall also be clearly stated on any map, plat, or plan to be signed by the
Planning Board or Site Plan Review Committee as part of the approval
process.
§ 265-7 WOOD, SALE OF § 265-9
252:451
may grant a variance from the requirements of this chapter consistent with
state law and the following criteria:
A. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.
B. Variances shall be granted only upon:
(1) a showing of good and sufficient cause; and,
(2) a determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood
occur, the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, public expense, or
create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and,
(3) a showing that the issuance of the variance will not conflict with
other state, federal or local laws or ordinances; and,
(4) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
undue hardship, which in this sub-section means:
(a) that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return
unless a variance is granted; and,
(b) that the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances
of the property and not to the general conditions in the
neighborhood; and,
(c) that the granting of a variance will not alter the essential
character of the locality; and,
(d) that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the
applicant or a prior owner.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
D. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development for the conduct of a functionally
dependent use provided that:
(1) other criteria of this § 265-9 and § 265-6K are met; and
(2) the structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety.
E. Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
or restoration of Historic Structures upon the determination that:
(1) the development meets the criteria of § 265-9A through D above;
and,
§ 265-9 SANFORD CODE § 265-9
252:452
(2) the proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
F. Any applicant who meets the criteria of § 265-9A through E shall be
notified by the Zoning Board of Appeals in writing over the signature of
the Chairman of the Zoning Board of Appeals that:
(1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in greatly increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25) per
one hundred dollars ($100) of insurance coverage;
(2) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life
and property; and,
(3) the applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of
all the risks inherent in the use of land subject to flooding, assumes
those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the municipality
against any claims filed against it that are related to the applicant's
decision to use land located in a floodplain and that the applicant
individually releases the municipality from any claims the applicant
may have against the municipality that are related to the use of
land located in a floodplain.
G. Appeal Procedure for Administrative and Variance Appeals
(1) An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Zoning
Board of Appeals by an aggrieved party within thirty (30) days after
receipt of a written decision of the Enforcement Officer.
(2) Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all of the papers
constituting the record of the decision appealed from.
(3) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the
appeal within thirty (30) days of its receipt of an appeal request.
(4) The person filling the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
(5) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals within thirty
(30) days after the close of the hearing, and shall issue a written
decision on all appeals.
(6) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall submit to the Code Enforcement
Officer a report of all variance actions, including justification for
the granting of the variance and an authorization for the Code
Enforcement Officer to issue a Flood Hazard Development Permit,
which includes any conditions to be attached to said permit.
(7) Any aggrieved party who participated as a party dining the
proceedings before the Zoning Board of Appeals may take an
§ 265-9 WOOD, SALE OF § 265-9
252:453
§ 265-10. Enforcement; penalties.
§ 265-11. Conflicts with other regulations.
This chapter shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of
compliance with any other applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw,
permit, or provision of law. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction
upon the use of land, buildings, or structures, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
§ 265-12. Definitions.
appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State laws within
forty-five (45) days from the date of any decision of the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the
provisions of this chapter pursuant to Title 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
B. The penalties contained in Title 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 shall apply to any
violation of this chapter.
C. In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer, upon
determination that a violation exists, shall submit a declaration to the
Federal Insurance Administrator requesting a denial of flood insurance.
The valid declaration shall consist of:
(1) the name of the property owner and address or legal description of
the property sufficient to confirm its identity or location;
(2) a clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation
of a cited State or local law, regulation, or ordinance;
(3) a clear statement that the public body making the declaration has
authority to do so and a citation to that authority;
(4) evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the
violation and the prospective denial of insurance; and
(5) a clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant
to Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as
amended.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this
chapter shall have the same meaning as they have at common law and
to give this chapter its most reasonable application. Words used in the
present tense include the future, the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural number includes the singular. The word "may" is
permissive; "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 265-9 SANFORD CODE § 265-12
252:454
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A small detached structure that is
incidental and subordinate to the principal structure.
ADJACENT GRADE — The natural elevation of the ground surface prior
to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
having a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given
year, as specifically identified in the Flood Insurance Study cited in
§ 265-1 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year, commonly called the "100-year
flood."
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A document signed by the Code
Enforcement Officer stating that a structure is in compliance with all of
the provisions of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A person certified under Title
30-A MRSA, Section 4451 (including exceptions in subsection 4451,
paragraph 1) and employed by a municipality to enforce all applicable
comprehensive planning and land use laws and ordinances.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures;
the construction of additions or substantial improvements to buildings
or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING —
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE — An official form (FEMA Form 81-31, 02/
06, as amended) that:
A non-basement building:
built, in the case of a building in Zones AE or A to have the top
of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns, post, piers, or "stilts"; and
(a)
adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to one (1) foot
above the magnitude of the base flood.
(b)
(1)
In the case of Zones AE or A, "elevated building" also includes
a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with hydraulic openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of flood waters, as required in § 265-6L.
(2)
§ 265-12 WOOD, SALE OF § 265-12
252:455
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community, on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has
delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "Flood Elevation Study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — The operation of an overall program
of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage,
including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, floodcontrol
works, and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance,
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power.
The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and contents.
Is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management
regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program; and
(1)
(2) Is required for purchasing flood insurance.
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(b)
(1)
The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body
of water, accompanied by a severe storm or by an unanticipated
force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or
by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in
flooding as defined in Subsection (1)(a) of this definition.
(2)
§ 265-12 SANFORD CODE § 265-12
252:456
FLOODWAY — See "regulatory floodway."
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES — The lines marking the limits
of floodways on federal, state, and local floodplain maps.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors, such as wave action, bridge
openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed,
that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated
for a selected size flood and floodway conditions.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and
ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term
storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOCALLY ESTABLISHED DATUM — For purposes of this chapter, an
elevation established for a specific site to which all other elevations at
the site are referenced. This elevation is generally not referenced to
the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or any other established
datum and is used in areas where Mean Sea Level data is too far from
a specific site to be practically used.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 265-12 WOOD, SALE OF § 265-12
252:457
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements described
in § 265-6L of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term
"manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and
other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred
eighty (180) consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or
other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MINOR DEVELOPMENT — All development that is not new
construction or a substantial improvement, such as repairs,
maintenance, or renovations, or additions, whose value is less that fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure. It also includes,
but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in § 265-6J,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling
operations, storage of equipment or materials, deposition or extraction
of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply
facilities that do not involve structures, and non-structural projects
such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers.
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) — The national
vertical datum, whose standard was established in 1929, which is used
by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). NGVD was based
upon mean sea level in 1929 and also has been called "1929 Mean Sea
Level (MSL)".
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the initial
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
100-YEAR FLOOD — See "base flood."
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — a vehicle which is:
(1) built on a single chassis;
four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projection, not including slideouts;
(2)
§ 265-12 SANFORD CODE § 265-12
252:458
REGULATORY FLOODWAY —
RIVERINE — Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — See "area of special flood hazard."
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other
improvement was within one hundred eighty 180 days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab
or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, or
modification of any construction element, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and
roofed building. A gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above
ground is also a structure.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamage
condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor
vehicle; and
(3)
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one (1) foot, and
(1)
When not designated on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map, it is considered to be the channel of a river or other water
course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the
width of the floodplain, as measured from the normal high water
mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
(2)
§ 265-12 WOOD, SALE OF § 265-12
252:459
§ 265-13. Abrogation.
This chapter repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously
enacted to comply with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L.
90-488, as amended).
Chapter 270
SHORELAND ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 90.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 265.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 275.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 270-1. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are to further the maintenance of safe and
healthful conditions; to prevent and control water pollution; to protect fish
spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird and other wildlife habitat; to protect
buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion; to protect
archaeological and historic resources; to protect commercial fishing; to
protect freshwater wetlands; to control building sites, placement of
structures and land uses; to conserve shore cover, and visual as well as
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds fifty percent 50% of the market value of the structure
before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes
structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include
either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or development to comply with
a community's floodplain management regulations.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure, and a variance is obtained from the community's
Zoning Board of Appeals.
(2)
§ 265-12 SANFORD CODE § 270-1
252:460
actual points of access to inland waters; to conserve natural beauty and
open space; and to anticipate and respond to the impacts of development in
shoreland areas.
§ 270-2. Authority.
This chapter has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title
38 of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated (M.R.S.A.) §§ 435 through 449.
§ 270-3. Applicability.
This chapter applies to:
§ 270-4. Effective Date.
A. All land areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of the following ponds and rivers: the Mousam River from
Estes Lake to the Shapleigh town line, Bauneg Beg Pond, the Middle
Branch River from the confluence of Hay Brook to the confluence of the
Mousam River, Curtis Lake, El Pond, Deering Pond, Number One Pond,
Estes Lake, Littlefield Pond, Old Falls Pond, Old Fishing Pond, Picture
Pond, Sand Pond and Stump Pond;
B. All land areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of
a freshwater wetland as herein defined;
C. All land areas within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of a stream;
D. All other land areas included within significant natural resources
designated on the Shoreland Zoning Map, such as 100-year floodplains
and freshwater wetlands to the extent of that resource area; and
E. Any structure or use located on, over, or abutting a dock, wharf, pier, or
other structure extending over or below the normal high-water line of a
water body or within a wetland.
A. Effective Date of Chapter and Chapter Amendments.
(1) This Chapter (Ordinance), which was adopted by the Town on April
22, 1975, shall not be effective unless approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection. A
certified copy of the Chapter, or Chapter Amendment, attested and
signed by the Town Clerk, shall be forwarded to the Commissioner
for approval. If the Commissioner fails to act on this Chapter or
Chapter Amendment, within 45 days of his/her receipt of the
Chapter, or Chapter Amendment, it shall be automatically
approved.
(2) Any application for a permit submitted to the Town within the
45-day period shall be governed by the terms of this Chapter, or
§ 270-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-4
252:461
§ 270-5. Availability.
A certified copy of this chapter shall be filed with the Town Clerk and shall
be accessible to any member of the public. Copies shall be made available
to the public at reasonable cost at the expense of the person making the
request. Notice of availability of this chapter shall be posted within the
Town Hall.
§ 270-6. Conflicts.
Whenever a provision of this chapter conflicts with or is inconsistent with
another provision of this chapter or of any other ordinance, regulation
or statute administered by the Town, the more restrictive provision shall
control.
§ 270-7. Amendments.
This chapter may be amended by majority vote of the Town Council. Copies
of amendments, attested and signed by the Town Clerk, shall be submitted
to the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection
following adoption by the municipal legislative body and shall not be
effective unless approved by the Commissioner. If the Commissioner fails to
act on any amendment within 45 days of his/her receipt of the amendment,
the amendment is automatically approved. Any application for a permit
submitted to the Town within the 45-day period shall be governed by
the terms of the amendment, if such amendment is approved by the
Commissioner.91
Chapter Amendment, if the Chapter, or Chapter Amendment, is
approved by the Commissioner.
B. Repeal of Municipal Timber Harvesting Regulation.
(1) The municipal regulation of timber harvesting activities is repealed
on the statutory date established under 38 M.R.S.A. § 438-B(5), at
which time the State of Maine Department of Conservation's
Bureau of Forestry shall administer timber harvesting standards in
the shoreland zone. On the date established under 38 M.R.S.A.
§ 438-B(5), the following provisions of this Chapter are repealed:
(a) Table 1. Table of Land Uses, Row 3 (Forest management
activities except for timber harvesting) and Row 4 (Timber
harvesting);90
(b) § 270-14.N in its entirety; and
(c) § 270-16. Definitions, the definitions of "forest management
activities" and "residual basal area".
90.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
91.Editor's Note: See 38 M.R.S.A. § 435 et seq.
§ 270-4 SANFORD CODE § 270-8
252:462
§ 270-8. Zones and Official Moreland Zoning Map.
§ 270-9. Interpretation of zone boundaries.
A. Zones. The area of the Town subject to the provisions of this chapter
shall be divided into two shoreland zones, the boundaries of which
intentionally embrace and overlay parts of other official zones of the
Town of Sanford.
(1) Resource Protection Zone. The standards of the Resource
Protection Zone apply to all areas designated as "Resource
Protection" on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map.
(2) Shoreland Overlay Zone. The standards of the Shoreland Overlay
Zone apply to all other shoreland areas not included within the
Resource Protection Zone.
(3) The Shoreland Overlay Zone includes two development zones.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, development in the
General Development Shoreland Zone 1 and General Development
Shoreland Zone 2, shall conform to the standards of the Shoreland
Overlay Zone.
(a) General Development Shoreland Zone 1
(b) General Development Shoreland Zone 2
B. Official Shoreland Zoning Map. The areas to which this chapter is
applicable are shown on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map which is
made a part of this chapter.
C. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map. The Official Shoreland
Zoning Map shall be certified by the attested signature of the Town
Clerk and shall be located in the Code Enforcement Office.
D. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning Map. If amendments, in
accordance with § 270-7, are made in the zone boundaries or other
matter portrayed on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map, such changes
shall be made on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map within 30 days
after the amendment has been approved by the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection.
A. Unless otherwise set forth on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map, zone
boundary lines are property lines, the center lines of streets, roads and
rights-of-way, and the boundaries of the shoreland areas as defined
herein. Where uncertainty exists as to the exact location of zone
boundary lines, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be the final authority
as to location.
B. When there is any question as to the location of the boundary of the
Resource Protection Zone or Shoreland Overlay Zone, including the
accuracy of mapped wetlands or mapped floodplains, the location shall
be established by field determination. When a field determination of the
§ 270-8 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-9
252:463
§ 270-10. Land use requirements.
§ 270-11. Nonconformance.
boundary has been made by the Town, this determination shall
supersede any mapped or written description of the boundary. Any
property owner may submit evidence to assist the Town in determining
the appropriate location for the boundary.
A. Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure or land shall
hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part
thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, expanded, moved, or
altered and no new lot shall be created except in conformity with all of
the regulations herein specified for the zone in which it is located,
unless a variance is granted.
B. Any use permitted in an underlying zone, as specified in Chapter 280,
Zoning, of the Town Code, shall be permitted in the Shoreland Overlay
Zone unless specifically excluded by this chapter.
C. All such uses shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter,
including the performance standards of § 270-14.
D. All use of land within the Resource Protection Zone shall be in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
E. Where any conflict exists between the requirements of this chapter and
Chapter 280, Zoning, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
A. Purpose. It is the intent of this chapter to promote land use
conformities, except that nonconforming conditions that existed before
the effective date of this chapter or amendments thereto shall be
allowed to continue, subject to the requirements set forth in this
section. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a non-conforming
condition shall not be permitted to become more non-conforming. The
nonconformance provisions of this section shall apply to structures,
uses, and lots within the Resource Protection and Shoreland Overlay
Zones notwithstanding the nonconformance provisions of Article VII of
Chapter 280, Zoning.
B. General.
(1) Transfer of ownership. Nonconforming structures, lots, and uses
may be transferred and the new owner may continue the
nonconforming use or continue to use the nonconforming structure
or lot, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Repair and maintenance. This chapter allows, without a permit, the
normal upkeep and maintenance of nonconforming uses and
structures including repairs or renovations that do not involve
expansion of the nonconforming use or structure, and such other
§ 270-9 SANFORD CODE § 270-11
252:464
changes in a nonconforming use or structure as federal, state, or
local building and safety codes may require.
C. Nonconforming structures.
(1) Expansions.
(a) A nonconforming structure may be added to or expanded after
obtaining a permit from the same permitting authority as that
for a new structure, if such addition or expansion does not
increase the nonconformity of the structure and is in
accordance with subsections (b) and (c) below.
(b) Legally existing non-conforming principal and accessory
structures that do not meet the water body, tributary stream,
or wetland setback requirements may be expanded or altered
as follows, as long as all other applicable standards contained
in this chapter are met.
[1] Expansion of any portion of a structure within 25 feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a
water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland
is prohibited, even if the expansion will not increase
nonconformity with the water body, tributary stream or
wetland setback requirement.
[2] Expansion of an accessory structure that is located closer
to the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary
stream, or upland edge of a wetland than the principal
structure is prohibited, even if the expansion will not
increase nonconformity with the water body or wetland
setback requirement.
[3] For structures located less than 75 feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of a water body,
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, the
maximum combined total floor area for all portions of
those structures within that 75-foot distance is 1,000
square feet, and the maximum height of any portion of a
structure that is within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of a
water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland
is 20 feet or the height of the existing structure, whichever
is greater.
[4] For structures located less than 100 feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of a great pond
classified as GPA or a river flowing to a great pond
classified as GPA, the maximum combined total floor area
for all portions of those structures within that 100-foot
distance is 1,500 square feet, and the maximum height of
any portion of a structure that is within 100 feet,
horizontal distance, of a great pond is 25 feet or the height
§ 270-11 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-11
252:465
of the existing structure, whichever is greater, except that
any portion of those structures located less than 75 feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of
a water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a
wetland must meet the floor area and height limits of
§ 270-11.C(1)(b)[3]. For the purposes of § 270-11.C(1)(b),
a basement is not counted toward floor area.
(c) Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is
constructed under a non-conforming structure, the structure
and new foundation must be placed such that the setback
requirement is met to the greatest practical extent as
determined by the Planning Board or its designee, basing its
decision on the criteria specified in § 270-11.C(2). Relocation,
below. If the completed foundation does not extend beyond the
exterior dimensions of the structure and the foundation does
not cause the structure to be elevated by more than three
additional feet, as measured from the uphill side of the
structure, it shall not be considered to be an expansion of the
structure.
(2) Relocation.
(a) A nonconforming structure may be relocated within the
boundaries of the parcel on which the structure is located
provided that the site of relocation conforms to all setback
requirements to the greatest practical extent as determined by
the Planning Board or its designee, and, provided that if the
use is not connected to the public sewerage system, the
applicant demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage
disposal system meets the requirements of state law and the
State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules (Rules),
or that a new system can be installed in compliance with the
law and said Rules. In no case shall a structure be relocated in
a manner that causes the structure to be more nonconforming.
(b) In determining whether the building relocation meets the
setback to the greatest practical extent, the Planning Board or
its designee shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of the
land, the potential for soil erosion, the location of other
structures on the property and on adjacent properties, the
location of the septic system (if any) and other on-site soils
suitable for septic systems, and the type and amount of
vegetation to be removed to accomplish the relocation.
(c) When it is necessary to remove vegetation within the water or
wetland setback area in order to relocate a structure, the
Planning Board shall require replanting of native vegetation to
compensate for the destroyed vegetation. In addition, the area
from which the relocated structure was removed must be
§ 270-11 SANFORD CODE § 270-11
252:466
replanted with vegetation. Replanting shall be required as
follows:
[1] Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be
replanted with at least one native tree, three feet in height,
for every tree removed. If more than five trees are planted,
no one species of tree shall make up more than 50% of the
number of trees planted. Replaced trees must be planted
no further from the water or wetland than the trees that
were removed. Other woody and herbaceous vegetation,
and ground cover, that are removed or destroyed in order
to relocate a structure must be re-established. An area at
least the same size as the area where vegetation and/or
ground cover was disturbed, damaged, or removed must
be reestablished within the setback area. The vegetation
and/or ground cover must consist of similar native
vegetation and/or ground cover that was disturbed,
destroyed or removed.
[2] Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel
the original location of the structure shall be replanted
with vegetation which may consist of grasses, shrubs,
trees, or a combination thereof.
(3) Reconstruction or replacement.
(a) Any nonconforming structure other than a dock or float which
is located less than the required setback from a water body,
tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed, or
damaged or destroyed, regardless of the cause, by more than
50% of the market value of the structure before such damage,
destruction or removal, may be reconstructed or replaced
provided that a permit is obtained within 18 months of the date
of said damage, destruction, or removal, and provided that
such reconstruction or replacement is in compliance with the
water body, tributary stream or wetland setback requirement
to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning
Board in accordance with the purposes of this chapter. In no
case shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to
increase its nonconformity. If the reconstructed or replacement
structure is less than the required setback it shall not be any
larger than the original structure, except as allowed pursuant
to § 270-11.C(1)(a) above, as determined by the nonconforming
floor area and volume of the reconstructed or
replaced structure at its new location. If the total amount of
floor area and volume of the original structure can be relocated
or reconstructed beyond the required setback area, no portion
of the relocated or reconstructed structure shall be replaced or
constructed at less than the setback requirement for a new
structure. When it is necessary to remove vegetation in order
§ 270-11 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-11
252:467
to replace or reconstruct a structure, vegetation shall be
replanted in accordance with § 270-11.C(2) above.
(b) When the nonconforming structure in above § 270-11.C(3)(a) is
less than 500 square feet in area, the request for
reconstruction or replacement shall be reviewed by the Code
Enforcement Officer instead of the Planning Board. The
reconstruction or replacement shall comply with all other
provisions of § 270-11.C(3)(a) above.
(c) Any nonconforming structure which is located less than the
required setback from a water body, tributary stream, or
wetland and which is removed by 50% or less of the market
value, or damaged or destroyed by 50% or less of the market
value of the structure, excluding normal maintenance and
repair, may be reconstructed in place if a permit is obtained
from the Code Enforcement Officer within one year of such
damage, destruction, or removal.
(d) In determining whether the building reconstruction or
replacement meets the setback to the greatest practical
extent, the Planning Board or its designee shall consider, in
addition to the criteria in § 270-11.C(2) above, the physical
condition and type of foundation present, if any.
(4) Replacement of docks and floats. A dock or float which is
nonconforming because of its size or location may be replaced
provided the replacement is no more nonconforming than the
original.
(5) Change of use of a nonconforming structure.
(a) The use of a nonconforming structure may not be changed to
another use unless the Planning Board, after receiving a
written application, determines that the new use will have no
greater adverse impact on the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland or on the subject or adjacent properties and resources
than the existing use.
(b) In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, the
Planning Board shall require written documentation from the
applicant regarding the probable effects on public health and
safety, erosion and sedimentation, water quality, fish and
wildlife habitat, vegetative cover, visual and actual points of
public access to waters, natural beauty, floodplain
management, archaeological and historic resources, and
commercial fishing activities and other functionally waterdependent
uses.
D. Nonconforming uses.
§ 270-11 SANFORD CODE § 270-11
252:468
(1) Expansions. Expansions of nonconforming uses are prohibited,
except that non-conforming residential uses may, after obtaining a
permit from the Planning Board, be expanded within existing
residential structures or within expansions of such structures as
allowed in § 270-11.C(1)(b) above.
(2) Resumption prohibited. A lot, building or structure in or on which a
nonconforming use is discontinued for a period exceeding one year,
or which is superseded by a conforming use, may not again be
devoted to a nonconforming use except that the Planning Board
may, for good cause shown by the applicant, grant up to a one year
extension to that time period. This provision shall not apply to the
resumption of a use of a residential structure provided that the
structure has been used or maintained for residential purposes
during the preceding five year period.
E. Nonconforming lots.
(1) Nonconforming lots. A nonconforming lot of record as of the
effective date of this chapter or amendment thereto may be built
upon, without the need for a variance, provided that such lot is in
separate ownership and not contiguous with any other lot in the
same ownership and that all provisions of this chapter except lot
area, lot width and shore frontage can be met. Variances relating to
setback or other requirements not involving lot area, lot width or
shore frontage shall be obtained by action of the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(2) Contiguous built lots.
(a) If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in a single or joint
ownership of record at the time of adoption of this chapter, and
if all or part of the lots does not meet the dimensional
requirements of this chapter, and if a principal use or structure
exists on each lot, the nonconforming lots may be conveyed
separately or together, provided that the State Minimum Lot
Size Law (12 M.R.S.A. §§ 4807-A through 4807-D) and the
State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules are
complied with.
(b) If two or more principal uses or structures existed on a single
lot of record on the effective date of this chapter, each may be
sold on a separate lot provided that the above-referenced law
and rules are complied with. When such lots are divided, each
lot thus created must be as conforming as possible to the
dimensional requirements of this chapter as determined by the
Planning Board.
(3) Contiguous lots, vacant or partially built.
(a) When two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in single or
joint ownership of record at the time of or since adoption or
§ 270-11 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-11
252:469
§ 270-12. Allowed uses.
§ 270-13. Land use standards.
amendment of this chapter or any time thereafter, if any of
these lots do not individually meet the dimensional
requirements of this chapter or subsequent amendments, and
if one or more of the lots are vacant or contain no principal
structure, the lots shall be combined to the extent necessary to
meet the dimensional requirements of this chapter.
(b) This provision shall not apply to two or more contiguous lots, at
least one of which is nonconforming, owned by the same
person or persons on the effective date of this chapter or any
time thereafter, and recorded in the registry of deeds if the lot
is served by a public sewer or can accommodate a subsurface
sewage disposal system in conformance with the State of
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and:
[1] Each lot contains at least 100 feet of shore frontage and at
least 20,000 square feet of lot area; or
[2] Any lots that do not meet the frontage and lot size
requirements of § 270-11.E(3)(b)[1] are reconfigured or
combined so that each new lot contains at least 100 feet of
shore frontage and 20,000 square feet of lot area.
A. Land uses allowed within the Resource Protection Zone are shown in
Table 1, Land Uses in the Shoreland Zone.92 Table 1 also shows those
uses allowed within the Shoreland Overlay Zone. Such uses are allowed
only if they are allowed in both the Shoreland Overlay Zone and the
underlying zones.
B. All land use activities, as indicated in Table 1, Land Uses in the
Shoreland Zone, shall conform with all of the applicable land use
standards in § 270-13 and shoreland performance standards in
§ 270-14.93 The zone designation for a particular site shall be
determined from the Official Shoreland Zoning Map.
A. All land use activities within the Shoreland Overlay Zone shall conform
to the development controls of Chapter 280, Zoning, Article XI for the
zone in which such activity is located.
B. Lots located in the Shoreland Overlay Zone and the Resource
Protection Zone shall have the following minimum shore frontage
requirements:
(1) Residential: 200 feet per dwelling unit
92.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
93.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 270-11 SANFORD CODE § 270-13
252:470
§ 270-14. Shoreland performance standards.
All use of land within the Resource Protection and Shoreland Overlay Zones
shall conform to the following standards:
(2) Public and Private Recreational uses: 200 feet per use
(3) Commercial, Industrial, Governmental, or Industrial per principal
structure: 300 feet
C. Land below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge
of a wetland and land beneath roads serving more than two lots shall
not be included toward calculating minimum lot area.
D. Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall be
considered each a separate tract or parcel of land unless such road was
established by the owner of land on both sides thereof after September
22, 1971.
E. The minimum width of any portion of any lot within 100 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge
of a wetland shall be equal to or greater than the shore frontage
requirement for a lot with the proposed use.
F. If more than one residential dwelling unit, principal governmental,
institutional, commercial or industrial structure or use, or combination
thereof, is constructed or established on a single parcel, all dimensional
requirements shall be met for each additional dwelling unit, principal
structure, or use.
A. Principal and accessory structures.
(1) All new principal and accessory buildings and structures in the
Resource Protection zone shall be set back at least 250 feet,
horizontal distance, from rivers with undeveloped shoreline and
from freshwater wetlands and great ponds which are rated medium
to high value except for structures, roads, parking spaces or other
regulated objects specifically allowed in that zone in which case the
setback requirements specified in § 270-14.A(2) below shall apply.
(2) All new principal and accessory buildings and structures in the
Shoreland Overlay Zone shall be set back at least 75 feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of great
ponds, great ponds classified GPA, other water bodies, tributary
streams, or the upland edge of a wetland, with the following
exceptions:
(a) Those areas with municipal sewage shall have a minimum
setback of 50 feet.
(b) Littlefield Pond and Deering Pond shall have a setback of 200
feet.
§ 270-13 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-14
252:471
(c) The Mousam River, from the southerly side of the Springvale
Recreational Area to the northerly side of the School Street
Bridge in Sanford, including the General Development
Shoreland zones 1 and 2, shall have a minimum setback of 25
feet.
(d) In addition, the water body, tributary stream, or wetland
setback provision shall neither apply to structures which
require direct access to the water body or wetland as an
operational necessity, such as piers, docks and retaining walls,
nor to other functionally water-dependent uses.
(e) On a non-conforming lot of record on which only a residential
structure exists, and it is not possible to place an accessory
structure meeting the required water body, tributary stream or
wetland setbacks, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a
permit to place a single accessory structure, with no utilities,
for the storage of yard tools and similar equipment. Such
accessory structure shall not exceed 80 square feet in area nor
eight feet in height, and shall be located as far from the
shoreline or tributary stream as practical and shall meet all
other applicable standards, including lot coverage and
vegetation clearing limitations. In no case shall the structure
be located closer to the shoreline or tributary stream than the
principal structure.
(f) Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing
structures which are permitted in the Resource Protection, and
Shoreland zone, shall not exceed 35 feet in height. This
provision shall not apply to structures such as transmission
towers, windmills, antennas, and similar structures having no
floor area.
(3) The lowest floor elevation or openings of all buildings and
structures, including basements, shall be elevated at least one foot
above the elevation of the 100-year flood, the flood of record or, in
the absence of these, the flood as defined by soil types identified as
recent flood-plain soils. Accessory structures may be placed in
accordance with the standards of Chapter 265, Floodplain
Management, and need not meet the elevation requirements of this
paragraph.
(4) The total footprint area of all structures, parking lots and other
non-vegetated surfaces within the Resource Protection Zone shall
not exceed 20% of the lot or a portion thereof located within the
shoreland zone, including land area previously developed. Within
the Shoreland Overlay Zone, the total footprint area of all
structures, parking lots and other non-vegetated surfaces shall not
exceed 20% of the lot or a portion thereof, including land area
previously developed, with the following exceptions:
§ 270-14 SANFORD CODE § 270-14
252:472
(a) Within the General Development Shoreland Zone 1 (GDSZ1),
the total footprint area of all structures, parking lots and other
non-vegetated surfaces shall not exceed 100% of the lot or a
portion thereof, including land area previously developed.
(b) Within the General Development Shoreland Zone 2 (GDSZ2),
the total footprint area of all structures, parking lots and other
non-vegetated surfaces shall not exceed 70% of the lot or a
portion thereof, including land area previously developed.
(5) Retaining walls that are not necessary for erosion control shall
meet the structure setback requirement, except for low retaining
walls and associated fill provided all of the following conditions are
met:
(a) The site has been previously altered and an effective vegetated
buffer does not exist;
(b) The wall(s) is(are) at least 25 feet, horizontal distance, from
the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or
upland edge of a wetland;
(c) The site where the retaining wall will be constructed is legally
existing lawn or is a site eroding from lack of naturally
occurring vegetation, and which cannot be stabilized with
vegetative plantings;
(d) The total height of the wall(s), in the aggregate, are no more
than 24 inches;
(e) Retaining walls are located outside of the 100-year floodplain
on rivers, streams, coastal wetlands, and tributary streams, as
designated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's
(FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary
Maps, or the flood of record, or in the absence of these, by soil
types identified as recent flood plain soils.
(f) The area behind the wall is revegetated with grass, shrubs,
trees, or a combination thereof, and no further structural
development will occur within the setback area, including
patios and decks; and
(g) A vegetated buffer area is established within 25 feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a water
body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland when a
natural buffer area does not exist. The buffer area must meet
the following characteristics:
[1] The buffer must include shrubs and other woody and
herbaceous vegetation. Where natural ground cover is
lacking the area must be supplemented with leaf or bark
mulch;
§ 270-14 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-14
252:473
[2] Vegetation plantings must be in quantities sufficient to
retard erosion and provide for effective infiltration of
stormwater runoff;
[3] Only native species may be used to establish the buffer
area;
[4] A minimum buffer width of 15 feet, horizontal distance, is
required, measured perpendicularly to the normal highwater
line or upland edge of a wetland;
[5] A footpath not to exceed the standards in § 270-14.O(2)(a),
may traverse the buffer;
(6) Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or
similar structures to provide shoreline access in areas of steep
slopes or unstable soils may be allowed with a permit from the
Code Enforcement Officer, provided that the structure is limited to
a maximum of four feet in width; that the structure does not extend
below or over the normal high-water line of a water body or upland
edge of a wetland (unless permitted by the Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources
Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. § 480-C); and that the applicant
demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative exists on the
property.
B. Piers, docks, wharfs, bridges, and other structures and uses extending
over or below the normal high-water line of a water body or within a
wetland.
(1) Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such
use and constructed so as to control erosion.
(2) The location shall not interfere with existing developed or natural
beach areas.
(3) The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects on
fisheries.
(4) The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to carry
on the activity and be consistent with the surrounding character
and uses of the area. A temporary pier, dock or wharf shall not be
wider than six feet for non-commercial uses.
(5) Docks shall be not larger than 100 square feet in surface area and
shall not extend more than 20 feet from the shoreline. Docks shall
be so located as not to interfere with boating or navigation.
(6) Floats shall be not larger than 150 square feet in surface area and
shall be so located so as not to interfere with boating.
(7) No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf,
dock or other structure extending beyond the normal high-water
§ 270-14 SANFORD CODE § 270-14
252:474
line of a water body or within a wetland unless the structure
requires direct access to the water body or wetland as an
operational necessity.
(8) No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock, wharf
or other structure extending below the normal high-water line of a
water body or within a wetland shall be converted to residential
dwelling units in any zone.
(9) New permanent piers and docks shall not be permitted unless it is
clearly demonstrated to the Planning Board that a temporary pier
or dock is not feasible, and a permit has been obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant to the Natural
Resource Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. § 480-C.
C. Campgrounds. Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum
requirements imposed under state licensing procedures and the
following:
(1) Campgrounds shall contain a minimum of 5,000 square feet of land,
not including roads and driveways, for each site. Land supporting
wetland vegetation and land below the normal high-water line of a
water body shall not be included in calculating land area per site.
(2) The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or
shelter, and utility and service buildings shall be set back a
minimum of 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal highwater
line of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a
great pond classified GPA and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the
normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or
the upland edge of a wetland.
D. Individual, private campsites. Individual, private campsites not
associated with campgrounds and intended for short-term recreational
use are allowed provided the following conditions are met:
(1) One campsite per vacant, undeveloped lot existing on the effective
date of this chapter, or 30,000 square feet of lot area within the
shoreland zone, whichever is less, may be permitted.
(2) Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a
recreational vehicle or tent platform, shall be set back 100 feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a great
pond classified GPA or river flowing to a great pond classified GPA
and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of
other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a
wetland.
(3) Only one recreational vehicle shall be allowed on a campsite. The
recreational vehicle shall not be located on any type of permanent
foundation except for a gravel pad, and no structure except a
temporary awning shall be attached to the recreational vehicle.
§ 270-14 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-14
252:475
(4) The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational vehicle,
tent or similar shelter in a Resource Protection Zone shall be
limited to 1,000 square feet.
(5) A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method
and location of sewage disposal shall be required for each campsite
and shall be approved by the Local Plumbing Inspector. Where
disposal is off-site, written authorization from the receiving facility
or landowner is required.
(6) When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed on-site
for more than 120 days per year, all requirements for a singlefamily
residential structure shall be met, including the installation
of a subsurface sewage disposal system in compliance with the
State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules unless
connected to public sewerage facilities.
E. Commercial and industrial uses. The following new commercial and
industrial uses are prohibited within the Shoreland Overlay Zone
adjacent to great ponds classified GPA and rivers and streams which
flow to great ponds classified GPA.
(1) Auto washing facilities.
(2) Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations, including
body shops.
(3) Chemical and bacteriological laboratories.
(4) Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers,
other than amounts normally associated with individual households
or farms.
(5) Commercial painting, wood preserving, and furniture stripping.
(6) Dry cleaning establishments.
(7) Electronic circuit assembly.
(8) Laundromats, unless connected to a sanitary sewer.
(9) Metal plating, finishing, or polishing.
(10) Petroleum or petroleum product storage and/or sale, except
storage on the same property as the use occurs and except for
storage and sales associated with marinas.
(11) Photographic processing.
(12) Printing.
(13) Other commercial and industrial uses involving the storage or
handling of materials or chemicals similar to those involved in
Subsection E(1) through (12).
§ 270-14 SANFORD CODE § 270-14
252:476
F. Parking areas.
(1) Parking areas shall meet the shoreline and tributary stream
setback requirements for structures for the zone in which such
areas are located. The setback requirement for parking areas
serving public boat launching facilities shall be no less than 50 feet,
horizontal distance, from the shoreline or tributary stream if the
Planning Board finds that no other reasonable alternative exists
further from the shoreline or tributary stream.
(2) Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed use and
shall be designed to prevent stormwater runoff from flowing
directly into a water body, tributary stream or wetland and where
feasible, to retain all runoff on-site.
(3) The amount of parking and design of parking facilities shall comply
with Chapter 280, Zoning.
G. Roads and driveways. The following standards shall apply to the
construction of roads and/or driveways and drainage systems, culverts
and other related features within Resource Protection and Shoreland
Overlay Zones in addition to the requirements set forth in Chapter 275,
Subdivision of Land:
(1) Roads and driveways shall be set back at least 100 feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of a great pond classified
GPA or river that flows to a great pond classified GPA, and 75 feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of other water
bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland unless
no reasonable alternative exists as determined by the Planning
Board. If no other reasonable alternative exists, the road and/or
driveway setback requirement shall be no less than 50 feet,
horizontal distance, upon clear showing by the applicant that
appropriate techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of
the water body, tributary stream or wetland. Such techniques may
include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling basins
and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and
turnouts placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the water body,
tributary stream, or wetland.
(a) On slopes of greater than 20%, the road and/or driveway
setback shall be increased by 10 feet, horizontal distance, for
each five percent increase in slope above 20%.
(b) § 270-14.G(1) does not apply to approaches to water crossings
nor to roads or driveways that provide access to permitted
structures and facilities located nearer to the shoreline due to
an operational necessity, excluding temporary docks for
recreational uses. Roads and driveways providing access to
permitted structures within the setback area shall comply fully
with the requirements of § 270-14.G(1) except for that portion
§ 270-14 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-14
252:477
of the road or driveway necessary for direct access to the
structure.
(2) Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road rightof-
way regardless of their setback from a water body, tributary
stream or wetland.
(3) New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection
Zone except that the Planning Board may grant a permit to
construct a road or driveway to provide access to permitted uses
within the zone. A road or driveway in a Resource Protection Zone
may also be approved by the Planning Board upon a finding that no
reasonable alternative route or location is available outside the
zone. When a road or driveway is permitted in a Resource
Protection Zone, the road and/or driveway shall be set back as far
as practicable from the normal high-water line of a water body,
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland.
(4) Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two
horizontal to one vertical, and shall be graded and stabilized in
accordance with the provisions for erosion and sedimentation
control contained in § 270-14.P.
(5) Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than 10% except for
segments of less than 200 feet.
(6) In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from
directly entering water bodies, tributary streams or wetlands,
roads and driveways shall be designed, constructed, and
maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip at least 50 feet
plus two times the average slope in width between the outflow
point of the ditch or culvert and the normal high-water line of a
water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland. Surface
drainage which is directed to an unscarified buffer strip shall be
diffused or spread out to promote infiltration of the runoff and to
minimize channelized flow of the drainage through the buffer strip.
(7) Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water
turnouts shall be installed in a manner effective in directing
drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before the flow gains
sufficient volume or head to erode the road, driveway, or ditch. To
accomplish this, the following shall apply:
(a) Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water
turnouts shall be spaced along the road or driveway at
intervals no greater than indicated in the following table:
§ 270-14 SANFORD CODE § 270-14
252:478
Grade
(percent)
Spacing
(feet)
0 to 2 250
3 to 5 200 to 135
6 to 10 100 to 80
11 to 15 80 to 60
16 to 20 60 to 45
21 plus 40
(b) Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only
where the grade is 10% or less.
(c) On sections having slopes greater than 10%, ditch relief
culverts shall be placed at approximately a 30 degree angle
downslope from a line perpendicular to the center line of the
road or driveway.
(d) Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly
installed in order to allow for effective functioning, and their
inlet and outlet ends shall be stabilized with appropriate
materials.
(8) Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other storm
water runoff control installations associated with roads and
driveways shall be maintained on a regular basis to assure effective
functioning.
H. Signs. Signs shall conform to the standards of Chapter 280, Zoning.
I. Storm water runoff.
(1) All new construction and development shall be designed to
minimize storm water runoff from the site in excess of the natural
predevelopment conditions. Where possible, existing natural runoff
control features, such as berms, swales, terraces and wooded
areas, shall be retained in order to reduce runoff and encourage
infiltration of storm waters.
(2) Storm water runoff control systems shall be maintained as
necessary to ensure proper functioning.
J. Septic waste disposal. All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be
installed in conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules, and the following:
(1) clearing or removal of woody vegetation necessary to site a new
system and any associated fill extensions shall not extend closer
than 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line
of a water body or the upland edge of a wetland, and
§ 270-14 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-14
252:479
(2) a holding tank is not allowed for a first-time residential use in the
shoreland zone.
K. Essential services.
(1) Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited
to existing public ways and existing service corridors.
(2) The installation of essential services, other than road-side
distribution lines, is not allowed in a Resource Protection Zone,
except to provide services to a permitted use within said zone, or
except where the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable
alternative exists. Where allowed, such structures and facilities
shall be located so as to minimize any adverse impacts on
surrounding uses and resources, including visual impacts.
L. Mineral exploration and extraction. Mineral exploration to determine
the nature or extent of mineral resources shall be accomplished by
hand sampling, test boring, or other methods which create minimal
disturbance of less than 100 square feet of ground surface. A permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer shall be required for mineral
exploration which exceeds the above limitation. All excavations,
including test pits and holes, shall be immediately capped, filled or
secured by other equally effective measures to restore disturbed areas
and to protect the public health and safety. Mineral extraction may be
allowed subject to the provisions of § 280-91 of Chapter 280, Zoning,
and the following additional standards:
(1) A reclamation plan shall be filed with, and approved, by the
Planning Board before a permit is granted. Such plan shall describe
in detail procedures to be undertaken to fulfill the requirements of
§ 270-14.L(4) below.
(2) No part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff
control features, shall be permitted within 100 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond classified
GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA and within 75
feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of any other
water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland.
Extraction operations shall not be permitted within 50 feet,
horizontal distance, of any property line without written permission
of the owner of such adjacent property.
(3) Within 12 months following the completion of extraction operations
at any extraction site, which operations shall be deemed complete
when less than 100 cubic yards of materials are removed in any
consecutive twelve-month period, ground levels and grades shall
be established in accordance with the following:
(a) All debris, stumps, and similar material shall be removed for
disposal in an approved location or shall be buried on-site. Only
materials generated on-site may be buried or covered on-site.
§ 270-14 SANFORD CODE § 270-14
252:480
(b) The final graded slope shall be a slope of 2 1/2:1 or flatter.
(c) Topsoil or loam shall be retained to cover all disturbed land
areas, which shall be reseeded and stabilized with vegetation
native to the area. Additional topsoil or loam shall be obtained
from off-site sources if necessary to complete the stabilization
project.
(4) In keeping with the purposes of this chapter, the Planning Board
may impose such conditions as are necessary to minimize the
adverse impacts associated with mineral extraction operations on
surrounding uses and resources.
M. Agriculture.
(1) All spreading of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with
the Manure Utilization Guidelinespublished by the Maine
Department of Agriculture on November 1, 2001, and the Nutrient
Management Law (7 M.R.S.A. §§ 4201-4209).
(2) Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within 100 feet, horizontal
distance, of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great
pond classified GPA, or within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of other
water bodies, tributary streams, or wetlands. All manure storage
areas within the Resource Protection or Shoreland Overlay Zones
must be constructed or modified such that the facility produces no
discharge of effluent or contaminated storm water.
(3) Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than 40,000
square feet in surface area within the Resource Protection or
Shoreland Overlay Zones shall require a Conservation Plan to be
filed with the Code Enforcement Officer. Nonconformance with the
provisions of said plan shall be considered to be a violation of this
chapter.
(4) There shall be no new tilling of soil within 100 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond classified
GPA; within 75 feet, horizontal distance, from other water bodies;
or within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of tributary streams and
freshwater wetlands. Operations in existence on the effective date
of this chapter and not in conformance with this provision may be
maintained.94
(5) Newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted
within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line
of a great pond classified GPA; within 75 feet, horizontal distance,
of other water bodies; or within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of
tributary streams and freshwater wetlands. Livestock grazing
associated with ongoing farm activities and which is not in
conformance with the above setback provisions may continue,
94.Editor's Note: See 38 M.R.S.A. § 480-A et seq.
§ 270-14 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-14
252:481
provided that such grazing is conducted in accordance with a
Conservation Plan.
N. Timber harvesting.
(1) In a Resource Protection Zone abutting a great pond, timber
harvesting shall be limited to the following:
(a) Within the strip of land extending 75 feet, horizontal distance,
inland from the normal high-water line there shall be no timber
harvesting, except to remove safety hazards.
(b) Beyond the 75-foot strip referred to in § 270-14.N(1)(a) above,
timber harvesting is permitted in accordance with
§ 270-14.N(2) below, except that in no case shall the average
residual basal area of trees over 4 1/2 inches in diameter at
4 1/2 feet above ground level be reduced to less than 30 square
feet per acre.
(2) Except in areas as described in § 270-14.N(1) above, timber
harvesting shall conform to the following provisions:
(a) Selective cutting of no more than 40% of the total volume of
trees four inches or more in diameter measured at 4 1/2 feet
above ground level on any lot in any ten year period is
permitted. In addition:
[1] Within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing
to a great pond classified GPA and within 75 feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of other
water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a
wetland, there shall be no clear-cut openings and a welldistributed
stand of trees and other vegetation, including
existing ground cover, shall be maintained.
[2] At distances greater than 100 feet, horizontal distance, of
a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great
pond classified GPA and greater than 75 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of other water
bodies or the upland edge of a wetland, harvesting
operations shall not create single clear-cut openings
greater than 10,000 square feet in the forest canopy.
Where such openings exceed 5,000 square feet they shall
be at least 100 feet apart. Such clear-cut openings shall be
included in the calculation of total volume removal. For the
purposes of these standards, volume may be considered to
be equivalent to basal area.
(b) Timber harvesting operations exceeding the 40% limitation in
§ 270-14.N(2)(a) above may be allowed by the Planning Board
upon a clear showing, including a forest management plan
§ 270-14 SANFORD CODE § 270-14
252:482
signed by a Maine licensed professional forester, that such
an exception is necessary for good forest management and
will be carried out in accordance with the purposes of this
chapter. The Planning Board shall notify the Commissioner of
the Department of Environmental Protection of each exception
allowed within 14 days of the Planning Board's decision.
(c) No accumulation of slash shall be left within 50 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a water body. In all
other areas slash shall either be removed or disposed of in such
a manner that it lies on the ground and no part thereof extends
more than four feet above the ground. Any debris that falls
below the normal high-water line of a water body or tributary
stream shall be removed.
(d) Timber harvesting equipment shall not use stream channels as
travel routes except when:
[1] Surface waters are frozen; and
[2] The activity will not result in any ground disturbance.
(e) All crossings of flowing water shall require a bridge or culvert,
except in areas with low banks and channel beds which are
composed of gravel, rock or similar hard surface which would
not be eroded or otherwise damaged.
(f) Skid trail approaches to water crossings shall be located and
designed so as to prevent water runoff from directly entering
the water body or tributary stream. Upon completion of timber
harvesting, temporary bridges and culverts shall be removed
and areas of exposed soil revegetated.
(g) Except for water crossings, skid trails and other sites where
the operation of machinery used in timber harvesting results in
the exposure of mineral soil shall be located such that an
unscarified strip of vegetation of at least 75 feet, horizontal
distance, in width for slopes up to 10% shall be retained
between the exposed mineral soil and the normal high-water
line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland. For each 10%
increase in slope, the unscarified strip shall be increased by 20
feet, horizontal distance. The provisions of this subsection
apply only to a face sloping toward the water body or wetland;
provided, however, that no portion of such exposed mineral soil
on a back face shall be closer than 25 feet, horizontal distance,
from the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge
of a wetland.
O. Clearing or removal of vegetation for activities other than timber
harvesting.
§ 270-14 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-14
252:483
(1) In a Resource Protection Zone abutting a great pond, there shall be
no cutting of vegetation within the strip of land extending 75 feet,
horizontal distance, inland from the normal high-water line, except
to remove safety hazards. Elsewhere, in any Resource Protection
Zone the cutting or removal of vegetation shall be limited to that
which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that zone.
(2) Except in areas as described in § 270-14O(1) above, and except to
allow for the development of permitted uses, within a strip of land
extending 100 feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal
high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a
great pond classified GPA and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from any
other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a
wetland, a buffer strip of vegetation shall be preserved as follows:
(a) There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet
in the forest canopy (or other existing woody vegetation if a
forested canopy is not present) as measured from the outer
limits of the tree or shrub crown. However, a footpath not to
exceed six feet in width as measured between tree trunks and/
or shrub stems is allowed provided that a cleared line of sight
to the water through the buffer strip is not created.
(b) Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is allowed
provided that a well-distributed stand of trees and other
natural vegetation are maintained.
[1] For the purposes of § 270-14.O(2)(b), a "well-distributed
stand of trees" adjacent to a great pond classified GPA or a
river or stream flowing to a great pond classified GPA,
shall be defined as maintaining a rating score of 24 or
more in each 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular (1,250 square
feet) area as determined by the following rating system:
Diameter of Tree at 4 1/2 feet
Above Ground Level
(inches) Points
2 to less than 4 1
4 to less than 8 2
8 to less than 12 4
12 or greater 8
[2] Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and
wetlands, a "well-distributed stand of trees" is defined as
maintaining a minimum rating score of 16 per 25-foot by
50-foot rectangular area.
[3] As an example, adjacent to a great pond, if a 25-foot by
50-foot plot contains four trees between two and four
§ 270-14 SANFORD CODE § 270-14
252:484
inches in diameter, two trees between four and eight
inches in diameter, three trees between eight and twelve
inches in diameter, and two trees over twelve inches in
diameter, the rating score is: (4 x 1) + (2 x 2) + (3 x 4) + (2
x 8) = 36 points. Thus, the 25-foot by 50-foot plot contains
trees worth 36 points. Trees totaling 12 points (36 - 24 =
12) may be removed from the plot provided that no cleared
openings are created.
[4] The following shall govern in applying this point system:
[a] The 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular plots must be
established where the landowner or lessee proposes
clearing within the required buffer;
[b] Each successive plot must be adjacent to, but not
overlap a previous plot;
[c] Any plot not containing the required points must have
no vegetation removed except as otherwise allowed by
this chapter;
[d] Any plot containing the required points may have
vegetation removed down to the minimum points
required or as otherwise allowed by this chapter;
[e] Where conditions permit, no more than 50% of the
points on any 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular area may
consist of trees greater than 12 inches in diameter.
[5] For the purposes of § 270-14.O(2)(b) "other natural
vegetation" is defined as retaining existing vegetation
under three feet in height and other ground cover and
retaining at least five saplings less than two inches in
diameter at 4 1/2 feet above ground level for each 25-foot
by 50-foot rectangle area. If five saplings do not exist, no
woody stems less than two inches in diameter can be
removed until five saplings have been recruited into the
plot.
[6] Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than 40%
of the total volume of trees four inches or more in diameter
measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level may be removed
in any ten-year period.
(c) In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing
vegetation under three feet in height and other ground cover,
including leaf litter and the forest duff layer, shall not be cut,
covered, or removed, except to provide for a footpath or other
permitted uses as described in § 270-14.O(2) and
§ 270-14.O(2)(a) above.
§ 270-14 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-14
252:485
(d) Pruning of tree branches on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is
allowed.
(e) In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the
removal of storm-damaged, diseased, unsafe, or dead trees
results in the creation of cleared openings, these openings
shall be replanted with native tree species unless existing new
tree growth is present.
(3) § 270-14.O(2) does not apply to those portions of public
recreational facilities adjacent to public swimming areas as long as
cleared areas are limited to the minimum area necessary.
(4) At distances greater than 100 feet, horizontal distance, from a
great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond
classified GPA and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal
high-water line of any other water body, tributary stream, or the
upland edge of a wetland, there shall be allowed on any lot, in any
ten year period, selective cutting of not more than 40% of the
volume of trees four inches or more in diameter measured 4 1/2
feet above ground level. Tree removal in conjunction with the
development of permitted uses shall be included in the 40%
calculation. For the purposes of these standards, volume may be
considered to be equivalent to basal area. In no event shall cleared
openings for any purpose, including but not limited to, principal
and accessory structures, driveways, lawns, and sewage disposal
areas, exceed in the aggregate 25% of the lot area within the
shoreland zone or 10,000 square feet, whichever is greater,
including land previously cleared.
(5) Legally existing nonconforming cleared openings may be
maintained, but shall not be enlarged, except as allowed by this
chapter.
(6) Fields and other cleared openings which have reverted to primarily
shrubs, trees, or other woody vegetation shall be regulated under
the provisions of § 270-14.O.
P. Erosion and sedimentation control.
(1) All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation, or other
similar activities which result in unstabilized soil conditions and
which require a permit shall also require a written soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan. The plan shall be submitted to the
permitting authority for approval and shall include, where
applicable, provisions for:
(a) Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
(b) Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt
fencing or diversion ditches.
§ 270-14 SANFORD CODE § 270-14
252:486
(c) Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or
rip-rap.
(2) In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall
be designed to fit with the topography and soils of the site. Areas of
steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be required shall be
avoided wherever possible, and natural contours shall be followed
as closely as possible.
(3) Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all
aspects of the proposed project involving land disturbance, and
shall be in operation during all stages of the activity. The amount of
exposed soil at every phase of construction shall be minimized to
reduce the potential for erosion.
(4) Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently
stabilized within one week from the time it was last actively
worked, by use of rip-rap, sod, seed, and mulch or other effective
measures. In all cases permanent stabilization shall occur within
nine months of the initial date of exposure. In addition:
(a) Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one
bale per 500 square feet and shall be maintained until a catch
of vegetation is established.
(b) Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other
suitable method may be required to maintain the mulch cover.
(c) Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to
avoid siltation into the water. Such measures may include the
use of staked hay bales and/or silt fences.
(5) Natural and man-made drainageways and drainage outlets shall be
protected from erosion from water flowing through them.
Drainageways shall be designed and constructed in order to carry
water from a 25-year storm or greater, and shall be stabilized with
vegetation or lined with rip-rap.
Q. Soils. All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the
proposed uses or structures can be established or maintained without
causing adverse environmental impacts, including severe erosion, mass
soil movement, improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during
or after construction. Proposed uses requiring subsurface waste
disposal, and commercial or industrial development and other similar
intensive land uses, shall require a soils report based on an on-site
investigation and be prepared by state-certified professionals. Certified
persons may include Maine Certified Soil Scientists, Maine Registered
Professional Engineers, Maine State Certified Geologists and other
persons who have training and experience in the recognition and
evaluation of soil properties. The report shall be based upon the
analysis of the characteristics of the soil and surrounding land and
water areas, maximum ground water elevation, presence of ledge,
§ 270-14 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-14
252:487
§ 270-15. Administration.
drainage conditions, and other pertinent data which the evaluator
deems appropriate. The soils report shall include recommendations for
a proposed use to counteract soil limitations where they exist.
R. Water quality. No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or
discharge to the waters of the state any pollutant that, by itself or in
combination with other activities or substances, will impair designated
uses or the water classification of the water body, tributary stream or
wetland.
S. Archaeological sites. Any proposed land use activity involving
structural development or soil disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed
on, or eligible to be listed on, the National Register of Historic Places,
as determined by the permitting authority, shall be submitted by the
applicant to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review
and comment at least 20 days prior to action being taken by the
permitting authority. The permitting authority shall consider comments
received from the Commission prior to rendering a decision on the
application.
A. Administering bodies and agents.
(1) Code Enforcement Officer. A Code Enforcement Officer shall be
appointed or reappointed annually by July 1st.
(2) Board of Appeals. A Board of Appeals shall be created in
accordance with the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691.
(3) Planning Board. A Planning Board shall be created in accordance
with the provisions of State law.
B. Permits required. After the effective date of this chapter, no person
shall, without first obtaining a permit, engage in any activity or use of
land or structure requiring a permit in the zone in which such activity
or use would occur; or expand, change, or replace an existing use or
structure; or renew a discontinued nonconforming use. A person who is
issued a permit pursuant to this chapter shall have a copy of the permit
on site while the work authorized by the permit is performed.
(1) A permit is not required for the replacement of an existing road
culvert as long as:
(a) The replacement culvert is not more than 25% longer than the
culvert being replaced;
(b) The replacement culvert is not longer than 75 feet; and
(c) Adequate erosion control measures are taken to prevent
sedimentation of the water and the crossing does not block fish
passage in the watercourse.
§ 270-14 SANFORD CODE § 270-15
252:488
(2) A permit is not required for an archaeological excavation as long as
the excavation is conducted by an archaeologist listed on the State
Historic Preservation Officer's level 1 or level 2 approved list, and
unreasonable erosion and sedimentation is prevented by means of
adequate and timely temporary and permanent stabilization
measures.
(3) Any permit required by this chapter shall be in addition to any
other permit required by other law or chapter.
C. Permit application.
(1) Every applicant for a permit shall submit a written application,
including a scaled site plan, on a form provided by the municipality,
to the appropriate official as indicated in § 270-12.
(2) All applications shall be signed by an owner or individual who can
show evidence of right, title or interest in the property or by an
agent, representative, tenant, or contractor of the owner with
authorization from the owner to apply for a permit hereunder,
certifying that the information in the application is complete and
correct.
(3) All applications shall be dated, and the Code Enforcement Officer
or Planning Board, as appropriate, shall note upon each application
the date and time of its receipt.
(4) If the property is not served by a public sewer, a valid plumbing
permit or a completed application for a plumbing permit, including
the site evaluation approved by the Plumbing Inspector, shall be
submitted whenever the nature of the proposed structure or use
would require the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal
system.
D. Procedures for administering permits. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall refer any permit application requiring Planning Board approval to
the Planning Board for consideration. Within 35 days of the date of
receiving a written application, the Planning Board shall notify the
applicant in writing either that the application is a complete
application, or, if the application is incomplete, that specified additional
material is needed to make the application complete. The Planning
Board shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny all permit
applications in writing within 35 days of receiving a completed
application. However, if the Planning Board has a waiting list of
applications, a decision on the application shall occur within 35 days
after the first available date on the Planning Board's agenda following
receipt of the completed application or within 35 days of the public
hearing, if the proposed use or structure is found to be in conformance
with the purposes and provisions of this chapter.
§ 270-15 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-15
252:489
(1) The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the proposed
land use activity is in conformity with the purposes and provisions
of this chapter.
(2) After receipt of a complete application, the Planning Board shall
approve an application or approve it with conditions if it makes a
positive finding based on the information presented that the
proposed use:
(a) Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
(b) Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to
surface waters;
(c) Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
(d) Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish,
aquatic life, bird or other wildlife habitat;
(e) Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points
of access to inland and coastal waters;
(f) Will protect archaeological and historic resources as
designated in the Comprehensive Plan;
(g) Will not adversely affect existing commercial fishing activities;
(h) Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development
and use; and
(i) Is in conformance with the provisions of § 270-13, Land Use
Standards.
(3) If a permit is either denied or approved with conditions, the
reasons as well as conditions shall be stated in writing. No approval
shall be granted for an application involving a structure if the
structure would be located in an unapproved subdivision or would
violate any other local ordinance, or regulation or statute
administered by the municipality.
E. Special Exceptions. In addition to the criteria specified in § 270-15.D
above, excepting structure setback requirements, the Planning Board
may approve a permit for a single family residential structure in a
Resource Protection zone provided that the applicant demonstrates
that all of the following conditions are met:
(1) There is no location on the property, other than a location within
the Resource Protection zone, where the structure can be built.
(2) The lot on which the structure is proposed is undeveloped and was
established and recorded in the York County Registry of Deeds
before the adoption of the Resource Protection zone.
§ 270-15 SANFORD CODE § 270-15
252:490
(3) All proposed buildings, sewage disposal systems and other
improvements are:
(a) Located on natural ground slopes of less than 20%; and
(b) Located outside the floodway of the 100-year flood-plain along
rivers and artificially formed great ponds along rivers, based
on detailed flood insurance studies and as delineated on the
Federal Emergency Management Agency's Flood Boundary
and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps; all
buildings, including basements, are elevated at least one foot
above the 100-year flood-plain elevation; and the development
is otherwise in compliance with any applicable municipal floodplain
ordinance.
(4) The total ground-floor area, including cantilevered or similar
overhanging extensions, of all principal and accessory structures is
limited to a maximum of 1,500 square feet. This limitation shall not
be altered by variance.
(5) All structures, except functionally water-dependent structures, are
set back from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary
stream or upland edge of a wetland to the greatest practical extent,
but not less than 75 feet, horizontal distance. In determining the
greatest practical extent, the Planning Board shall consider the
depth of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion,
the type and amount of vegetation to be removed, the proposed
building site's elevation in regard to the flood-plain, and its
proximity to moderate-value and high-value wetlands.
F. Expiration of permit. Permits shall expire one year from the date of
issuance if a substantial start is not made in construction or in the use
of the property during that period. If a substantial start is made within
one year of the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall have one
additional year to complete the project, at which time the permit shall
expire.
G. Installation of public utility service. No public utility, water district,
sanitary district, or any utility company of any kind may install services
to any new structure located in the Resource Protection or Shoreland
Overlay Zones unless written authorization attesting to the validity and
currency of all local permits required under this chapter or any
previous ordinance has been issued by the appropriate municipal
officials or other written arrangements have been made between the
municipal officials and the utility. Following installation of service, the
company or district shall forward the written authorization to the
municipal officials, indicating that installation has been completed.
H. Appeals.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals, as established by the Town Charter
and organized in accordance with Chapter 280, Zoning, is
§ 270-15 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-15
252:491
authorized to hear appeals relating to the administration of this
chapter in accordance with the procedures and standards of
Chapter 280, Zoning.
(2) A copy of each variance request, including the application and all
supporting information supplied by the applicant, shall be
forwarded by the municipal officials to the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection at least 20 days prior to
action by the Board of Appeals. Any comments received from the
Commissioner prior to the action by the Board of Appeals shall be
made part of the record and shall be taken into consideration by
the Board of Appeals.
(3) The Board of Appeals shall state the reasons and basis for its
decision, including a statement of the facts found and conclusions
reached by the Board. The Board shall cause written notice of its
decision to be mailed or hand-delivered to the applicant and to the
Department of Environmental Protection within seven days of the
Board's decision. Copies of written decisions of the Board of
Appeals shall be given to the Planning Board, Code Enforcement
Officer, and the municipal officers.
I. Enforcement.
(1) Nuisances. Any violation of this Chapter shall be deemed to be a
nuisance.
(2) Code Enforcement Officer.
(a) It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce
the provisions of this chapter. If the Code Enforcement Officer
shall find that any provision of this chapter is being violated, he
or she shall notify in writing the person responsible for such
violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering
the action necessary to correct it, including discontinuance of
illegal use of land, buildings or structures, or work being done,
removal of illegal buildings or structures, and abatement of
nuisance conditions. A copy of such notices shall be filed in the
Code Enforcement Office and be maintained as a permanent
record.
(b) The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct on-site
inspections to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and
conditions attached to permit approvals. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall also investigate all complaints of
alleged violations of this chapter.
(c) The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete record of
all essential transactions of the office, including applications
submitted, permits granted or denied, variances granted or
denied, revocation actions, revocation of permits, appeals,
court actions, violations investigated, violations found, and
§ 270-15 SANFORD CODE § 270-15
252:492
§ 270-16. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A use or structure which is incidental
and subordinate to the principal use or structure. Accessory uses, when
aggregated, shall not subordinate the principal use of the lot. A deck or
similar extension of the principal structure or a garage attached to the
principal structure by a roof or a common wall is considered part of the
principal structure.
AGGRIEVED PARTY — An owner of land whose property is directly or
indirectly affected by the granting or denial of a permit or variance under
this chapter; a person whose land abuts land for which a permit or variance
has been granted; or any other person or group of persons who have
suffered particularized injury as a result of the granting or denial of such
permit or variance.
AGRICULTURE — The production, keeping, or maintenance, for sale or
lease, of plants and/or animals, including but not limited to: forages and
sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry
fees collected. On a biennial basis, a summary of this record
shall be submitted to the Director of the Bureau of Land and
Water Quality within the Department of Environmental
Protection.
(3) Legal actions. When the above action does not result in the
correction or abatement of the violation or nuisance condition, the
Town Council, or its authorized agent, upon notice from the Code
Enforcement Officer, is hereby directed to institute any and all
actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, including
seeking injunctions of violations and the imposition of fines, that
may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this
chapter in the name of the municipality. The Town Council, or its
authorized agent, is hereby authorized to enter into administrative
consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating violations of this
chapter and recovering fines without court action. Such
agreements shall not allow an illegal structure or use to continue
unless there is clear and convincing evidence that the illegal
structure or use was constructed or conducted as a direct result of
erroneous advice given by an authorized municipal official and
there is no evidence that the owner acted in bad faith, or unless the
removal of the structure or use will result in a threat or hazard to
public health and safety or will result in substantial environmental
damage.
(4) Fines. Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a
landowner's agent or a contractor, who violates any provision or
requirement of this chapter shall be penalized in accordance with
30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
§ 270-15 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-16
252:493
and poultry products; livestock; fruits and vegetables; and ornamental and
greenhouse products. "Agriculture" does not include forest management
and timber harvesting activities.
AQUACULTURE — The growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater,
estuarine, or marine plant or animal species.
BASAL AREA — The area of cross section of a tree stem at 4 1/2 feet above
ground level and inclusive of bark.
BASEMENT — Any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of
six feet or more and having more than 50% of its volume below the existing
ground level.
BOAT LAUNCHING FACILITY — A facility designed primarily for the
launching and landing of watercraft, and which may include an access
ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for vehicles and trailers.
BUREAU — State of Maine Department of Conservation's Bureau of
Forestry.
CAMPGROUND — Any area or tract of land to accommodate two or more
parties in temporary living quarters, including but not limited to tents,
recreational vehicles or other shelters.
CANOPY — The more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a
wooded area.
COMMERCIAL USE — The use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than
a "home occupation", defined below, the intent and result of which activity
is the production of income from the buying and selling of goods and/or
services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings and/or dwelling units.
CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA — The cross-sectional area of a stream or
tributary stream channel is determined by multiplying the stream or
tributary stream channel width by the average stream or tributary stream
channel depth. The stream or tributary stream channel width is the straight
line distance from the normal high-water line on one side of the channel to
the normal high-water line on the opposite side of the channel. The average
stream or tributary stream channel depth is the average of the vertical
distances from a straight line between the normal high-water lines of the
stream or tributary stream channel to the bottom of the channel.
DBH — The diameter of a standing tree measured 4 1/2 feet from ground
level.
DEVELOPMENT — A change in land use involving alteration of the land,
water or vegetation, or the addition or alteration of structures or other
construction not naturally occurring.
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS — Numerical standards relating to
spatial relationships, including but not limited to setback, lot area, shore
frontage and height.
DISABILITY — Any disability, infirmity, malformation, disfigurement,
congenital defect or mental condition caused by bodily injury, accident,
§ 270-16 SANFORD CODE § 270-16
252:494
disease, birth defect, environmental conditions or illness; and also includes
the physical or mental condition of a person which constitutes a substantial
handicap as determined by a physician or in the case of mental handicap,
by a psychiatrist or psychologist, as well as any other health or sensory
impairment which requires special education, vocational rehabilitation or
related services.
DISRUPTION OF SHORELINE INTEGRITY — The alteration of the physical
shape, properties, or condition of a shoreline at any location by timber
harvesting and related activities. A shoreline where shoreline integrity has
been disrupted is recognized by compacted, scarified and/or rutted soil,
an abnormal channel or shoreline cross-section, and in the case of flowing
waters, a profile and character altered from natural conditions.
DRIVEWAY — A vehicular access-way less than 500 feet in length serving
two single-family dwellings or one two-family dwelling, or less.
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS — Operations conducted for the public health,
safety or general welfare, such as protection of resources from immediate
destruction or loss, law enforcement, and operations to rescue human
beings, property and livestock from the threat of destruction or injury.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Gas, electrical or communication facilities;
steam, fuel, electric power, or water transmission or distribution lines,
towers, and related equipment; telephone cables or lines, poles, and related
equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry, or other similar pipelines; municipal
sewage lines; collection or supply systems; and associated storage tanks.
Such systems may include towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes,
conduits, cables, fire alarms and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants,
and similar accessories, but shall not include service drops or buildings
which are necessary for the furnishing of such services.
EXPANSION OF A STRUCTURE — An increase in the floor area or volume
of a structure, including all extensions such as, but not limited to, attached
decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
EXPANSION OF USE — The addition of one or more months to a use's
operating season or the use of more floor area or ground area devoted to a
particular use.
FAMILY — One or more persons, including domestic employees, occupying
a dwelling unit and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit. A
community living facility, defined as a state-licensed housing facility for
eight or fewer persons in need of and receiving social services, such as but
not limited to mentally handicapped or developmentally disabled persons,
living as a housekeeping unit shall also be considered to house a single
family.
FLOODWAY — The area defined on the Federal Emergency Management
Agency's Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps or, if not shown, the channel
of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot in height.
§ 270-16 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-16
252:495
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure
enclosed by exterior walls, plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed
portions of a structure, such as porches and decks.
FORESTED WETLAND — A freshwater wetland dominated by woody
vegetation that is six meters (approximately 20 feet) tall or taller.
FOREST MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES — Timber cruising and other forest
resource evaluation activities, pesticide or fertilizer application,
management planning activities, timber stand improvement, pruning,
regeneration of forest stands, and other similar or associated activities,
exclusive of timber harvesting and the construction, creation or
maintenance of roads.
FOREST STAND — A contiguous group of trees sufficiently uniform in age
class distribution, composition, and structure, and growing on a site of
sufficiently uniform quality, to be a distinguishable unit.
FOUNDATION — The supporting substructure of a building or other
structure, excluding wooden sills and post supports, but including
basements, slabs, frost walls, or other base consisting of concrete, block,
brick or similar material.
FRESHWATER WETLAND —
FUNCTIONALLY WATER-DEPENDENT USES — Those uses that require,
for their primary purpose, location on submerged lands or that require
direct access to, or location in, inland waters and that cannot be located
away from these waters. The uses include but are not limited to commercial
and recreational fishing and boating facilities, excluding recreational boat
storage buildings, finfish and shellfish processing, fish storage and retail
and wholesale fish marketing facilities, waterfront dock and port facilities,
shipyards and boat building facilities, marinas, navigation aids, basins and
channels, retaining walls, industrial uses dependent upon waterborne
transportation or requiring large volumes of cooling or processing water
that can not reasonably be located or operated at an inland site, and uses
that primarily provide general public access to inland waters.
Freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, other than
forested wetlands, which are:
Of 10 or more contiguous acres, or of less than 10 contiguous acres
and adjacent to a surface water body, excluding any river, stream
or brook, such that in a natural state, the combined surface area is
in excess of 10 acres; and
(1)
Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency
and for a duration sufficient to support, and which under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soils.
(2)
A.
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions
of land that do not conform to the criteria of this definition.
B.
§ 270-16 SANFORD CODE § 270-16
252:496
GREAT POND — Any inland body of water which in a natural state has a
surface area in excess of 10 acres, and any inland body of water artificially
formed or increased which has a surface area in excess of 30 acres except,
for the purposes of this chapter, where the artificially formed or increased
inland body of water is completely surrounded by land held by a single
owner.
GREAT POND CLASSIFIED GPA — Any great pond classified GPA, pursuant
to 38 M.R.S.A. Article 4-A § 465-A. This classification includes some, but not
all impoundments of rivers that are defined as great ponds.
GROUND COVER — Small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the
partially decayed organic matter of the forest floor.
HARVEST AREA — The area where timber harvesting and related activities,
including the cutting of trees, skidding, yarding, and associated road
construction take place. The area affected by a harvest encompasses the
area within the outer boundaries of these activities, excepting unharvested
areas greater than 10 acres within the area affected by a harvest.
HEIGHT OF A ATRUCTURE — The vertical distance between the mean
original (prior to construction) grade at the downhill side of the structure
and the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys, steeples,
antennas, and similar appurtenances that have no floor area.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit,
provided that:
No person other than a member of the family residing on the premises
shall be engaged in such occupation; and
A.
The use of the premises for the home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants; and
B.
There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building
or premises or any visible evidence of the conduct of such home
occupation other than one sign, not exceeding six square feet in area,
non-illuminated and mounted flat against the wall of the residence; and
C.
No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater
volumes than would primarily be expected in the neighborhood, and
any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home
occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front
yard; and
D.
No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the home occupation is
conducted in a detached one-family dwelling, or outside the dwelling
unit if conducted in any other form of dwelling. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates
visual or audible interference in any radio or television receiver off the
premises or causes fluctuations in line voltage of the premises; and
E.
§ 270-16 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-16
252:497
INCREASE IN NONCONFORMITY OF A STRUCTURE — Any change in a
structure or property which causes further deviation from the dimensional
standard(s) creating the nonconformity such as, but not limited to,
reduction in water body, tributary stream or wetland setback distance,
increase in lot coverage, or increase in height of a structure. Property
changes or structure expansions which either meet the dimensional
standard or which cause no further increase in the linear extent of
nonconformance of the existing structure shall not be considered to
increase nonconformity. For example, there is no increase in nonconformity
with the setback requirement for water bodies, wetlands, or tributary
streams if the expansion extends no further into the required setback area
than does any portion of the existing nonconforming structure. Hence, a
structure may be expanded laterally provided that the expansion extends
no closer to the water body, tributary stream, or wetland than the closest
portion of the existing structure from that water body, tributary stream, or
wetland. Included in this allowance are expansions which in-fill irregularly
shaped structures.
INDIVIDUAL, PRIVATE CAMPSITE — An area of land which is not
associated with a campground but which is developed for repeated camping
by only one group not to exceed 10 individuals and which involves site
improvements which may include but not be limited to a gravel pad, parking
area, fireplace, or tent platform.
INDUSTRIAL — The assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing,
packaging or processing of goods or the extraction of minerals.
INSTITUTIONAL — A non-profit or quasi-public use, or institution such as a
church, library, public or private school, hospital, or municipally owned or
operated building, structure or land used for public purposes.
LAND MANAGEMENT ROAD — A route or track consisting of a bed of
exposed mineral soil, gravel, or other surfacing materials constructed for, or
created by, the passage of motorized vehicles and used primarily for timber
harvesting and related activities, including associated log yards, but not
including skid trails or skid roads.
LICENSED FORESTER — A forester licensed under 32 M.R.S.A. Chapter
76.
LOT AREA — The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot,
minus land below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge
of a wetland and areas beneath roads serving more than two lots.
MARINA — A business establishment having frontage on navigable water
and, as its principal use, providing for hire offshore moorings or docking
There shall be no stock-in-trade regularly maintained or any new
commodity sold on the premises; and
F.
The following are specifically excluded as home occupations:
convalescent or nursing home, tourist home, animal hospital,
restaurant, doctors' and dentists' offices, small engine repair, and
automotive tune-up.
G.
§ 270-16 SANFORD CODE § 270-16
252:498
facilities for boats, and which may also provide accessory services such as
boat and related sales, boat repair and construction, indoor and outdoor
storage of boats and marine equipment, bait and tackle shops, and marine
fuel service facilities.
MARKET VALUE — The estimated price a property will bring in the open
market and under prevailing market conditions in a sale between a willing
seller and a willing buyer, both conversant with the property and with
prevailing general price levels.
MINERAL EXPLORATION — Hand sampling, test boring, or other methods
of determining the nature or extent of mineral resources which create
minimal disturbance to the land and which include reasonable measures to
restore the land to its original condition.
MINERAL EXTRACTION — Any operation within any 12 month period
which removes more than 100 cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand,
gravel, clay, rock, peat, or other like material from its natural location and
transports the product removed away from the extraction site.
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH — The closest distance between the side lot lines of
a lot. When only two lot lines extend into the shoreland zone, both lot lines
shall be considered to be side lot lines.
MULTI-UNIT RESIDENTIAL — A residential structure containing three or
more residential dwelling units.
NATIVE — Indigenous to the local forests.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A structure that does
not meet one or more of the following dimensional requirements: the
minimum setback, maximum lot coverage, or maximum height standards of
the zone in which it is located. It is allowed solely because it was in lawful
existence at the time this chapter or subsequent amendment took effect.
NONCONFORMING CONDITION — Nonconforming lot, structure or use
which is allowed solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this
chapter or subsequent amendment took effect.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A single lot of record which, at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, does not meet the lot area,
frontage, or width requirements of the zone in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE — Use of buildings, structures, premises, land or
parts thereof which is not allowed in the zone in which it is situated, but
which is allowed to remain solely because it was in lawful existence at the
time this chapter or subsequent amendments took effect and, if established
after 1953, which has been issued a valid certificate of occupancy.
NORMAL HIGH-WATER LINE — That line which is apparent from visible
markings, changes in the character of soils due to prolonged action of
the water or changes in vegetation, and which distinguishes between
predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial land. Areas contiguous
with rivers and great ponds that support non-forested wetland vegetation
and hydric soils and that are at the same or lower elevation as the water
§ 270-16 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-16
252:499
level of the river or great pond during the period of normal high-water are
considered part of the river or great pond.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality,
trust, estate, partnership, association, two or more individuals having a joint
or common interest, or other legal entity.
PIERS, DOCKS, WHARFS, BRIDGES AND OTHER STRUCTURES AND
USES EXTENDING OVER OR BEYOND THE NORMAL HIGH-WATER LINE
OR WITHIN A WETLAND —
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — A building other than one which is used for
purposes wholly incidental or accessory to the use of another building or
use on the same premises.
PRINCIPAL USE — A use other than one which is wholly incidental or
accessory to another use on the same premises.
PUBLIC FACILITY — Any facility, including but not limited to buildings,
property, recreation areas, and roads, which is owned, leased, or otherwise
operated or funded by a governmental body or public entity.
RECENT FLOODPLAIN SOILS — The following soil series as described and
identified by the National Cooperative Soil Survey:
Temporary: structures which remain in or over the water for less than
seven months in any period of 12 consecutive months.
A.
Permanent: structures which remain in or over the water for seven
months or more in any period of 12 consecutive months.
B.
A. Fryeburg.
B. Lovewell.
C. Alluvial.
D. Podunk.
E. Suncook.
F. Hadley.
G. Medomak.
H. Cornish.
I. Rumney.
J. Sunday.
K. Limerick.
L. Ondawa.
M. Charles.
N. Saco.
§ 270-16 SANFORD CODE § 270-16
252:500
RECREATIONAL FACILITY — A place destined and equipped for the
conduct of sports, leisure time activities, and other customary and usual
recreational activities, excluding boat launching facilities.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle
designed to be towed and designed for temporary sleeping or living
quarters for one or more persons, and which may include a pickup camper,
travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and motor home. In order to be
considered a vehicle and not as a structure, the unit must remain with its
tires on the ground and must be registered with the State Division of Motor
Vehicles.
REPAIRS — Activities intended to restore an existing building or structure
to a sound condition without changing the size or use of the building or
structure. Repairs do not include:
REPLACEMENT SYSTEM — A system intended to replace:
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms designed and
equipped exclusively for use as permanent, seasonal, or temporary living
quarters for only one family at a time, and containing cooking, sleeping and
toilet facilities. The term shall include mobile homes and rental units that
contain cooking, sleeping, and toilet facilities regardless of the time-period
rented. Recreational vehicles are not residential dwelling units.
RESIDUAL BASAL AREA — The average of the basal area of trees remaining
on a harvested site.
RESIDUAL STAND — A stand of trees remaining in the forest following
timber harvesting and related activities.
RIPRAP — Rocks, irregularly shaped and at least six inches in diameter,
used for erosion control and soil stabilization, typically used on ground
slopes of two units horizontal to one unit vertical or less.
RIVER — A free-flowing body of water including its associated floodplain
wetlands from that point at which it provides drainage for a watershed of
25 square miles to its mouth.
O. Winooski.
A. An enlargement of the building or structure.
B. The enclosing of decks, porches, and similar areas.
The reconstruction of a building or structure which has been damaged,
destroyed, or removed.
C.
The modification of structural elements of the building or structure
unless required to comply with Code requirements.
D.
An existing system which is either malfunctioning or being upgraded
with no significant change of design flow or use of the structure; or
A.
B. Any existing overboard wastewater discharge.
§ 270-16 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-16
252:501
ROAD — A route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil,
gravel, asphalt, or other surfacing material constructed for or created by
the repeated passage of motorized vehicles excluding a driveway as defined.
SERVICE DROP — Any utility line extension which does not cross or run
beneath any portion of a water body, provided that:
SETBACK — The nearest horizontal distance from the normal high-water
line of a water body or tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, to the
nearest part of a structure, road, parking space or other regulated object or
area.
SHORE FRONTAGE — The length of a lot bordering on a water body or
wetland measured in a straight line between the intersections of the lot
lines with the shoreline.
SHORELAND ZONE — The land area located within 250 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of any great pond or river; within
250 feet of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland; or within 75 feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream.
SHORELINE — The normal high-water line, or upland edge of a freshwater
wetland.
SKID ROAD OR SKID TRAIL — A route repeatedly used by forwarding
machinery or animal to haul or drag forest products from the stump to the
yard or landing, the construction of which requires minimal excavation.
SLASH — The residue, e.g., treetops and branches, left on the ground after
a timber harvest.
STREAM — A free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond
or the confluence of two perennial streams as depicted on the most recent
edition of a United States Geological Survey 7.5-minute series topographic
map or, if not available, a 15-minute series topographic map, to the point
where the body of water becomes a river or flows to another water body or
wetland within the shoreland area.
STRUCTURE — Anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, goods or property of any kind, together with anything
In the case of electric service:
The placement of wires and/or the installation of utility poles is
located entirely upon the premises of the customer requesting
service or upon a roadway right-of-way; and
(1)
(2) The total length of the extension is less than 1,000 feet.
A.
In the case of telephone service:
The extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation
of telephone wires to existing utility poles; or
(1)
The extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or
placement underground is less than 1,000 feet in length.
(2)
B.
§ 270-16 SANFORD CODE § 270-16
252:502
constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, exclusive
of fences, and poles, wiring and other aerial equipment normally associated
with service drops as well as guying and guy anchors. The term includes
structures temporarily or permanently located, such as decks, patios, and
satellite dishes.
SUBSTANTIAL START — Completion of 30% of a permitted structure or use
measured as a percentage of estimated total cost.
SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system designed to
dispose of waste or waste water on or beneath the surface of the earth;
includes, but is not limited to: septic tanks; disposal fields; grandfathered
cesspools; holding tanks; pretreatment filter, piping, or any other fixture,
mechanism, or apparatus used for those purposes; does not include any
discharge system licensed under 36 M.R.S.A. § 414, any surface waste
water disposal system, or any municipal or quasi-municipal sewer or waste
water treatment system.
SUSTAINED SLOPE — A change in elevation where the referenced percent
grade is substantially maintained or exceeded throughout the measured
area.
TIMBER HARVESTING — The cutting and removal of timber for the primary
purpose of selling or processing forest products. The cutting or removal of
trees in the shoreland zone on a lot that has less than two acres within
the shoreland zone shall not be considered timber harvesting. Such cutting
or removal of trees shall be regulated pursuant to § 270-14O, Clearing or
Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting.
TRIBUTARY STREAM — A channel between defined banks created by the
action of surface water, which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial
vegetation or by the presence of a bed devoid of topsoil, containing
waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material or bedrock; and which
is connected hydrologically with other water bodies. "Tributary stream"
does not include rills or gullies forming because of accelerated erosion in
disturbed soils where the natural vegetation cover has been removed by
human activity. This definition does not include the term "stream" as defined
elsewhere in this chapter, and only applies to that portion of the tributary
stream located within the shoreland zone of the receiving water body or
wetland.
UPLAND EDGE OF A WETLAND — The boundary between upland and
wetland. For purposes of a freshwater wetland, the upland edge is formed
where the soils are not saturated for a duration sufficient to support
wetland vegetation; or where the soils support the growth of wetland
vegetation, but such vegetation is dominated by woody stems that are six
meters (approximately 20 foot) tall or taller.
VEGETATION — All live trees, shrubs, and other plants, including, without
limitation, trees both over and under four inches in diameter, measured at
4 1/2 feet above ground level.
§ 270-16 WOOD, SALE OF § 270-16
252:503
VOLUME OF A STRUCTURE — The volume of all portions of a structure
enclosed by roof and fixed exterior walls as measured from the exterior
faces of these walls and roof.
WATER BODY — Any great pond, river or stream.
WATER CROSSING — Any project extending from one bank to the opposite
bank of a river, stream, tributary stream, or wetland whether under,
through, or over the water or wetland. Such projects include, but may not
be limited to, roads, fords, bridges, culverts, water lines, sewer lines, and
cables, as well as maintenance work on these crossings. This definition
includes crossings for timber harvesting equipment and related activities.
WETLAND — See "freshwater wetland."
WOODY VEGETATION — Live tees or woody, non-herbaceous shrubs.
Chapter 272
(RESERVED)
Chapter 275
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 8.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 90.
Streets, sidewalks and public areas — See Ch.
226.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 265.
Shoreland zoning — See Ch. 270.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 270-16 SANFORD CODE § 270-16
252:504
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 275-1. Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are to:
§ 275-2. Authority; title.
§ 275-3. Administration; applicability.
§ 275-4. Amendments.
A. Provide for the expeditious, equitable, and efficient review of proposed
subdivisions;
B. Establish standards for the application of the approval criteria of the
State Subdivision Law, found in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4401 et seq.;
C. Assure that development in the Town of Sanford meets the goals and
conforms to the policies of the adopted Comprehensive Plan;
D. Assure the comfort, convenience, safety, health, and welfare of the
people of the Town of Sanford;
E. Protect the environment and conserve the natural and cultural
resources identified in the adopted Comprehensive Plan as important to
the community;
F. Assure that an adequate level of services and facilities is available to
the residents of new subdivisions and that lots in subdivisions can
support the proposed uses and structures;
G. Minimize the potential impacts from new subdivisions on neighboring
properties and on the municipality; and
H. Promote the development of an economically sound and stable
community.
A. This chapter has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of
30-A M.R.S.A. § 4403.
B. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision
Ordinance of the Town of Sanford, Maine."
A. The Planning Board of the Town of Sanford, hereinafter called the
"Board," shall administer this chapter.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall pertain to all land and buildings
proposed for subdivision within the boundaries of the Town of Sanford.
A. This chapter may be amended by vote of the Town Council of the Town
of Sanford.
§ 275-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-4
252:505
B. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing prior to the adoption of
any amendments to this chapter. Notice of the public hearing shall be
provided at least seven days in advance of the hearing.
§ 275-4 SANFORD CODE § 275-4
252:506
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 275-5. Word usage.
In general, words and terms used in this chapter shall have their customary
dictionary meanings. More specifically, any word or term defined in the
most recent revision of Chapter 280, Zoning, of the Town Code shall have
the definition contained in that chapter, unless defined differently below.
§ 275-6. Definitions.
Other words and terms used herein are defined as follows:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Housing units that will meet the sales price
and/or rental targets established by the Comprehensive Plan for housing
affordability.
APPLICANT — The person applying for subdivision approval under these
regulations.
AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT) — The average number of vehicles per day
that enter and exit the premises or travel over a specific section of road.
BUFFER AREA — A part of a property or an entire property which is not
built upon and is specifically intended to separate and thus minimize the
effects of a land use activity (e.g., noise, dust, visibility, glare, etc.) on
adjacent areas.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM (CIP) — The municipality's proposed
schedule of future projects listed in order of construction priority together
with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project.
CAPITAL INVESTMENT PLAN — The portion of the Comprehensive Plan
that identifies the projects for consideration for inclusion within the capital
improvements program, together with an estimate of the order of
magnitude for the cost of each project.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A subdivision meeting the requirements of
§ 280-89 of Chapter 280, Zoning, in which the lot sizes are reduced below
those normally required in the zoning district in which the development is
located in return for the provision of permanent common open space.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Land within or related to a subdivision, not
individually owned or within an individual lot, which is designed and
intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the
development or the general public. It may include complementary
structures and improvements typically used for maintenance and operation
of the open space, such as for outdoor recreation.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application shall be considered complete
upon submission of the required fee and all information required by these
regulations or by a vote of the Planning Board to waive the submission of
required information. The Planning Director shall issue a written statement
to the applicant upon his determination that an application is complete.
§ 275-5 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-6
252:507
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Town of Sanford Comprehensive Plan as
adopted by the Town's legislative body.
CONCEPTUAL PLAN — A preliminary plan showing the major features of
the site and development concepts in a generalized format.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT — A nonpossessory interest in real property
imposing limitations or affirmative obligations, the purposes of which
include retaining or protecting natural, scenic or open space values of real
property, assuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational or
open space use, protecting natural resources, or maintaining air or water
quality.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
DEVELOPED AREA — Any area on which a site improvement or change is
made, including buildings, landscaping, parking areas, and streets.
DIRECT WATERSHED OF A GREAT POND — That portion of the watershed
that drains directly to the great pond without first passing through an
upstream great pond. For the purposes of these regulations, the watershed
boundaries shall be as delineated in the Comprehensive Plan. Due to the
scale of the map in the Comprehensive Plan there may be small inaccuracies
in the delineation of the watershed boundary. Where there is a dispute
as to exact location of a watershed boundary, the Board or its designee
and the applicant shall conduct an on-site investigation to determine where
the drainage divide lies. If the Board and the applicant cannot agree on
the location of the drainage divide based on the on-site investigation, the
burden of proof shall lie with the applicant to provide the Board with
information from a registered professional engineer showing where the
drainage divide lies.
DRIVEWAY — A vehicular accessway serving two dwelling units or fewer.
ENGINEERED SUBSURFACE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A
subsurface wastewater disposal system designed, installed, and operated
as a single unit to treat and dispose of 2,000 gallons of wastewater or
more per day or any system designed to be capable of treating wastewater
with higher BOD5 and total suspended solids concentrations than domestic
wastewater.
FINAL PLAN — The final drawings on which the applicant's plan of
subdivision is presented to the Board for approval and which, if approved,
may be recorded at the Registry of Deeds.
FRESHWATER WETLAND — Areas that are inundated or saturated by
surface or groundwater at a frequency and for a duration sufficient to
support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils and that are
not part of a great pond, coastal wetland, river, stream or brook. Freshwater
wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do
not conform to the above criteria.
GREAT POND — Any inland body of water that in a natural state has a
surface area in excess of 10 acres, and any inland body of water artificially
§ 275-6 SANFORD CODE § 275-6
252:508
formed or increased which has a surface area in excess of 30 acres. For the
purposes of these regulations, no artificially formed or increased pond will
be considered a great pond if it is completely surrounded by land held by a
single owner.
HIGH-INTENSITY SOIL SURVEY — A map prepared by a certified soil
scientist identifying the soil types down to 1/8 acre or less at a scale
equivalent to the subdivision plan submitted. The soils shall be identified
in accordance with the National Cooperative Soil Survey. The map shall
show the location of all test pits used to identify the soils and shall be
accompanied by a log of each sample point identifying the textural
classification and the depth to seasonal high-water table or bedrock at
that location. Single soil test pits and their evaluation for suitability for
subsurface wastewater disposal systems shall not be considered to
constitute high-intensity soil surveys.
HIGH-WATER MARK — That line that is apparent from visible markings,
changes in the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water, or
changes in vegetation that distinguishes between predominantly aquatic
and predominantly terrestrial land. In the case of wetlands adjacent to
rivers, streams, brooks, or ponds, the normal high-water mark is the upland
edge of the wetland and not the edge of the open water.
INITIATE CONSTRUCTION — The completion of a portion of the
improvements which represents no less than 30% of the costs of the
proposed improvements within a subdivision. If the subdivision is to consist
of individual lots to be sold or leased by the subdivider, the cost of
construction of buildings on those lots shall not be included. If the
subdivision is a multifamily development, or if the applicant proposes to
construct the buildings within the subdivision, the cost of building
construction shall be included in the total costs of proposed improvements.
LEVEL OF SERVICE — A description of the operating conditions a driver
will experience while traveling on a particular street or highway calculated
in accordance with the provisions of the Highway Capacity Manual, 1991
Edition, published by the National Academy of Sciences, Transportation
Research Board. There are six levels of service ranging from Level of
Service A, with free traffic flow and no delays, to Level of Service F, with
forced flow and congestion resulting in complete failure of the roadway.
MEDIUM-INTENSITY SOIL SURVEY — A map identifying the soil types
down to mapping units of three acres or less at a scale equivalent to the
subdivision plan submitted. The soils shall be identified in accordance with
the National Cooperative Soil Survey.
MULTIFAMILY DEVELOPMENT — A subdivision that contains three or
more dwelling units on land in common ownership, such as apartment
buildings, condominiums, or mobile home parks.
NEW STRUCTURE OR STRUCTURES — Includes any structure for which
construction began on or after September 23, 1988. The area included in
the expansion of an existing structure is deemed to be a new structure.
§ 275-6 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-6
252:509
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — The highest level of flooding that, on the
average, has a one-percent chance of occurring in any given year.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of Sanford.
PLANNING DIRECTOR — The staff person responsible for the direction of
the Planning Department, his/her designee, or other person designated by
the Town Council to be responsible for development review.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — The preliminary drawings showing the proposed
layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Board for its
consideration.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer registered in the
State of Maine.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — A water supply system that provides water to
at least 15 service connections or services water to at least 25 individuals
daily for at least 30 days a year.
RECORD DRAWINGS — Scaled detailed drawings of the completed or
encountered existing infrastructure within a public right-of-way or
easement. The plans shall be prepared and organized in a form that is
consistent with the design plans submitted for Planning Board review
during the subdivision approval process or engineering review by the Town
Engineer. The plans shall be drawn and noted with field measurements, i.e.,
three-way ties, made by the contractor installing the infrastructure. The
plans shall note the infrastructure materials, widths, diameters, elevations,
service connection locations at the main and the right-of-way line, ledge
profile, permanent reference benchmark, and other appropriate data
necessary to show the completed or encountered existing infrastructure.
The record drawing plan set shall include a copy of the signed plat.
RECORDING PLAN — An original of the final plan, suitable for recording at
the Registry of Deeds, that shows only information relevant to the transfer
of an interest in the property and which does not show other information
presented on the plan, such as sewer and water line locations and sizes,
culverts, and building lines.
RESERVED AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Affordable housing that is
restricted by means of deed covenants, financing restrictions, or other longterm
binding methods to occupancy by households making 80% or less of
the area median household income.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of an unobstructed view from a particular
access point to the farthest visible point of reference on a roadway. It is used
in these regulations as a reference for unobstructed road visibility.
SITE INVENTORY AND ANALYSIS — Inventory maps, renderings, and
supporting data describing the site proposed to be subdivided and analyzing
the opportunities and constraints for subdivision and development. The
inventory and analysis are submitted for initial review prior to submitting a
formal application for subdivision approval.
§ 275-6 SANFORD CODE § 275-6
252:510
SKETCH PLAN — A preliminary plan showing the major features of the site
and the preliminary, generalized layout of proposed roads, lots, and other
improvements.
STREET CLASSIFICATION —
SUBDIVISION — The division of a tract or parcel of land into three or
more lots within any five-year period that begins after September 23, 1971.
This definition applies whether the division is accomplished by sale, lease,
development, buildings or otherwise. The term "subdivision" also includes
the division of a new structure or structures on a tract or parcel of land
into three or more dwelling units within a five-year period, the construction
or placement of three or more dwelling units on a single tract or parcel of
land, and the division of an existing structure or structures previously used
for commercial or industrial use into three or more dwelling units within a
five-year period.
ARTERIAL STREET — Those streets listed in the definition of "arterial"
in Chapter 280, Zoning.
A.
COLLECTOR STREET — Those existing streets listed in the definition
of "collector" in Chapter 280, Zoning, or a proposed street that has a
projected average daily traffic of 1,000 or more trips.
B.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street with only one outlet and having the other end
for the reversal of traffic movement.
C.
COMMERCIAL STREET — Streets servicing industrial or commercial
uses.
D.
LOCAL STREET — An existing street not defined as an arterial or
collector or a proposed street which has a projected average daily
traffic of fewer than 1,000 trips.
E.
PRIVATE WAY — A minor street meeting the requirements of § 280-85
of Chapter 280, Zoning.
F.
In determining whether a tract or parcel of land is divided into three or
more lots, the first dividing of such tract or parcel shall be considered
to create the first two lots and the next dividing of either of the first two
lots, by whomever accomplished, unless otherwise exempted herein,
shall be considered to create a third lot, unless:
Both dividings are accomplished by a subdivider who has retained
one of the lots for the subdivider's own use as a single-family
residence or for open space land as defined in 36 M.R.S.A. § 1102
for a period of at least five years before the second dividing occurs;
or
(1)
The division of the tract or parcel is otherwise exempt under this
definition.
(2)
A.
A lot of 40 or more acres shall not be counted as a lot, except where the
lot or parcel from which it was divided is located entirely or partially
B.
§ 275-6 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-6
252:511
SUBDIVISION, DEVELOPMENTAL — Any activity meeting the state
definition of "subdivision" that is not a major or minor subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision containing 10 or more lots or
dwelling units or any subdivision requiring any new street or municipal
facilities.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: — Any subdivision containing nine or fewer lots
or dwelling units. All lots shall be located on an existing, accepted public
street, and no new public services or extensions of municipal facilities shall
be required.
TOWN ENGINEER — Any registered professional engineer hired or
retained by the Town, either as staff or on a consulting basis.
TRACT OR PARCEL OF LAND — All contiguous land in the same ownership,
provided that lands located on opposite sides of a public or private road
shall be considered each a separate tract or parcel of land unless such road
was established by the owner of land on both sides thereof.
USABLE OPEN SPACE — That portion of the common open space which,
due to its slope, drainage characteristics and soil conditions, can be used
for active recreation, horticulture or agriculture. To be considered usable
open space, the land must not be poorly drained or very poorly drained or
have ledge outcroppings or areas with slopes exceeding 10%.
within any shoreland area as defined in 38 M.R.S.A. § 435 or Chapter
270, Shoreland Zoning, of the Town Code.
A division accomplished by devise, condemnation, order of court, gift to
a person related to the donor by blood, marriage or adoption or a gift
to a municipality or by transfer of any interest in land to the owner of
land abutting that land does not create a lot or lots for the purposes of
these regulations, unless the intent of the transferor in any transfer or
gift is to avoid the objectives of these regulations. If real estate exempt
under this subsection by a gift to a person related to the donor by blood,
marriage or adoption is transferred within five years to another person
not related to the donor of the exempt real estate by blood, marriage
or adoption, then the previously exempt division creates a lot or lots for
the purposes of this definition. The grant of bona fide security interest
in an entire lot that has been exempted from the definition under this
subsection, or subsequent transfer of that entire lot by the original
holder of the security interest or that person's successor in interest,
does not create a lot for the purposes of this definition, unless the intent
of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of these regulations.
C.
In determining the number of dwelling units in a structure, the
provisions regarding the determination of the number of lots shall
apply, including exemptions from the definition of a subdivision of land.
D.
§ 275-6 SANFORD CODE § 275-6
252:512
ARTICLE III
Administrative Procedures
[Amended 1-18-2005]
§ 275-7. Planning Board procedures; agenda for meetings.
To establish an orderly, equitable, and expeditious procedure for reviewing
subdivisions and to avoid unnecessary delays in processing applications
for subdivision review, the Board shall adopt Planning Board procedures
governing the handling of application submissions, including the
establishment of a submittal deadline for being placed upon the Board's
agenda. The Planning Director shall prepare a written agenda for each
regularly scheduled meeting. The agenda shall be prepared in advance
of the meeting, distributed to the Board members and any applicants
appearing on the agenda, and posted at the municipal offices. Except for
good cause shown and as otherwise permitted by law, the Board shall take
no action on any application not appearing on the Board's written agenda.
§ 275-8. Application and development review fees.
A. Application fees. Each application requires the payment of a
nonrefundable application fee. These fees vary based upon the type of
application. They are itemized in the chart included at the end of this
chapter.
B. Development review fee. The Town may use contracted staff such as the
Town Engineer or Town Attorney or outside consultants to review those
aspects of a subdivision proposal that are outside of the expertise of
Town staff. The cost of this outside review shall be borne by the
applicant. To cover the cost of this outside review, an applicant shall
deposit a development review fee with the Planning Department at the
time of the submission of an application. The Planning Department shall
maintain a project account for each application showing the amounts of
the deposits and the charges incurred for review of the subdivision
proposal. The initial deposit for an application is shown on the chart
included at the end of this chapter. If the amount initially deposited in
the project account is drawn down by 75% or more, the Planning
Department shall notify the applicant and require that an additional
amount equal to 50% of the initial deposit be submitted. The
Department shall continue to notify the applicant and require additional
deposits as needed. The applicant may also be required, as a condition
of approval, to post additional amounts to cover the cost of construction
compliance review. No certificates of occupancy are to be issued until
all outstanding fees have been paid. Any balance in the account
remaining after a decision on the final acceptance of the project by the
Planning Director, Town Engineer and Code Enforcement Officer shall
be returned to the applicant. Payment of this fee may not be waived.
Further, payment of the fee shall be deemed a cost of review and shall
not be contingent on plan approval. Any individual or firm who has an
outstanding review account balance is not eligible to submit a new site
§ 275-7 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-8
252:513
plan or subdivision application or to obtain any building permits until
the outstanding balance is paid in full. [Amended 6-16-2015 by
Order No. 15-67.09]
§ 275-8 SANFORD CODE § 275-8
252:514
ARTICLE IV
Preapplication Procedures
§ 275-9. Purpose.
The purpose of the preapplication process is for the applicant to present
general information regarding the proposed subdivision to the staff and
Board and receive the staff's and Board's comments prior to the expenditure
of substantial sums of money on surveying and engineering by the
applicant.
§ 275-10. Activities.
The preapplication phase consists of the following four activities:
§ 275-11. Preapplication conference and site inspection.
§ 275-12. Classification of subdivision.
Within 10 days of the preapplication conference and site inspection, the
Planning Director shall tentatively classify the subdivision as a minor or
major subdivision and advise the applicant of this determination. The
Planning Board shall review the classification of the project when it first
considers the application and shall determine if it is a major or minor
subdivision. The classification may later be revised if the scope of the
project changes.
A. A preapplication conference and site inspection.
B. The classification of the project.
C. The determination of the contour interval.
D. The submission and review by the Board of a site inventory and
analysis.
A. All applicants for subdivision review shall schedule a preapplication
conference with the Planning Director. The purpose of this activity is to
familiarize the applicant with the Town's procedures and requirements
and to familiarize the Town's representatives with the nature of the
project. Such review shall not cause the plan to be a pending
application or proceeding under 1 M.R.S.A. § 302. No decisions relative
to the plan shall be made at this meeting.
B. The preapplication conference shall be held by the Planning Director.
The Planning Director may ask other Town staff, such as the Town
Engineer and a representative of the Planning Board, to participate in
the preapplication conference if warranted by the scale and/or nature
of the proposal. As part of the meeting, the Town representative(s) and
the applicant may visit the proposed site. At this meeting, the applicant
shall be prepared to discuss his/her plans for the development in a
general nature.
§ 275-9 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-13
252:515
§ 275-13. Contour interval.
Within 10 days of the tentative classification of the project by the Planning
Director, the Town Engineer shall inform the applicant in writing of the
required contour interval on the preliminary plan, or final plan in the case of
a minor subdivision. The applicant may appeal the Engineer's determination
to the Planning Board by filing a written request with the Planning Director.
This request will be considered by the Planning Board at the next meeting
at which the application is considered.
§ 275-14. Site inventory and analysis procedures.
A. After the preapplication conference has been held, the applicant must
submit a site inventory and analysis for Planning Board review. The
Planning Board may waive this requirement or reduce the amount of
information required for the revision of previously approved plans and
for minor subdivisions involving fewer than five lots. The Board may
waive or reduce the requirements only if the Board finds that the
analysis provided by this process is not necessary due to the scale of the
project. Unless waived by the Board, this review must be completed
prior to the preparation and submission of a subdivision application and
supporting documentation. The Board shall review the site inventory
and analysis with the applicant and shall authorize the submission of
the formal application when the site analysis phase is complete. The
site inventory and analysis shall be submitted to the Planning Director.
B. Upon receipt of a site inventory and analysis, the Planning Director
shall give the applicant a dated receipt. Within 10 days of the receipt of
a site inventory and analysis submission, the Planning Director shall
review the material and determine whether the submission is complete.
If the submission is determined to be incomplete, the Planning Director
shall notify the applicant in writing of this finding, shall specify the
additional material required to make the submission complete, and
shall advise the applicant that the application will not be considered by
the Board until the additional information is submitted. These steps,
except the notification requirements, shall be repeated until the
application is found to be complete. When the submission is determined
to be complete, the Planning Director shall notify the applicant in
writing of this finding, place the item on the agenda for review by the
Planning Board, and distribute copies of the submission to the members
of the Site Plan Review Committee for their review.
C. The Planning Board may hold an on-site inspection of the site to review
the existing conditions, field verify the information submitted, and
investigate the development proposal. The Board may schedule this
visit either before or after the first meeting at which the inventory and
analysis are considered. The Board may decide not to hold an on-site
inspection. If a review is pending during a period when there is snow
cover, the deadline by which the Planning Board shall take final action
on the site inventory and analysis may be extended, which extension
§ 275-13 SANFORD CODE § 275-14
252:516
§ 275-15. Site inventory and analysis submission requirements.
The site inventory and analysis are intended to provide the applicant, the
Planning Board, and the staff with a better understanding of the site and
the opportunities and constraints imposed on its use by both the natural
and built environment. It is anticipated that this analysis will result in a
subdivision plan that reflects the conditions of the site; those areas most
suitable for the proposed use will be utilized, while those that are not
suitable or present significant constraints will be avoided to the maximum
extent possible. Therefore, the submission requirements provide that the
applicant submit basic information about the site and an analysis of that
information. The site inventory and analysis submission must contain, at a
minimum, the following information:
shall not exceed 30 days after the Board is able to conduct an on-site
inspection.
D. Within 60 days of the Planning Director finding that the site inventory
and analysis submission is complete, the Board shall complete its
review of the submission and notify the applicant in writing of its
findings.
E. The review of the site inventory and analysis shall be informational and
shall not result in any formal approval or disapproval of the project. The
Board shall review the submission to determine if the information
provides a clear understanding of the site and identifies opportunities
and constraints that help determine how it should be used and
developed. The Board shall also consider any input received from
members of the staff. The outcome of the review process shall be the
identification by the Board of the issues and constraints that must be
addressed in the formal subdivision application. The Board shall also
act on any requests for waivers at this time.
A. The names, addresses, and phone numbers of the record owner and the
applicant.
B. The names and addresses of all consultants working on the project.
C. Evidence of right, title, or interest in the property.
D. The appropriate application fee.
E. Fifteen copies of an accurate scale inventory plan of the parcel at a
scale of not more than 50 feet to the inch showing as a minimum:
(1) The proposed name of the development, North arrow, date, and
scale.
(2) The boundaries of the parcel based upon a standard boundary
survey prepared by a registered land surveyor and giving the
bearings and distances of all property lines.
(3) The relationship of the site to the surrounding area.
§ 275-14 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-15
252:517
(4) The topography of the site at an appropriate contour interval
depending on the nature of the use and character of the site (in
many instances, submittal of the U.S.G.S. ten-foot contours will be
adequate).
(5) The major natural features of the site and within 500 feet of the
site, including wetlands, streams, ponds, floodplains, groundwater
aquifers, significant wildlife habitats or other important natural
features (if none, so state).
(6) Existing buildings, structures, or other improvements on the site (if
none, so state).
(7) Existing restrictions or easements on the site (if none, so state).
(8) The location and size of existing utilities or improvements servicing
the site (if none, so state).
(9) The soils on the site through a Class C medium-intensity soil survey.
(10) Any potential sources of fire protection water supply within 1/2
mile of the site, including public water mains, existing fire ponds,
or possible sources of water supply.
F. Fifteen copies of a site analysis plan at the same scale as the inventory
plans (see Subsection E above) highlighting the opportunities and
constraints of the site. This plan should enable the Planning Board to
determine: which portions of the site are unsuitable for development or
use; which portions of the site are unsuitable for on-site sewage
disposal if public sewerage is not available; which areas of the site have
development limitations (steep slopes, soil constraints, aquifers,
wetlands, wildlife habitat, floodplains, drainage, etc.) that should be
addressed in the subdivision plan; which areas of the site may be
subject to off-site conflicts or concerns (noise, lighting, traffic, etc.); and
which areas are well suited for the proposed use.
G. Fifteen copies of a narrative describing the existing conditions of the
site, the proposed development, and the constraints and opportunities
created by the site. This submission should include a narrative
description of the existing road system that will provide access to the
project and any issues related to traffic capacity, safety, sight distances,
or other traffic considerations together with any preliminary studies
done relative to the site, including wetland delineations, traffic studies,
market studies, or other information that will help the Board
understand the project.
H. Fifteen copies of a conceptual plan, drawn at the same scale as the site
analysis plan, showing the anticipated road layout and major
development features or, if the subdivision is classified as a minor
subdivision, a sketch plan, drawn at the same scale as the site analysis
plan, showing the tentative layout of lots and roads.
§ 275-15 SANFORD CODE § 275-15
252:518
I. Written requests for any waivers from the minor subdivision or
preliminary major subdivision submission requirements or development
standards of Article XI.
§ 275-15 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-15
252:519

ARTICLE V
Minor Subdivision
§ 275-16. General provisions.
The Board may require that a minor subdivision comply with some or all
of the submission requirements for a major subdivision. The additional
information may be required when the Planning Board finds it necessary
to decide if the criteria for approval from 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4404 or the
standards from Article X of these regulations have been met.
§ 275-17. Procedure.
A. Within six months after the classification of the project as a minor
subdivision and the review or waiver of the site inventory and analysis
by the Board, the applicant shall submit an application for approval of a
final plan. Applications shall be submitted to the Planning Department.
Failure to submit the application within six months shall require
resubmission of the inventory and analysis to the Board. The final plan
shall reflect the opportunities and constraints identified in the site
inventory and analysis and address any issues identified by the
Planning Board in the review of the site inventory and analysis.
B. Upon receipt of an application, the Planning Department shall issue the
applicant a dated receipt for the application.
C. Within 10 days of the receipt of the final plan application, the Planning
Director shall determine whether the application is complete. If the
application is complete, the Planning Director shall notify the applicant
in writing of the determination. If the application is not complete, the
Planning Director shall notify the applicant of the specific additional
material needed to complete the application and that the application
will not be considered by the Board until the additional information is
provided.
D. Once the Planning Director has determined that the application is
complete, the Planning Director shall:
(1) Place the item on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled
workshop meeting of the Planning Board for which the appropriate
notification can be given.
(2) Distribute the application to the members of the Site Plan Review
Committee for their review and comment.
(3) Notify all owners of abutting property in writing that an application
for subdivision approval has been submitted, specifying the
location of the proposed subdivision, including a general
description of the project, and advising the abutters of the date,
time, and location of the workshop and public hearing at which the
application will be considered by the Board.
§ 275-16 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-17
252:521
§ 275-18. Submissions.
(4) Notify the clerk and the review authority of the neighboring
municipalities if any portion of the subdivision abuts or crosses the
municipal boundary.
E. The applicant, or his/her duly authorized representative, shall attend
the workshop and meetings of the Board to present the final plan.
Failure to attend the meeting to present the final plan shall result in a
delay of the Board's consideration of the plan until the next meeting
that the applicant attends.
F. Following review of the application at a workshop meeting, the Board
shall hold a public hearing on the application at its next regular
meeting. Prior to the hearing, the Board shall publish a notice of the
date, time and place of the hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality at least two times. The date of the first
publication shall be at least seven days prior to the hearing. A copy of
the notice shall be mailed to the applicant.
G. Within 45 days from the public hearing or within another time limit as
may be otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board and the applicant,
the Board shall make findings of fact and conclusions relative to the
criteria contained in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4404 and the standards of Article
X. If the Board finds that all the criteria of the statute and the standards
of Article X have been met, the Board shall approve the final plan. If the
Board finds that any of the criteria of the statute or the standards of
Article X have not been met, the Board shall either deny the application
or approve the application with conditions to ensure all of the criteria
and standards will be met by the subdivision. The Board shall issue a
written notice of its decision to the applicant, including findings,
conclusions and any reasons for denial or conditions of approval.
A. The final plan application shall consist of the following items:
(1) A fully executed and signed copy of the application for minor
subdivision review (provided by the Town).
(2) A location map drawn at a size adequate to show the relationship of
the proposed subdivision to the adjacent properties and to allow
the Board to locate the subdivision within the municipality. The
location map shall show:
(a) Existing subdivisions in the proximity of the proposed
subdivision.
(b) Locations and names of existing and proposed streets.
(c) Boundaries and designations of zoning districts.
§ 275-17 SANFORD CODE § 275-18
252:522
(d) An outline of the proposed subdivision and any remaining
portion of the owner's property if the final plan submitted
covers only a portion of the owner's entire contiguous holding.
(3) The required application and development review fees.
(4) A complete list of abutters and the owners of any parcel abutting an
abutter if it is located within 250 feet of the subject parcel, together
with their mailing addresses.
(5) The final subdivision plan and supporting documentation consisting
of 15 copies of one or more maps or drawings drawn to a scale of
not more than 50 feet to the inch and 15 copies of supporting
documentation bound in a single report. Plans for subdivisions
containing more than 100 acres may be drawn at a scale of not
more than 100 feet to the inch provided that all necessary detail
can easily be read. Plans shall be no larger than 24 by 36 inches in
size and shall have a margin of two inches outside of the border
lines on the left side for binding and a one-inch margin outside the
border along the remaining sides. Space shall be provided for
endorsement by the Board. In addition, one copy of the plan(s)
reduced to a size of 11 by 17 inches shall be provided.
B. Prior to the meeting at which action on the plan is anticipated to be
taken, the applicant shall submit two reproducible, stable-based
transparencies of the subdivision plan, one to be recorded at the
Registry of Deeds, the other to be filed at the municipal office. The
reproducible transparencies shall be embossed and printed with the
seal of the individual responsible for preparation of the plan.
C. The subdivision plan and supporting documentation shall include at
least the following information:
(1) Proposed name of the subdivision or identifying title, the name of
the municipality, and the Assessor's map and lot numbers.
(2) The names and addresses of the record owner, applicant, and
individual or company who or which prepared the plan and
adjoining property owners.
(3) The date the plan was prepared, North point, and graphic map
scale.
(4) The zoning district in which the proposed subdivision is located and
the location of any zoning boundaries affecting the subdivision.
(5) Certification of right, title, or interest in the property.
(6) A copy of the most recently recorded deed for the parcel and a copy
of all deed restrictions, easements, rights-of-way, or other
encumbrances currently affecting the property.
§ 275-18 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-18
252:523
(7) A copy of any deed restrictions intended to cover all or part of the
lots or dwellings in the subdivision.
(8) A standard boundary survey of the parcel, giving complete
descriptive data by bearings and distances, made and certified by a
registered land surveyor. The corners of the parcel shall be located
on the ground and marked by monuments. The plan shall indicate
the type of monument found or to be set at each lot corner.
(9) The number of acres within the proposed subdivision, location of
property lines, existing buildings, vegetative cover type, and other
essential existing physical features. The location of any trees larger
than 24 inches in diameter at breast height shall be shown on the
plan. On wooded sites, the plan shall indicate the area where
clearing for lawns and structures shall be permitted and/or any
restrictions to be placed on clearing existing vegetation.
(10) The location of all rivers, streams and brooks within or adjacent to
the proposed subdivision. If any portion of the proposed subdivision
is located in the direct watershed of a great pond, the application
shall indicate which great pond.
(11) If any portion of the subdivision is in a flood-prone area, the
boundaries of any flood hazard areas and the one-hundred-year
flood elevation, as depicted on the municipality's Flood Insurance
Rate Map, shall be delineated on the plan.
(12) Areas within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision which have
been identified as high or moderate value wildlife habitat by the
Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or within the
Comprehensive Plan. If any portion of the subdivision is located
within an area designated as a critical natural area by the
Comprehensive Plan or the Maine Natural Areas Program, the plan
shall indicate appropriate measures for the preservation of the
values which qualify the site for such designation.
(13) Contour lines at the interval specified by the Town Engineer
showing elevations in relation to mean sea level.
(14) The location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water
mains, culverts, and drainageways on or adjacent to the property to
be subdivided.
(15) The location, names, and present widths of existing streets and
highways and existing and proposed easements, building lines,
parks and other open spaces on or adjacent to the subdivision. The
plan shall contain sufficient data to allow the location, bearing and
length of every street line, lot line, and boundary line to be readily
determined and be reproduced upon the ground. These lines shall
be tied to reference points previously established. In order to
facilitate the addition of the subdivision into the municipal property
§ 275-18 SANFORD CODE § 275-18
252:524
records, this information shall also be submitted on a computer
disc in a format compatible with the Assessor's records.
(16) An indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the
subdivision.
(a) When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by connection to
the public sewer, a written statement from the Sanford
Sewerage District, stating that the District has the capacity to
collect and treat the wastewater, shall be provided.
(b) When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by subsurface
wastewater disposal systems, test pit analyses, prepared by a
licensed site evaluator, shall be provided. A test pit log and a
map at the same scale as the subdivision plan showing the
location of all test pits dug on the site shall be submitted.
(17) An indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the
subdivision.
(a) When water is to be supplied by public water supply, a written
statement from the Sanford Water District shall be submitted
indicating that there is adequate supply and pressure for the
subdivision and that the District approves the plans for
extensions where necessary. Where the District's supply line is
to be extended, a written statement from the Fire Chief stating
approval of the location of fire hydrants, if any, and a written
statement from the District approving the design of the
extension shall be submitted.
(b) When water is to be supplied by private wells, evidence of
adequate groundwater supply and quality shall be submitted
by a well driller or a hydrogeologist familiar with the area.
(18) The width and location of any streets, public improvements or open
space shown upon the Official Map and the Comprehensive Plan, if
any, within the subdivision.
(19) The location of any open space to be preserved and a description of
proposed improvements and its management.
(20) All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the
conditions of such dedication. Written offers to convey title to the
municipality of all public open spaces shown on the plan, and
copies of agreements or other documents showing the manner in
which open spaces to be retained by the applicant or lot owners are
to be maintained, shall be submitted. If open space or other land is
to be offered to the municipality, written evidence that the Town
Council is satisfied with the legal sufficiency of the written offer to
convey title shall be included.
§ 275-18 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-18
252:525
(21) The location and method of disposal for land clearing and
construction debris.
D. The Board may require additional information, including but not limited
to the following, to be submitted where it finds it necessary in order to
determine whether the criteria of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4404 are met:
(1) A high-intensity soil survey by a certified soil scientist. Wetland
areas shall be identified on the survey, regardless of size.
(2) A hydrogeologic assessment prepared by a certified geologist or
registered professional engineer experienced in hydrogeology.
(a) The Board may require a hydrogeologic assessment when the
subdivision is not served by public sewer and:
[1] Any part of the subdivision is located over a mapped sand
and gravel aquifer;
[2] The subdivision has an average density of more than one
dwelling unit per 100,000 square feet; or
[3] In other cases where site considerations or development
design indicates greater potential of adverse impacts on
groundwater quality, such as extensive areas of shallow to
bedrock soils, cluster developments in which the average
density is less than one dwelling unit per 100,000 square
feet but the density of the developed portion is in excess of
one dwelling unit per 80,000 square feet, or the use of
shared or common subsurface wastewater disposal
systems.
(b) The hydrogeologic assessment shall be conducted in
accordance with the provisions of § 275-42A(1).
(3) An estimate of the amount and type of vehicular traffic to be
generated on a daily basis and at peak hours. Trip generation rates
used shall be taken from Trip Generation Manual, 1997 Edition,
published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. Trip
generation rates from other sources may be used if the applicant
demonstrates that these sources better reflect local conditions.
(4) A traffic impact analysis. The Board may require an analysis for
projects involving 40 or more parking spaces or projected to
generate more than 400 vehicle trips per day based upon the ITE
Trip Generation Manual. The traffic impact analysis shall be
prepared by a registered professional engineer with experience in
traffic engineering. The analysis shall indicate the expected
average daily vehicular trips, peak hour volumes, access conditions
at the site, distribution of traffic, types of vehicles expected, effect
upon the level of service of the street giving access to the site and
neighboring streets which may be affected, and recommended
§ 275-18 SANFORD CODE § 275-18
252:526
§ 275-19. Final approval and filing.
improvements to maintain the desired level of service on the
affected streets.
(5) A stormwater management plan prepared by a registered
professional engineer in accordance with "Stormwater
Management for Maine: Best Management Practices," published by
the Maine Department of Environmental Protection (1995).
(6) An erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared in accordance
with "Maine Erosion and Sedimentation Control Handbook for
Construction: Best Management Practices," published by the
Cumberland County Soil and Water Conservation District and the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection, March 1991, and
approved by the York County Soil and Water Conservation District.
(7) A phosphorus control plan if the proposed subdivision is in the
direct watershed of a great pond.
(a) For subdivisions that require a stormwater permit from the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. § 420-D, a copy of the DEP application
with all supporting materials and the permit shall be
submitted.
(b) For subdivisions that do not require a DEP stormwater permit
and therefore qualify for the simplified review procedure as
described in § 280-47A(2), the plan, if required, shall indicate
the location and dimensions of vegetative buffer strips or other
provisions to control phosphorous export.
A. No plan shall be approved by the Board if the applicant(s) or any other
entity in which the applicant(s) or the principals or shareholders of the
applicant have a substantial interest is in violation of the provisions of a
previously approved plan within the municipality.
B. Upon findings of fact and determination that all standards in 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4404 and these regulations have been met, and upon voting
to approve the subdivision, the Board shall sign the final plan. The
Board shall specify in writing its findings of facts and reasons for any
conditions or denial. One copy of the signed plan shall be retained by
the Board as part of its permanent records. One copy of the signed plan
shall be forwarded to the Tax Assessor. One copy of the signed plan
shall be forwarded to the Code Enforcement Officer. Any subdivision
not recorded in the Registry of Deeds within 90 days of the date upon
which the plan is approved and signed by the Board shall become null
and void.
C. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any
final plan after approval has been given by the Board and endorsed in
writing on the plan, unless the revised final plan is first submitted and
§ 275-18 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-19
252:527
the Board approves any modifications, except in accordance with
Article IX. The Board shall make findings that the revised plan meets
the criteria of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4404 and the standards of these
regulations. In the event that a plan is recorded without complying with
this requirement, it shall be considered null and void and the Board
shall institute proceedings to have the plan stricken from the records of
the Registry of Deeds.
D. The approval by the Board of a subdivision plan shall not be deemed to
constitute or be evidence of any acceptance by the municipality of any
street, easement, or other open space shown on such plan. When a
park, playground, or other recreation area shall have been shown on
the plan to be dedicated to the municipality, approval of the plan shall
not constitute an acceptance by the municipality of such areas. The
Board shall require the plan to contain appropriate notes to this effect.
The Board may also require the filing of a written agreement between
the applicant and the Town Council covering future deed and title
dedication and provision for the cost of grading, development,
equipment, and maintenance of any such dedicated area.
E. Failure to initiate construction of the subdivision within five years of the
date of approval and signing of the plan shall render the plan null and
void unless the applicant has requested in writing and received an
extension and has provided for the continuation of any performance
guarantees for the period of the extension prior to the expiration of the
five-year period. Upon determining that a subdivision's approval has
expired under this subsection, the Board shall have a notice placed in
the Registry of Deeds to that effect.
§ 275-19 SANFORD CODE § 275-19
252:528
ARTICLE VI
Preliminary Plan for Major Subdivision
§ 275-20. Procedure.
A. Within six months after the review of the site inventory and analysis by
the Board, the applicant shall submit an application for approval of a
preliminary plan. Applications shall be submitted to the Planning
Department. Failure to submit an application within six months shall
require resubmission of the inventory and analysis to the Board. The
preliminary plan shall reflect the opportunities and constraints
identified in the site inventory and analysis and address any issues
identified by the Planning Board in the review of the site inventory and
analysis.
B. Upon receipt of an application, the Planning Department shall issue the
applicant a dated receipt for the application.
C. Within 10 days of the receipt of the preliminary plan application, the
Planning Director shall determine whether the application is complete.
If the application is complete, the Planning Director shall notify the
applicant in writing of the determination. If the application is not
complete, the Planning Director shall notify the applicant of the specific
additional material needed to complete the application and that the
application will not be considered by the Board until the additional
information is provided.
D. Once the Planning Director has determined that the application is
complete, the Planning Director shall:
(1) Place the item on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled
workshop meeting of the Planning Board for which the appropriate
notification can be given.
(2) Distribute the application to the members of the Site Plan Review
Committee for their review and comment.
(3) Notify, in writing, all owners of abutting property that an
application for preliminary subdivision approval has been
submitted, specifying the location of the proposed subdivision,
including a general description of the project, and advising the
abutters of the date, time, and location of the workshop and public
hearing at which the application will be considered by the Board.
(4) Notify the clerk and the review authority of the neighboring
municipalities if any portion of the subdivision abuts or crosses the
municipal boundary.
E. The applicant, or his/her duly authorized representative, shall attend
the workshop and meetings of the Board to present the preliminary
plan. Failure to attend the meeting to present the plan shall result in a
§ 275-20 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-20
252:529
§ 275-21. Submissions.
The preliminary plan application shall consist of the following items:
delay of the Board's consideration of the plan until the next meeting
which the applicant attends.
F. Following review of the application at a workshop meeting, the Board
shall hold a public hearing on the application at its next regular
meeting. The Board shall publish a notice of the date, time and place of
the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at
least two times. The date of the first publication shall be at least seven
days prior to the hearing. A copy of the notice shall be mailed to the
applicant.
G. Within 45 days from the public hearing or within another time limit as
may be otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board and the applicant,
the Board shall make findings of fact on the application and approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the preliminary plan application. The
Board shall specify in writing its findings of facts and reasons for any
conditions or denial.
H. When granting approval of a preliminary plan, the Board shall state the
conditions of such approval, if any, with respect to:
(1) The specific changes which it will require in the final plan;
(2) The character and extent of the required improvements for which
waivers may have been requested and which the Board finds may
be waived without jeopardy to the public health, safety, and general
welfare; and
(3) The construction items for which cost estimates and performance
guarantees will be required as a prerequisite to the approval of the
final plan.
I. Approval of a preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of the final
plan or intent to approve the final plan but rather it shall be deemed an
expression of approval of the design of the preliminary plan as a guide
to the preparation of the final plan. The final plan shall be submitted for
approval by the Board upon fulfillment of the requirements of these
regulations and the conditions of preliminary approval, if any. Prior to
the approval of the final plan, the Board may require that additional
information be submitted and changes in the plan be made as a result of
further study of the proposed subdivision or as a result of new
information received.
A. A fully executed and signed copy of the application for preliminary
major subdivision review (provided by the Town).
B. A location map drawn at a size adequate to show the relationship of the
proposed subdivision to the adjacent properties and to allow the Board
§ 275-20 SANFORD CODE § 275-21
252:530
to locate the subdivision within the municipality. The location map shall
show:
(1) Existing subdivisions in the proximity of the proposed subdivision.
(2) Locations and names of existing and proposed streets.
(3) Boundaries and designations of zoning districts.
(4) An outline of the proposed subdivision and any remaining portion
of the owner's property if the preliminary plan submitted covers
only a portion of the owner's entire contiguous holding.
C. The required application and development review fees.
D. A complete list of abutters and the owners of any parcel abutting an
abutter if it is located within 250 feet of the subject parcel, together
with their mailing addresses.
E. The preliminary subdivision plan and supporting documentation
consisting of 15 copies of one or more maps or drawings drawn to a
scale of not more than 50 feet to the inch and 15 copies of supporting
documentation bound in a single report. Plans for subdivisions
containing more than 100 acres may be drawn at a scale of not more
than 100 feet to the inch provided that all necessary detail can easily be
read. Plans shall be no larger than 24 by 36 inches in size and shall have
a margin of two inches outside of the border lines on the left side for
binding and a one-inch margin outside the border along the remaining
sides. In addition, one copy of the plan(s) reduced to a size of 11 by 17
inches shall be provided.
F. The preliminary plan and supporting documentation shall include at
least the following information. The Board may require additional
information to be submitted where it finds necessary in order to
determine whether the criteria of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4404 are met.
(1) Proposed name of the subdivision and the name of the municipality
in which it is located, plus the Assessor's map and lot numbers.
(2) The names and addresses of the record owner, applicant, and
individual or company who or which prepared the plan and
adjoining property owners.
(3) The date the plan was prepared, North point, and graphic map
scale.
(4) The zoning district in which the proposed subdivision is located and
the location of any zoning boundaries affecting the subdivision.
(5) Verification of right, title or interest in the property.
(6) A copy of the most recently recorded deed for the parcel and a copy
of all deed restrictions, easements, rights-of-way, or other
encumbrances currently affecting the property.
§ 275-21 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-21
252:531
(7) A copy of any deed restrictions intended to cover all or part of the
lots or dwellings in the subdivision.
(8) A standard boundary survey of the parcel, giving complete
descriptive data by bearings and distances, made and certified by a
registered land surveyor. The corners of the parcel shall be located
on the ground and marked by monuments.
(9) The number of acres within the proposed subdivision, location of
property lines, existing buildings, vegetative cover type, and other
essential existing physical features. The location of any trees larger
than 24 inches in diameter at breast height shall be shown on the
plan.
(10) A medium-intensity soil survey.
(11) The location of all rivers, streams and brooks within or adjacent to
the proposed subdivision. If any portion of the proposed subdivision
is located in the direct watershed of a great pond, the application
shall indicate which great pond.
(12) If any portion of the subdivision is in a flood-prone area, the
boundaries of any flood hazard areas and the one-hundred-year
flood elevation, as depicted on the municipality's Flood Insurance
Rate Map, shall be delineated on the plan.
(13) Areas within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision which have
been identified as high or moderate value wildlife habitat by the
Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or within the
Comprehensive Plan. If any portion of the subdivision is located
within an area designated as a unique natural area by the
Comprehensive Plan or the Maine Natural Areas Program, the plan
shall indicate appropriate measures for the preservation of the
values which qualify the site for such designation.
(14) Contour lines at the interval specified by the Town Engineer,
showing elevations in relation to mean sea level.
(15) The location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water
mains, culverts, and drainageways on or adjacent to the property to
be subdivided.
(16) The location, names, and present widths of existing streets,
highways, easements, building lines, parks and other open spaces
on or adjacent to the subdivision.
(17) The location and width of all proposed streets, including a typical
cross section of the streets and sidewalks and a preliminary centerline
profile.
(18) The proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and lot areas.
§ 275-21 SANFORD CODE § 275-21
252:532
(19) An indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the
subdivision.
(a) When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by connection to
the public sewer, a written statement from the Sanford
Sewerage District stating that the District has the capacity to
collect and treat the wastewater shall be provided.
(b) When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by subsurface
wastewater disposal systems, test pit analyses, prepared by a
licensed site evaluator or certified soil scientist, shall be
provided. A map showing the location of all test pits dug on the
site shall be submitted.
(20) An indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the
subdivision.
(a) When water is to be supplied by public water supply, a written
statement from the Sanford Water District shall be submitted
indicating that there is adequate supply and pressure for the
subdivision and that the District approves the plans for
extensions where necessary. Where the District's supply line is
to be extended, a written statement from the Fire Chief stating
approval of the location of fire hydrants, if any, and a written
statement from the District approving the design of the
extension shall be submitted.
(b) When water is to be supplied by private wells, evidence of
adequate groundwater supply and quality shall be submitted
by a well driller or a hydrogeologist familiar with the area.
(21) Provisions for the collection and management of stormwater in the
form of a preliminary drainage plan.
(22) The width and location of any streets, public improvements or open
space shown upon the Official Map and the Comprehensive Plan, if
any, within the subdivision.
(23) The location of any open space to be preserved and a description of
proposed ownership, improvement and management.
(24) All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the
conditions of such dedication.
(25) The area on each lot where existing forest cover will be permitted
to be removed and converted to lawn, structures or other cover and
any proposed restrictions to be placed on clearing existing
vegetation.
G. The Board may require additional information, including but not limited
to the following, to be submitted where it finds it necessary in order to
determine whether the preliminary plan is likely to result in a final plan
that meets the criteria of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4404:
§ 275-21 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-21
252:533
(1) A high-intensity soil survey by a certified soil scientist. Wetland
areas shall be identified on the survey, regardless of size.
(2) A hydrogeologic assessment prepared by a certified geologist or
registered professional engineer experienced in hydrogeology.
(a) The Board may require a hydrogeologic assessment when the
subdivision is not served by public sewer and:
[1] Any part of the subdivision is located over a mapped sand
and gravel aquifer;
[2] The subdivision has an average density of more than one
dwelling unit per 100,000 square feet; or
[3] In other cases where site considerations or development
design indicates greater potential of adverse impacts on
groundwater quality, such as extensive areas of shallow to
bedrock soils, cluster developments in which the average
density is less than one dwelling unit per 100,000 square
feet but the density of the developed portion is in excess of
one dwelling unit per 80,000 square feet, or the use of
shared or common subsurface wastewater disposal
systems.
(b) The hydrogeologic assessment shall be conducted in
accordance with the provisions of § 275-42A(1).
(3) An estimate of the amount and type of vehicular traffic to be
generated on a daily basis and at peak hours. Trip generation rates
used shall be taken from the Trip Generation Manual, 1997 Edition,
published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. Trip
generation rates from other sources may be used if the applicant
demonstrates that these sources better reflect local conditions.
(4) A traffic impact analysis. The Board may require an analysis for
projects involving 40 or more parking spaces or projected to
generate more than 400 vehicle trips per day based upon the ITE
Trip Generation Manual. The traffic impact analysis shall be
prepared by a registered professional engineer with experience in
traffic engineering. The analysis shall indicate the expected
average daily vehicular trips, peak hour volumes, access conditions
at the site, distribution of traffic, types of vehicles expected, effect
upon the level of service of the street giving access to the site and
neighboring streets which may be affected, and recommended
improvements to maintain the desired level of service on the
affected streets.
(5) If the proposed subdivision is in the direct watershed of a great
pond and does not require a DEP stormwater permit and therefore
qualifies for the simplified review procedure as described in
§ 275-47A(2), the plan, if required, shall indicate the location and
§ 275-21 SANFORD CODE § 275-21
252:534
dimensions of vegetative buffer strips or other provisions to control
phosphorous export. The application shall include a long-term
maintenance plan for all phosphorus control measures.
§ 275-21 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-21
252:535

ARTICLE VII
Final Plan for Major Subdivision
§ 275-22. Procedure.
A. Within six months after the approval of the preliminary plan, the
applicant shall submit an application for approval of the final plan.
Applications shall be submitted to the Planning Department. If the
application for the final plan is not submitted within six months after
preliminary plan approval, the Board shall require resubmission of the
preliminary plan, except as stipulated below. The final plan shall
approximate the layout shown on the preliminary plan, plus any
changes required by the Board. If an applicant cannot submit the final
plan within six months, the applicant may request an extension. Such a
request for an extension to the filing deadline shall be submitted, in
writing, to the Planning Director prior to the expiration of the filing
period. In considering the request for an extension, the Board shall
make findings that the applicant has made due progress in preparation
of the final plan and in pursuing approval of the plans before other
agencies and that municipal ordinances or regulations which may
impact on the proposed development have not been amended.
B. Prior to submittal of the final plan application, the following approvals
shall be obtained in writing, where applicable:
(1) Maine Department of Environmental Protection, under the Site
Location of Development Act95
(2) Maine Department of Environmental Protection, under the Natural
Resources Protection Act96 or if a stormwater management permit
or a wastewater discharge license is needed.
(3) Maine Department of Human Services, if the applicant proposes to
provide a public or community water system.
(4) Maine Department of Human Services, if an engineered subsurface
wastewater disposal system(s) is to be utilized.
(5) United States Army Corps of Engineers, if a permit under Section
404 of the Clean Water Act is required.
C. Upon receipt of an application, the Planning Department shall issue the
applicant a dated receipt for the application.
D. Within 10 days of the receipt of the final plan application, the Planning
Director shall determine whether the application is complete. If the
application is complete, the Planning Director shall notify the applicant
in writing of the determination. If the application is not complete, the
Planning Director shall notify the applicant of the specific additional
95.Editor's Note: See 38 M.R.S.A. § 481 et seq.
96.Editor's Note: See 38 M.R.S.A. § 480-A et seq.
§ 275-22 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-22
252:537
material needed to complete the application and that the application
will not be considered by the Board until the additional information is
provided.
E. Once the Planning Director has determined that the application is
complete, the Planning Director shall:
(1) Place the item on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled
workshop meeting of the Planning Board for which the appropriate
notification can be given.
(2) Distribute the application to the members of the Site Plan Review
Committee for their review and comment.
(3) Notify in writing all owners of abutting property that an application
for subdivision approval has been submitted, specifying the
location of the proposed subdivision, including a general
description of the project, and advising the abutters of the date,
time, and location of the workshop and public hearing at which the
application will be considered by the Board.
(4) Notify the clerk and the review authority of the neighboring
municipalities if any portion of the subdivision abuts or crosses the
municipal boundary.
F. The applicant, or his/her duly authorized representative, shall attend
the workshop and meetings of the Board to present the final plan.
Failure to attend the meeting to present the final plan shall result in a
delay of the Board's consideration of the plan until the next meeting
which the applicant attends.
G. At the workshop meeting, the Board shall determine whether to hold a
public hearing on the final plan application.
H. If the Board decides to hold a public hearing, it shall hold the hearing
within 30 days, notify the applicant, and shall publish a notice of the
date, time and place of the hearing in a newspaper of local circulation
at least two times. The date of the first publication shall be at least
seven days before the hearing.
I. Within 45 days from the public hearing or within 60 days of receiving a
complete application, if no hearing is held, or within another time limit
as may be otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board and the applicant,
the Board shall make findings of fact and conclusions relative to the
criteria for approval contained in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4404 and the
standards of these regulations. If the Board finds that all the criteria of
the statute and the standards of these regulations have been met, it
shall approve the final plan. If the Board finds that any of the criteria of
the statute or the standards of these regulations have not been met, the
Board shall either deny the application or approve the application with
conditions to ensure that all of the standards will be met by the
§ 275-22 SANFORD CODE § 275-22
252:538
§ 275-23. Submissions.
subdivision. The reasons for any conditions shall be stated in the
records of the Board.
A. The final plan application shall consist of the following items:
(1) A fully executed and signed copy of the application for final major
subdivision review (provided by the Town).
(2) The required application and development review fees.
(3) A performance guarantee in accordance with the provisions of
Article XII assuring the construction of all street, utilities, and
other improvements proposed as part of the final subdivision plan.
(4) The final subdivision plan and supporting documentation consisting
of 15 copies of one or more maps or drawings drawn to a scale of
not more than 50 feet to the inch and 15 copies of supporting
documentation bound in a single report. Plans for subdivisions
containing more than 100 acres may be drawn at a scale of not
more than 100 feet to the inch provided that all necessary detail
can easily be read. Plans shall be no larger than 24 by 36 inches in
size and shall have a margin of two inches outside of the border
lines on the left side for binding and a one-inch margin outside the
border along the remaining sides. Space shall be provided for
endorsement by the Board. In addition, one copy of the plan(s)
reduced to a size of 11 by 17 inches shall be provided.
B. Prior to the meeting at which action on the plan is anticipated to be
taken, the applicant shall submit two reproducible, stable-based
transparencies of the subdivision plan, one to be recorded at the
Registry of Deeds, the other to be filed at the municipal office. The
reproducible transparencies shall be embossed and printed with the
seal of the individual responsible for preparation of the plan.
C. The final subdivision plan and supporting documentation shall include
at least the following information:
(1) Proposed name of the subdivision and the name of the municipality
in which it is located, plus the Assessor's map and lot numbers.
(2) The names and addresses of the record owner, applicant, and
individual or company who or which prepared the plan.
(3) The date the plan was prepared, North point, and graphic map
scale.
(4) The location of any zoning boundaries affecting the subdivision.
(5) If different than those submitted with the preliminary plan, a copy
of any proposed deed restrictions intended to cover all or part of
the lots or dwellings in the subdivision.
§ 275-22 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-23
252:539
(6) The number of acres within the proposed subdivision, location of
property lines, existing buildings, watercourses, and other
essential existing physical features.
(7) The boundaries of any flood hazard areas and the one-hundred-year
flood elevation as depicted on the municipality's Flood Insurance
Rate Map shall be delineated on the plan.
(8) An indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the
subdivision. When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by
connection to the public sewerage system, a written statement
from the Sanford Sewerage District shall be submitted indicating
that the District has reviewed and approved the sewerage design.
(9) An indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the
subdivision. When water is to be supplied by the Sanford Water
District, a written statement from the District shall be submitted
indicating that the District has reviewed and approved the water
system design together with a written statement from the Fire
Chief approving all hydrant locations or other fire protection
measures deemed necessary.
(10) The location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water
mains, culverts, and drainageways on or adjacent to the property to
be subdivided.
(11) The location, names, and present widths of existing and proposed
streets, highways, easements, buildings, parks and other open
spaces on or adjacent to the subdivision. The plan shall contain
sufficient data to allow the location, bearing and length of every
street line, lot line, and boundary line to be readily determined and
be reproduced upon the ground. These lines shall be tied to
reference points previously established. The location, bearing and
length of street lines, lot lines and parcel boundary lines shall be
certified by a registered land surveyor. The original reproducible
plan shall be embossed and printed with the seal of the registered
land surveyor and be signed by that individual.
(12) All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the
conditions of such dedication. Written offers to convey title to the
municipality of all public ways and open spaces shown on the plan
and copies of agreements or other documents showing the manner
in which open spaces to be retained by the developer or lot owners
are to be maintained shall be submitted. If proposed streets and/or
open spaces or other land is to be offered to the municipality,
written evidence that the Town Council is satisfied with the legal
sufficiency of the written offer to convey title shall be included.
(13) Street plans meeting the requirements of § 275-51C.
(14) A stormwater management plan prepared by a registered
professional engineer in accordance with "Stormwater
§ 275-23 SANFORD CODE § 275-23
252:540
§ 275-24. Final approval and filing.
Management for Maine: Best Management Practices," published
by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection (1995). The
Board may not waive submission of the stormwater management
plan unless the subdivision is not in the watershed of a great pond,
the proposed subdivision will not involve grading which changes
drainage patterns, and the addition of impervious surfaces such as
roofs and driveways is less than 5% of the area of the subdivision.
(15) An erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared in accordance
with "Maine Erosion and Sedimentation Control Handbook for
Construction: Best Management Practices," published by the
Cumberland County Soil and Water Conservation District and the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection, March 1991. The
Board may not waive submission of the erosion and sedimentation
control plan unless the subdivision is not in the watershed of a
great pond, the proposed subdivision will not involve grading which
changes drainage patterns, and the addition of impervious surfaces
such as roofs and driveways is less than 5% of the area of the
subdivision.
(16) The width and location of any streets or public improvements or
open space shown upon the Official Map and the Comprehensive
Plan, if any, within the subdivision.
(17) If any portion of the proposed subdivision is in the direct watershed
of a great pond and the subdivision requires a stormwater permit
from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, a copy of
the DEP application with all supporting materials and the permit
shall be provided.
(18) A list of construction items, with cost estimates, that will be
completed by the applicant prior to the sale of lots and evidence
that the applicant has financial commitments or resources to cover
these costs.
(19) The location and method of disposal for land clearing and
construction debris.
A. No plan shall be approved by the Board if the applicant(s) or any other
entity in which the applicant(s) or the principals or shareholders of the
applicant have a substantial interest is in violation of the provisions of a
previously approved plan within the municipality.
B. Upon findings of fact and determination that all standards in 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4404 and these regulations have been met, and upon voting
to approve the subdivision, the Board shall sign the final plan. The
Board shall specify in writing its findings of facts and reasons for any
conditions or denial. One copy of the signed plan shall be retained by
the Board as part of its permanent records. One copy of the signed plan
§ 275-23 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-24
252:541
shall be forwarded to the Tax Assessor. One copy of the signed plan
shall be forwarded to the Code Enforcement Officer. Any subdivision
not recorded in the Registry of Deeds within 90 days of the date upon
which the plan is approved and signed by the Board shall become null
and void.
C. At the time the Board grants final plan approval, it may permit the plan
to be divided into two or more sections subject to any conditions the
Board deems necessary in order to ensure the orderly development of
the plan.
D. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any
final plan after approval has been given by the Board and endorsed in
writing on the plan, unless the revised final plan is first submitted and
the Board approves any modifications, except in accordance with
Article IX. The Board shall make findings that the revised plan meets
the criteria of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4404 and the standards of these
regulations. In the event that a plan is recorded without complying with
this requirement, it shall be considered null and void, and the Board
shall institute proceedings to have the plan stricken from the records of
the Registry of Deeds.
E. The approval by the Board of a subdivision plan shall not be deemed to
constitute or be evidence of any acceptance by the municipality of any
street, easement, or other open space shown on such plan. When a
park, playground, or other recreation area shall have been shown on
the plan to be dedicated to the municipality, approval of the plan shall
not constitute an acceptance by the municipality of such areas. The
Board shall require the plan to contain appropriate notes to this effect.
The Board may also require the filing of a written agreement between
the applicant and the Town Council covering future deed and title
dedication and provision for the cost of grading, development,
equipment, and maintenance of any such dedicated area.
F. Except in the case of a phased development plan, failure to initiate
construction of the subdivision within five years of the date of approval
and signing of the plan shall render the plan null and void unless the
applicant has requested in writing and received an extension and has
provided for the continuation of any performance guarantees for the
period of the extension prior to the expiration of the five-year period.
Upon determining that a subdivision's approval has expired under this
subsection, the Board shall have a notice placed in the Registry of
Deeds to that effect.
§ 275-24 SANFORD CODE § 275-24
252:542
ARTICLE VIII
Revisions to Approved Plans
§ 275-25. Procedure.
An application for a revision to a previously approved plan shall be
submitted to the Planning Director. The Planning Director shall review the
application and determine the procedure to be used in revising the plan.
Minor changes that do not alter lot lines or the essential nature of the
proposal or affect the approval criteria may be approved by the Planning
Director by written endorsement of the changes on the approved plan. If the
revision requires the approval of the Planning Board, the Planning Director
shall place the application on the agenda of the Board in accordance with
the procedures of Articles V, VI and VII as appropriate. If the revision
involves only modifications of the approved plan, without the creation of
additional lots or dwelling units, the procedures for final plan approval
shall be followed. If the application involves the creation of additional lots
or dwelling units, the procedures for preliminary plan approval shall be
followed.
§ 275-26. Submissions.
The applicant shall submit a copy of the approved plan as well as 15 copies
of the proposed revisions. The application shall also include the appropriate
supporting information to allow the Board to make a determination that
the proposed revisions meet the standards of these regulations and the
criteria of the statute. The revised plan shall indicate that it is the revision
of a previously approved and recorded plan and shall show the title of
the subdivision and the book and page or cabinet and sheet on which the
original plan is recorded at the Registry of Deeds.
§ 275-27. Scope of review.
The Board's scope of review shall be limited to those portions of the plan
which are proposed to be changed.
§ 275-25 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-27
252:543

ARTICLE IX
Inspections and Enforcement
§ 275-28. Inspection of required improvements.
A. Prior to the recording of the approved plan in the York County Registry
of Deeds and at least five days prior to commencing construction of
required improvements, the subdivider or builder shall:
(1) Notify the Director of Public Works in writing of the time when
(s)he proposes to commence construction of such improvements, so
that the Director can arrange for inspections to assure that all
municipal specifications, requirements, and conditions of approval
are met during the construction of required improvements and to
assure the satisfactory completion of improvements and utilities
required by the Board.
(2) Deposit with the Town an inspection fee in the amount of: 5% of the
estimated costs of the required improvements, or the estimated
cost of inspection by the Town Engineer, or the estimated cost of
inspection by an engineer hired by the Director of Public Works. If,
upon satisfactory completion of construction and cleanup, there
are funds remaining, the surplus shall be refunded to the
subdivider or builder as appropriate.
B. The Town Engineer or other engineer hired by the Director of Public
Works shall inspect any road construction and other improvements at
appropriate points in the construction.
(1) At a minimum, an inspection shall be conducted at the following
times:
(a) Upon completion of the clearing and grubbing.
(b) Upon completion of the excavation of the roadway.
(c) During the installation of drainage improvements and
structures.
(d) Upon installation of the road subbase.
(e) Prior to the installation of any paving or other improvements.
(f) During the paving of the road.
(g) Upon the completion of the improvements.
(h) Following loaming and seeding and cleanup.
(i) Upon receipt of a written request for the acceptance of the
road as a public street by the Town.
(2) If the road or other improvements are constructed in phases, each
phase shall be inspected separately.
§ 275-28 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-28
252:545
C. At the close of each summer construction season, the Town shall, at the
expense of the subdivider, have the site inspected by the inspecting
engineer. By October 1 of each year during which construction was
done on the site, the engineer shall submit a report to the Director of
Public Works and Planning Director based on that inspection,
addressing whether stormwater and erosion control measures (both
temporary and permanent) are in place, are properly installed, and
appear adequate. The report shall also include a discussion and
recommendations on any problems which were encountered.
D. If the inspecting engineer finds upon inspection of the improvements
that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in
accordance with the plans and specifications filed by the subdivider, the
inspecting engineer shall so report in writing to the Director of Public
Works, Planning Director, Planning Board, and the subdivider and
builder. The Director of Public Works shall take any steps necessary to
assure compliance with the approved plans.
E. If at any time it appears necessary or desirable to modify the required
improvements before or during the construction of the required
improvements, the inspecting engineer is authorized to approve minor
modifications due to unforeseen circumstances, such as encountering
hidden outcrops of bedrock, natural springs, etc. The inspecting
engineer shall issue any approval under this section in writing and shall
transmit a copy of the approval to the Planning Director. Revised plans
shall be filed with the Planning Department and endorsed by the
Planning Director. For major modifications, the subdivider shall obtain
permission from the Board to modify the plans in accordance with
Article VIII. Major modifications include, but are not limited to, changes
such as the relocation of rights-of-way, revisions to property
boundaries, or changes of grade by more than 1%.
F. Prior to the sale of any lot, the subdivider shall provide the Planning
Director with a letter from a registered land surveyor stating that all
monumentation shown on the plan has been installed.
G. Upon completion of street construction and prior to a vote by the Town
Council to accept a street, a written certification signed by the
inspecting engineer shall be submitted to the Town Council certifying
that the proposed public way meets or exceeds the design and
construction requirements of these regulations. If there are any
underground utilities, the servicing utility shall certify in writing that
they have been installed in a manner acceptable to the utility. The
subdivider shall submit record drawings to the Planning Director and
the Public Works Department prior to the Town acceptance of any
street.
H. The subdivider shall be required to maintain all improvements, provide
for snow removal on streets and sidewalks, and pay for any
streetlighting until acceptance of the improvements by the municipality
or control is placed with a lot owners' association. The subdivider shall
§ 275-28 SANFORD CODE § 275-28
252:546
§ 275-29. Violations and penalties.
file a performance guarantee with the Director of Public Works upon
completion of the public improvements in an amount and form
acceptable to the Town Council assuring that this obligation shall be
met. The performance guarantee shall remain in force as long as the
subdivider retains this maintenance responsibility.
A. No plan of a division of land within the municipality which would
constitute a subdivision shall be recorded in the Registry of Deeds until
a final plan has been approved by the Planning Board in accordance
with these regulations.
B. A person shall not convey or offer or agree to convey any land in a
subdivision which has not been approved by the Board and recorded in
the Registry of Deeds.
C. A person shall not sell, lease or otherwise convey any land in an
approved subdivision which is not shown on the plan as a separate lot.
D. No public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility company
of any kind shall serve any lot in a subdivision for which a final plan has
not been approved by the Board.
E. Development of a subdivision without Board approval shall be a
violation of law. Development includes grading or construction of roads,
grading of land or lots, or construction of buildings which requires a
plan approved as provided in these regulations and recorded in the
Registry of Deeds.
F. Violations of the above provisions of this section are a nuisance and
shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 4452 and as otherwise provided by law.
§ 275-28 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-29
252:547

ARTICLE X
Performance Standards
§ 275-30. Intent.
The performance standards in this article are intended to clarify and expand
upon the criteria for approval found within the subdivision statute (30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4404). In reviewing a proposed subdivision, the Board shall
review the application for conformance with the following performance
standards and make findings that each has been met prior to the approval
of a final plan. Compliance with the design guidelines of Article XI shall
be considered to be evidence of meeting the appropriate performance
standards. Proposed subdivisions not in compliance with the design
guidelines of Article XI may be considered, but the applicant shall provide
clear and convincing evidence that the proposed design will meet the
performance standard(s) and the statutory criteria. In all instances the
burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to present adequate information
to indicate all performance standards and statutory criteria for approval
have been or will be met.
§ 275-31. Pollution.
§ 275-32. Sufficient water.
A. The proposed subdivision shall not discharge wastewater to a water
body without a license from the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection.
B. Discharges of stormwater shall be treated to remove oil, grease, and
sediment prior to discharge into surface water bodies. When the
subdivision is within the watershed of a great pond, the stormwater
shall be treated in order to remove excess nutrients.
A. Water supply.
(1) When practical, any major or minor subdivision shall make
provisions for connection to the public water system if the Sanford
Water District indicates that it can provide water service.
Connection shall be deemed practical if the subdivision is:
(a) Within an area designated in the 1992 Comprehensive Plan as
a growth area;
(b) Adjacent to a public water main; or
(c) A major subdivision that is within 1,500 feet or a minor
subdivision that is within 200 feet of an existing public water
main as measured along the center line of public streets to the
nearest point of the parcel.
(2) When a subdivision will be served by the public water system, the
complete supply system within the subdivision, including fire
§ 275-30 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-32
252:549
hydrants, shall be installed at the expense of the applicant. The
size and location of mains, gate valves, hydrants, and service
connections shall be reviewed and approved in writing by the
Sanford Water District and the Fire Chief. The system shall be
designed by a professional engineer registered in the State of
Maine.
(3) When a proposed subdivision will not be served by the public water
system, water supply shall be from individual wells or a private
community water system.
(a) Individual wells shall be sited and constructed to prevent
infiltration of surface water and contamination from
subsurface wastewater disposal systems and other sources of
potential contamination.
(b) Lot design shall permit placement of wells, subsurface
wastewater disposal areas, and reserve sites for subsurface
wastewater disposal areas in compliance with the Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and the Well Drillers
and Pump Installers Rules.
(c) If a central water supply system is provided by the applicant,
the location and protection of the source and the design,
construction, and operation of the system shall conform to the
standards of the Maine Rules Relating to Drinking Water
(10-144A CMR 231).
(d) In areas where the Planning Board determines, based upon the
written recommendation of the Fire Chief or his designee, that
a reliable water supply for fire-fighting purposes is not
available within 0.5 mile of the site, the subdivider shall be
responsible for providing adequate fire protection water
supply. Subdivisions shall provide adequate fire protection
water supply in accordance with NFPA 1231. Acceptable
methods include, but are not limited to, fire ponds with an
approved dry hydrant, underground storage reservoirs with an
approved dry hydrant or approved residential sprinkler
systems in each principal building. An easement shall be
granted to the Town for access to and maintenance of dry
hydrants or reservoirs where necessary.
(e) The construction of waterlines shall include the construction of
laterals to the property line of each lot created.
B. Water quality. Water supplies shall meet the primary drinking water
standards contained in the Maine Rules Relating to Drinking Water. If
existing water quality contains contaminants in excess of the secondary
drinking water standards in the Maine Rules Relating to Drinking
Water, that fact shall be disclosed in a note on the plan to be recorded in
the Registry of Deeds.
§ 275-32 SANFORD CODE § 275-33
252:550
§ 275-33. Impact on existing water supplies.
In meeting the standards of § 275-32A, a proposed subdivision shall not
generate a demand on the source, treatment facilities, or distribution
system of the Sanford Water District beyond the capacity of those system
components, considering improvements that are planned to be in place
prior to occupancy of the subdivision. The applicant shall be responsible for
paying the costs of improvements to the District's system as necessary to
alleviate any deficiencies or expand the capacity of the system needed to
service the subdivision.
§ 275-34. Soil erosion.
§ 275-35. Traffic conditions.
A. The proposed subdivision shall prevent soil erosion from entering water
bodies, wetlands, and adjacent properties.
B. The procedures outlined in the erosion and sedimentation control plan
shall be implemented during the site preparation, construction, and
cleanup stages.
C. Topsoil shall be considered part of the subdivision and shall not be
removed from the site except for surplus topsoil from roads, parking
areas, and building excavations unless the removal has received site
plan approval in accordance with the mineral extraction provisions of
Chapter 280, Zoning.
A. At a minimum, provision shall be made for vehicular access to the
subdivision and circulation within the subdivision in such a manner as
to:
(1) Safeguard against hazards to traffic and pedestrians in existing
streets and within the subdivision;
(2) Avoid traffic congestion on any street; and
(3) Provide safe and convenient circulation on adjacent public streets
and within the subdivision.
B. More specifically, access and circulation shall also conform to the
following standards:
(1) The vehicular access to the subdivision shall be arranged to avoid
generating significant additional through traffic on existing local,
residential streets.
(2) The street giving access to the subdivision and neighboring streets
and intersections which can be expected to carry traffic generated
by the subdivision shall have the capacity or be suitably improved
to accommodate that traffic and avoid unreasonable congestion.
Intersections on major access routes to the site which are
functioning at a Level of Service of C (see definition) or better prior
§ 275-33 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-35
252:551
§ 275-36. Sewage disposal.
to the development will function at a minimum of Level of Service
C after development. If any intersection is functioning at a Level
of Service of D or lower prior to the development, the project will
not reduce the current level of service. The Planning Board may
approve a subdivision not meeting this requirement if the applicant
demonstrates that:
(a) A public agency has committed funds to construct
improvements necessary to bring or maintain the level of
service at this standard; or
(b) The applicant will assume the financial responsibility for the
improvements necessary to maintain or bring the level of
service to this standard and will assure the completion of the
improvements with a financial guarantee acceptable to the
Town.
(3) Where necessary to safeguard against hazards to traffic and
pedestrians and/or to avoid traffic congestion, provision shall be
made for turning lanes, traffic directional islands, frontage roads,
sidewalks, bicycle ways, and traffic controls within existing public
streets consistent with accepted highway design standards.
(4) Accessways to nonresidential subdivisions or to multifamily
developments shall be designed to avoid queuing of entering
vehicles on any street. Left lane storage capacity shall be provided
to meet anticipated demand. A study or analysis to determine the
need for a left-turn storage lane shall be done.
(5) Where site conditions allow, provision shall be made for the
extension of streets to connect with nearby streets and to provide
access to adjoining lots of similar existing or potential use. Such
interconnected streets shall be designed to discourage use by
through traffic.
C. Streets shall be named in accordance with Chapter 226, Article II, Road
Names and Building Numbers, of the Town Code. The developer shall
either install street name, traffic safety, and control signs meeting Town
specifications or reimburse the Town for the costs of their installation.
Streetlighting shall be installed by the developer as approved by the
Board.
D. Following street construction, the developer or contractor shall conduct
a thorough cleanup of stumps and other debris from the entire street
right-of-way. If on-site disposal of the stumps and debris is proposed,
the site shall be indicated on the plan and be suitably covered with fill
and topsoil, limed, fertilized, and seeded and identified on the record
drawings.
A. Public system.
§ 275-35 SANFORD CODE § 275-36
252:552
(1) When practical, any major or minor subdivision shall make
provisions for connection to the public sewer system if the Sanford
Sewerage District indicates that it can provide sewer service.
Connection shall be deemed practical if the subdivision is:
(a) Within an area designated in the 1992 Comprehensive Plan as
a growth area;
(b) Adjacent to a public sewer; or
(c) A major subdivision that is within 1,500 feet or a minor
subdivision that is within 200 feet of an existing public sewer
as measured along the center line of public streets to the
nearest point of the parcel.
(2) When a subdivision will be served by the public sewage system, the
complete collection system within the subdivision, including
manholes and pump stations, shall be installed at the expense of
the applicant.
(3) The Sanford Sewerage District shall certify that providing service
to the proposed subdivision is within the capacity of the system's
existing collection and treatment system or improvements planned
to be complete prior to the construction of the subdivision.
(4) All components of the sanitary sewerage system must be designed
by a professional engineer registered in the State of Maine. The
Sewerage District shall review and approve the construction
drawings for the sewerage system. The size and location of laterals,
collectors, manholes, and pump stations shall be reviewed and
approved in writing by the District. All components of the system
shall be tested for full compliance with the design specifications
and construction practices established by the District.
(5) The construction of sewer lines shall include the construction of
laterals to the property line of each lot created.
(6) Upstream sewage flows shall be accommodated by an adequately
sized system through the proposed subdivision for existing
conditions and potential development in the upstream area or
areas tributary to the proposed development.
B. Private systems.
(1) When a proposed subdivision is not within the area designated for
public sewage disposal service in the Comprehensive Plan,
connection to the public system shall not be permitted. Sewage
disposal shall be private subsurface wastewater disposal systems
or a private treatment facility with surface discharge.
(2) The applicant shall submit evidence of site suitability for
subsurface sewage disposal prepared by a Maine licensed site
§ 275-36 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-36
252:553
§ 275-37. Solid waste.
The applicant shall provide written verification from the Director of Public
Works that the municipal solid waste system can accommodate the types
and volumes of wastes anticipated to be generated by the occupants of
the subdivision. If the solid waste from the proposed subdivision cannot
be accommodated without exceeding the current contractual limit with the
disposal facility, the Planning Board shall require the applicant to make
alternate arrangements for the disposal of the solid waste. The alternate
arrangements shall be at a disposal facility which is in compliance with
its license. The Board may require the alternate arrangement until a new
contract is negotiated or for up to five years, whichever is less.
§ 275-38. Impact on aesthetics, open spaces, historic areas, wildlife
habitat and shoreline access.
evaluator in full compliance with the requirements of the State of
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
(a) The site evaluator shall certify in writing that all test pits which
meet the requirements for a new system represent an area
large enough for a disposal area on soils which meet the
Disposal Rules.
(b) On lots in which the limiting factor has been identified as being
within 24 inches of the surface, a second site with suitable soils
shall be shown as a reserve area for future replacement of the
disposal area. The reserve area shall be shown on the plan and
restricted so as not to be built upon.
(c) In no instance shall a disposal area be on a site which requires
a new system variance from the Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules.
A. Preservation of natural beauty and aesthetics.
(1) The plan shall, by notes on the final plan and deed restrictions, limit
the clearing of trees to those areas designated on the plan.
(2) Except in areas of the municipality designated by the
Comprehensive Plan as growth areas, the subdivision shall be
designed to minimize the visibility of buildings from existing public
roads.
(3) The Board may require the application to include a landscape plan
that will show the preservation of any existing trees larger than 24
inches in diameter at breast height, the replacement of trees and
vegetation, and graded contours.
(4) When a proposed subdivision street traverses open fields, the plans
shall include the planting of street trees.
§ 275-36 SANFORD CODE § 275-38
252:554
B. Retention of open spaces and natural, historic, or archaeological
features.
(1) If any portion of the subdivision is located within an area
designated by the Comprehensive Plan as open space, that portion
shall be reserved for open space preservation.
(2) If any portion of the subdivision is located within an area
designated as a unique natural area by the Comprehensive Plan or
the Maine Natural Areas Program, the plan shall indicate
appropriate measures for the preservation of the values which
qualify the site for such designation.
(3) If any portion of the subdivision is designated a site of historic,
prehistoric, or archaeological importance by the Comprehensive
Plan or the Maine Historic Preservation Commission, appropriate
measures for the protection of the historic, prehistoric, or
archaeological resources shall be included in the plan.
C. Protection of significant wildlife habitat.
(1) If any portion of a proposed major subdivision lies within the
following areas, the applicant shall demonstrate that there shall be
no adverse impacts on the habitat and species it supports:
(a) Two hundred fifty feet of the following areas identified and
mapped by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or
the Comprehensive Plan as:
[1] Habitat for species appearing on the official state or
federal lists of endangered or threatened species;
[2] High and moderate value waterfowl habitats, including
nesting and feeding areas; or
[3] A high or moderate value deer wintering area or travel
corridor; or
(b) Other important habitat areas identified in the Comprehensive
Plan.
(2) A report prepared by a wildlife biologist certified by the Wildlife
Society with demonstrated experience with the wildlife resource
being impacted shall be submitted. This report shall assess the
potential impact of the subdivision on the significant habitat and
adjacent areas that are important to the maintenance of the
affected species and shall describe appropriate mitigation
measures to ensure that the subdivision will have no adverse
impacts on the habitat and the species it supports.
D. Shoreline access. Any existing public rights of access to the shoreline of
a water body shall be maintained by means of easements or rights-of-
§ 275-38 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-38
252:555
§ 275-39. Conformance with other regulations.
All lots shall meet the minimum dimensional requirements of Chapter 280,
Zoning, and Chapter 270, Shoreland Zoning, for the zoning district in
which they are located. The proposed subdivision shall meet all applicable
performance standards or design criteria from Chapter 280, Zoning,
Chapter 270, Shoreland Zoning, Chapter 275, Floodplain Management, and
all other applicable land use regulations. If there is a conflict between
the requirements of this chapter and any other ordinance or between the
requirements of other ordinances, the more stringent requirement shall
apply.
§ 275-40. Financial and technical capacity.
§ 275-41. Impact on water quality or shoreline.
The application shall demonstrate that the cutting or removal of vegetation
along water bodies will not increase water temperature or result in
shoreline erosion or sedimentation of water bodies.
§ 275-42. Impact on groundwater quality or quantity.
way or should be included in the open space with provisions made for
continued public access.
A. Financial capacity. The applicant shall have adequate financial
resources to construct the proposed improvements and meet the
criteria of the statute and the standards of these regulations. When the
applicant proposes to construct the buildings as well as the subdivision
improvements, the applicant shall have adequate financial resources to
construct the total development. In making the above determinations,
the Board shall consider the proposed time frame for construction and
the effects of inflation.
B. Technical ability.
(1) The applicant shall retain qualified contractors and consultants to
supervise, construct, and inspect the required improvements in the
proposed subdivision.
(2) In determining the applicant's technical ability, the Board shall
consider the applicant's previous experience, the experience and
training of the applicant's consultants and contractors, and the
existence of violations of previous approvals involving the
applicant, consultants, contractors, or other agents of the
applicant.
A. Groundwater quality.
(1) When a hydrogeologic assessment is submitted, the assessment
shall contain at least the following information:
§ 275-38 SANFORD CODE § 275-42
252:556
(a) A map showing the basic soils types.
(b) The depth to the water table at representative points
throughout the subdivision.
(c) Drainage conditions throughout the subdivision.
(d) Data on the existing groundwater quality, either from test wells
in the subdivision or from existing wells on neighboring
properties.
(e) An analysis and evaluation of the effect of the subdivision on
groundwater resources. In the case of residential
developments, the evaluation shall, at a minimum, include a
projection of post-development nitrate-nitrogen concentrations
at any wells within the subdivision, or at the subdivision
boundaries, or at a distance of 1,000 feet from potential
contamination sources, whichever is a shortest distance.
(f) A map showing the location of any subsurface wastewater
disposal systems and drinking water wells within the
subdivision and within 200 feet of the subdivision boundaries.
(2) Projections of groundwater quality shall be based on the
assumption of drought conditions (assuming 60% of annual
average precipitation).
(3) No subdivision shall increase any contaminant concentration in the
groundwater to more than 1/2 of the Primary Drinking Water
Standards. No subdivision shall increase any contaminant
concentration in the groundwater to more than the Secondary
Drinking Water Standards.
(4) If groundwater contains contaminants in excess of the primary
standards and the subdivision is to be served by on-site
groundwater supplies, the applicant shall demonstrate how water
quality will be improved or treated.
(5) If groundwater contains contaminants in excess of the secondary
standards, the subdivision shall not cause the concentration of the
parameters in question to exceed 150% of the ambient
concentration.
(6) Subsurface wastewater disposal systems and drinking water wells
shall be constructed as shown on the map submitted with the
assessment. If construction standards for drinking water wells or
other measures to reduce groundwater contamination and protect
drinking water supplies are recommended in the assessment, those
standards shall be included as a note on the final plan and as
restrictions in the deeds to the affected lots.
B. Groundwater quantity.
§ 275-42 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-42
252:557
§ 275-43. Floodplain management.
When any part of a subdivision is located in a special flood hazard area as
identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
§ 275-44. Identification of freshwater wetlands.
Freshwater wetlands, including forested wetlands, shall be identified and
mapped in accordance with the 1987 Corps of Engineers Wetland
Delineation Manual, published by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers.
§ 275-45. Stormwater management.
(1) Groundwater withdrawals by a proposed subdivision shall not
lower the water table beyond the boundaries of the subdivision.
(2) A proposed subdivision shall not result in a lowering of the water
table at the subdivision boundary by increasing runoff with a
corresponding decrease in infiltration of precipitation.
A. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damages.
B. Adequate drainage shall be provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
C. The plan shall include a statement that structures in the subdivision
shall be constructed with their lowest floor, including the basement, at
least one foot above the one-hundred-year flood elevation. Such a
restriction shall be included in any deed, lease, purchase and sale
agreement, or document transferring or expressing an intent to
transfer any interest in real estate or structure, including but not
limited to a time-share interest. The statement shall clearly state that
the municipality will enforce the construction requirements, and that
fact shall also be included in the deed or any other document previously
described.
A. Adequate provision shall be made for the management of the quantity
and quality of all stormwater generated within the subdivision and any
drained groundwater through a management system using practices
equivalent to those described in "Stormwater Management for Maine:
Best Management Practices," published by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection, 1995. The stormwater management system
shall be designed to meet the following standards:
(1) Quantity. Peak discharge rates shall be limited to the
predevelopment levels for the two-year, ten-year, and twenty-fiveyear
frequency, twenty-four-hour duration storm unless stormwater
from the subdivision will drain directly into the Mousam River,
Number One Pond, Estes Lake, or Bauneg Beg Pond, or other large
§ 275-42 SANFORD CODE § 275-45
252:558
§ 275-46. Recreation and open space areas.
The applicant shall be responsible for demonstrating that there are
adequate recreational areas and open space to meet the needs of the
residents of the subdivision. The Planning Board may approve a subdivision
without any provision for recreational areas or open space if it determines,
based upon the recommendation of the Director of Public Works, that there
are adequate recreation facilities and open space in the neighborhood
to serve the proposed subdivision and other development that can be
water body approved by the Town Engineer as having adequate
capacity to absorb the increased runoff without adverse impacts.
(2) Quality.
(a) Major subdivisions. Stormwater runoff in major subdivisions
must conform to the State of Maine Stormwater Quality
Standards and obtain a stormwater permit from the DEP.
(b) Minor subdivisions. Stormwater runoff in minor subdivisions
must conform to the State of Maine Stormwater Quality
Standards and obtain a permit from the DEP if the project is
subject to the state standards. If a stormwater permit is not
required, the stormwater shall be treated by the use of best
management practices equivalent to those described in
"Stormwater Management for Maine: Best Management
Practices," published by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection, 1995, to achieve, by design, a
fifteen-percent reduction in total suspended solids.
B. Where necessary to achieve the above standards, there shall be
provided easements or drainage rights-of-way with swales, culverts,
catch basins or other means of channeling surface water within the
subdivision and over other properties. Whenever elements of the storm
drainage system are not within the right-of-way of a public street and
the facilities will not be offered to the Town for acceptance as public
facilities, perpetual easements not less than 30 feet in width shall be
provided to the municipality allowing maintenance and improvement of
the system. If there are elements of the stormwater system serving
more than one lot that require future maintenance to remain effective
that are located outside of the right-of-way of a proposed public street,
the Planning Board may require that the applicant offer to give these to
the Town with a condition of approval that the Town be permitted to
assess the lot owners on a pro rata basis for the costs of the future
maintenance of these stormwater facilities. A note relative to this
condition of approval shall appear on the approved plan and an
indication of the condition of approval shall be placed in the deed of
each lot subject to the condition. When an offer of dedication is
required by the Planning Board, the applicant shall be responsible for
the maintenance of these stormwater facilities until they are accepted
by the Town.
§ 275-45 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-46
252:559
reasonably expected to occur in the neighborhood. If the Board determines
that there are inadequate recreational facilities and open space to serve the
proposed development, the provisions for recreational or open space use
shall depend on the proposed lot sizes within the subdivision. If the average
lot size is less than 20,000 square feet, the equivalent of an area equal to at
least 10% of the total area of the subdivision shall be provided for recreation
and open space. If the average lot size is 20,000 square feet or more, the
equivalent of an area equal to at least 5% of the site shall be provided.
§ 275-47. Phosphorus impacts on great ponds.
A. This requirement can be met through the following methods:
(1) The applicant may propose to dedicate land to the Town that is
shown in the Comprehensive Plan or Open Space Plan as being
desired for recreational or open use in accordance with Subsection
B; or
(2) The applicant may propose to make a payment in lieu of dedication
of land in accordance with Subsection C.
B. If the applicant proposes to dedicate land:
(1) The land proposed for dedication must be approved as being
suitable for municipal recreation and/or open space use by the
Director of Public Works.
(2) The size of the area proposed to be dedicated shall be equal to or
greater than the required area set forth above.
(3) The final application submission shall contain the following:
(a) Evidence of the applicant's right, title, or interest in the land
proposed to be dedicated.
(b) An offer of dedication.
(4) Prior to the consideration of the dedication by the Town Council,
the applicant shall prepare, at his/her cost, the necessary deeds
and other paperwork in form satisfactory to the Town's Attorney.
C. If the applicant proposes to make a payment in lieu of dedication, the
payment shall be calculated based on the percentage of land that would
be required to be provided and the projected market value of that land
in its predevelopment, unimproved state at the time of the subdivision
as determined by the Municipal Tax Assessor. The payment in lieu of
dedication shall be deposited into a municipal open space or outdoor
recreation facility acquisition or improvement fund and may be used
only for the purpose of acquiring, improving or developing open space
or recreation facilities that will benefit the area of the community in
which the proposed subdivision is located.
A. Phosphorus export.
§ 275-46 SANFORD CODE § 275-47
252:560
(1) Any major subdivision and any minor subdivision within the
watershed of a great pond subject to the State Stormwater Quality
Standards shall conform to the State Stormwater Quality
Standards and obtain a stormwater permit from the DEP.
(2) Any subdivision located in the direct watershed of a great pond and
not subject to the State Stormwater Quality Standards shall
conform to the simplified phosphorus review procedure contained
in § 275-60.
B. Maintenance and use restrictions for phosphorus control measures.
Provisions for monitoring, inspecting, and maintaining phosphorus
control measures shall be included in the application. If buffer strips
are used as a phosphorous control measure, individual lot owners shall
be required to maintain buffer areas on their individual lots in
accordance with the following standards, to be specified in recorded
deed restrictions and as notes on the plan. Where a vegetative buffer
strip is to be owned in common by property owners in the subdivision,
documentation establishing the lot owners' association shall include the
following standards.
(1) Wooded buffers. Maintenance provisions for wooded buffers shall
provide for either of the following two options:
(a) No disturbance. Maintenance and use provisions for wooded
buffer strips which are located on Hydrologic Soil Group D
soils and within 250 feet of the great pond or a tributary, or
which are located on slopes over 20%, shall include the
following:
[1] Buffers shall be inspected annually for evidence of erosion
or concentrated flows through or around the buffer. All
eroded areas must be seeded and mulched. A shallow
stone trench must be installed as a level spreader to
distribute flows evenly in any area showing concentrated
flows.
[2] All existing undergrowth (vegetation less than four feet
high), forest floor duff layer, and leaf litter must remain
undisturbed and intact, except that one winding walking
path, no wider than six feet, is allowed through the buffer.
This path shall not be a straight line to the great pond or
tributary and shall remain stabilized.
[3] Pruning of live tree branches that do not exceed 12 feet
above the ground level is permitted, provided that at least
the top 2/3 of the tree canopy is maintained.
[4] No cutting is allowed of trees except for normal
maintenance of dead, wind-blown, or damaged trees.
§ 275-47 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-47
252:561
[5] Buffers shall not be used for all-terrain vehicle or vehicular
traffic.
(b) Limited disturbance. Maintenance and use provisions for other
buffer strips may include the following:
[1] There shall be no cleared openings. An evenly distributed
stand of trees and other vegetation shall be maintained.
[2] Activity within the buffer shall be conducted to minimize
disturbance of existing forest floor, leaf litter and
vegetation less than four feet in height. Where the existing
ground cover is disturbed and results in exposed mineral
soil, that area shall be immediately stabilized to avoid soil
erosion.
[3] Removal of vegetation less than four feet in height is
limited to that necessary to create a winding footpath no
wider than six feet. This path shall not be a straight line to
the great pond or a tributary. The path must remain
stabilized.
[4] Pruning of live tree branches that do not exceed 12 feet in
height above the ground level is permitted, provided that
at least the top 2/3 of the tree canopy is maintained.
[5] Where the removal of storm-damaged, diseased, unsafe, or
dead trees results in a cleared opening, those openings
shall be replanted with native trees at least three feet in
height unless existing new tree growth is present.
[6] Buffers shall not be used for all-terrain vehicle or vehicular
traffic.
(2) Nonwooded buffers.
(a) Nonwooded buffers may be allowed to revert or to be planted
to forest, in which case the standards above shall apply.
(b) A buffer must maintain a dense, complete and vigorous cover
of nonlawn vegetation which shall be mowed no more than
once a year. Vegetation may include grass, other herbaceous
species, shrubs and trees.
(c) Activity within the buffer shall be conducted so as to prevent
damage to vegetation and exposure of mineral soil. Burning of
vegetation shall be prohibited.
(d) Buffers shall not be used for all-terrain vehicles or other
vehicular traffic.
§ 275-47 SANFORD CODE § 275-48
252:562
§ 275-48. Spaghetti lots.
Any lot that has shore frontage on a river, stream, brook, or great pond as
defined by 38 M.R.S.A. § 480-B shall not have a ratio of lot depth to shore
frontage greater than five to one.
§ 275-48 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-48
252:563

ARTICLE XI
Design Guidelines
§ 275-49. Intent.
This article provides design guidelines which, if followed, will result in
meeting the appropriate performance standards of Article X. Compliance
with these guidelines shall be considered evidence of meeting those
standards. Proposed subdivisions not in compliance with the design
guidelines of this article may be considered, but the applicant shall provide
clear and convincing evidence that the proposed design will meet the
performance standard(s) and the statutory criteria. In all instances, the
burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to present adequate information
to demonstrate that all performance standards and statutory criteria for
approval have been or will be met.
§ 275-50. Sufficient water.
A. Well construction. Wells shall not be constructed within 100 feet of the
edge of the pavement of any street, if located downhill from the street,
or within 50 feet of the edge of the pavement of any street, if located
uphill of the street. This restriction shall be included as a note on the
plan and included in deed restrictions for the affected lots.
B. Fire protection.
(1) If fire hydrants connected to a public water supply system are
provided, they shall be located in accordance with the standards of
the Sanford Water District and the Fire Department, and each
location shall be approved in writing by the Fire Chief or his
designee.
(2) If fire hydrants are not provided and the Planning Board
determines that a fire protection water supply is needed, a
minimum storage capacity of 10,000 gallons plus additional storage
of 2,000 gallons per lot or principal building or such other amount
as required by the Fire Chief shall be provided. Where fire ponds
are proposed for water storage, the capacity of the pond shall be
calculated based on the lowest projected water level less an
equivalent of three feet of ice. A detailed plan of the required pond,
dry hydrant, piping, and/or access road shall be submitted as part
of the application. The Town Engineer and Fire Chief shall approve
the design of all storage facilities. Subject to the review and
approval of the Sanford Fire Marshal, individual fire suppression
systems may be utilized for fire protection. [Amended 7-18-2006]
(3) Hydrants or other provisions for fire protection water supply shall
meet the specifications of the Fire Department and NFPA 1231. The
design of hydrants shall be approved by the Fire Chief or his
designee. The minimum pipe size connecting dry hydrants to ponds
or underground storage shall be six inches.
§ 275-49 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-50
252:565
§ 275-51. Traffic conditions.
(4) Where a dry hydrant or other water source is not within the rightof-
way of a proposed or existing public street, an easement shall be
provided to the Town for access to, maintenance, and use of the dry
hydrant or reservoir. A suitable accessway to the hydrant or other
water source shall be constructed by the applicant. It shall be built
to standards approved by the Town Engineer and the Fire Chief.
Individual property owners and/or homeowner associations shall be
responsible for the maintenance of the fire protection system.
[Amended 7-18-200697]
A. Access control.
(1) Where a subdivision abuts or contains a principal arterial as
identified by § 280-75 of Chapter 280, Zoning, no new residential
lot shall have vehicular access directly onto the arterial street
unless the Planning Board waives this requirement in accordance
with § 280-75B of Chapter 280, Zoning. This requirement shall be
noted on the plan and in the deed of any lot adjacent to a principal
arterial.
(2) Where a lot has frontage on two or more streets, the access to the
lot shall be provided across the frontage and to the street where
there is lesser potential for traffic congestion and for hazards to
traffic and pedestrians. This restriction shall appear as a note on
the plan and as a deed restriction for the affected lot.
B. Subdivision access design. Streets, private roads, or common drives
that provide access to a subdivision shall conform to the following
standards. When the access to a subdivision is a street, the street
design and construction standards of Subsection C below shall also be
met. Where there is a conflict between the standards in this subsection
and the standards of Subsection C, the stricter or more stringent shall
apply.
(1) General. Access design shall be based on the estimated volume
using the access classification defined below. Traffic volume
estimates shall be as defined in the Trip Generation Manual, 1997
Edition, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers.
(a) Low-volume residential access: any access to a residential
subdivision with 50 or fewer vehicle trips per day.
(b) High-volume residential access: any access to a residential
subdivision with more than 50 vehicle trips per day.
97.Editor's Note: This ordinance also deleted original § 12.1B(5), which immediately followed
this subsection.
§ 275-50 SANFORD CODE § 275-51
252:566
(c) Commercial access: any street or drive providing access to a
nonresidential use or subdivision or to a project with a mix of
residential and nonresidential uses.
(2) Sight distances. Streets and other accesses shall be located and
designed in profile and grading to provide adequate sight distance
measured in each direction. Sight distances shall be measured
from the driver's seat of a vehicle standing on that portion of the
exit with the front of the vehicle a minimum of 10 feet behind the
curbline or edge of shoulder, with the height of the eye 3.5 feet, to
the top of an object 4.25 feet above the pavement. The required
sight distances are listed by road width and for various posted
speed limits.
(a) Two-lane roads. A minimum sight distance of 10 feet for each
mile per hour of posted speed limit shall be maintained or
provided.
(b) Four-lane roads. The sight distances provided below shall be
maintained or provided. These standards are based on
passenger cars exiting from accesses onto four-lane roads and
are designed to enable exiting vehicles:
[1] Upon turning left or right, to accelerate to the operating
speed of the street without causing approaching vehicles
to reduce speed by more than 10 miles per hour; and
[2] Upon turning left, to clear the near half of the street
without conflicting with vehicles approaching from the
left.
Safe Sight Distance
Operating Speed
(miles per hour)
Left
(feet)
Right
(feet)
20 130 130
30 220 260
40 380 440
50 620 700
(3) Vertical alignment. Accesses shall be designed to prevent surface
water from draining across the intersection. Accesses shall slope
upward or downward from the gutter line at a maximum slope of
3% for at least 75 feet. The maximum grade over the entire length
shall not exceed 10%. Accesses shall be flat enough to prevent the
dragging of any vehicle undercarriage.
(4) Access layout and design. The layout and design of the intersection
of a proposed street or other access with an existing or proposed
public street shall be appropriate for the anticipated use and traffic
§ 275-51 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-51
252:567
volume. Any access with a peak hour traffic volume of more than
100 passenger car equivalent trips shall be designed based on
a site-specific traffic analysis prepared by a traffic engineer. Any
access with 100 or fewer peak hour trips shall conform to the
following standards:
(a) Width. The width of the access shall be the minimum necessary
to serve the proposed use and anticipated traffic volume. The
width of the street or other access at the intersection or curb
cut shall not exceed the following:
[1] Low-volume residential: 20 feet.
[2] High-volume residential: 26 feet.
[3] Commercial (two-way): 30 feet.
[4] Commercial (with median/divider): 20 feet each side.
(b) Curb radii. Curb radii shall reflect the anticipated volume of
use (as determined by the ITE Trip Generation Manual), the
type of vehicles that will use the access, and the environment
in which the access is located. Curb radii for low-volume
residential accesses should be a maximum of 15 feet in built-up
areas and 20 feet in suburban and rural areas. Curb radii for
high-volume residential accesses or commercial accesses
should be a maximum of 30 feet in built-up areas and a
maximum of 40 feet in suburban and rural areas.
(c) Planning Board modification. The Planning Board may allow
greater access widths or larger curb radii if necessary for
safety or to accommodate turning lanes or truck traffic.
(d) Skew angle. The skew angle shall be as close to 90° as
possible, but in no case shall the angle be less than 60°.
(5) Access location and spacing.
(a) Minimum corner clearance. Corner clearance shall be
measured from the point of tangency of the corner to the point
of tangency of the access. In general the maximum practical
corner clearance should be provided based on site constraints.
Minimum corner clearances are listed in the following table,
based upon access volume and intersection type.
§ 275-51 SANFORD CODE § 275-51
252:568
Minimum Standards for Corner Clearance
Minimum Corner Clearance (Dc)
Access Type
Intersection
Signalized
(feet)
Intersection
Unsignalized
(feet)
Low-volume
residential
150 50
High-volume
residential
150 50
Commercial 500 250
(b) Access spacing. Accesses and street intersections shall be
separated from adjacent accesses, streets, and property lines
as indicated in the following table in order to allow major
through routes to effectively serve their primary function of
conducting through traffic. This distance shall be measured
from the access point of tangency to the access point of
tangency for spacing between accesses and from the access
point of tangency to a projection of the property line at the
edge of the roadway for access spacing to the property line.
Minimum Access Spacing
Minimum Spacing to Adjacent
Access
by Access Type2 (Dsp)3
Access
Type
Minimum
Spacing to
Property
Line
(Dpl)1
(feet)
Low
Resident
(feet)
High
Resident
(feet)
Comm
w/o RT
(feet)
Comm
w/ RT
(feet)
Lowvolume
residential
5 50 50 75 100
Highvolume
residential
10 50 75 100 150
Commercial
(w/o RT)4
10 75 100 150 250
Commercial
(w/RT)5
10 100 150 250 400
§ 275-51 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-51
252:569
NOTES:
1Dpl measured from point of tangency of access to projection
of property line on roadway edge.
2For two more accesses serving a single parcel, or from a
proposed access from an existing access.
3Dsp measured from point of tangency of access to point of
tangency of adjacent access.
4Access without right turn channelization.
5Access with right turn channelization.
(6) Number of accesses. The maximum number of accesses shall
conform to § 280-76B of Chapter 280, Zoning.
§ 275-51 SANFORD CODE § 275-51
252:570
(7) Construction materials/paving.
(a) All accesses entering a curbed street shall be curbed with
materials matching the street curbing. Sloped curbing is
required around all raised channelization islands or medians.
(b) All accesses shall be paved with bituminous concrete pavement
within the street right-of-way. All commercial accesses,
regardless of access volume, shall be paved with bituminous
concrete pavement or other paving material approved by the
Director of Public Works within 30 feet of the street right-ofway.
(c) In addition, all other aspects of access construction shall
comply with the provisions of § 280-76C(4) of Chapter 280,
Zoning.
C. Street design and construction standards.
(1) General requirements.
(a) The Board shall not approve any subdivision plan unless
proposed streets are designed in accordance with the
specifications contained in these regulations. Approval of the
final plan by the Board shall not be deemed to constitute or be
evidence of acceptance by the municipality of any street or
easement.
(b) Applicants shall submit to the Board, as part of the final plan,
detailed construction drawings showing a plan view, profile,
and typical cross section of the proposed streets and existing
streets within 300 feet of any proposed intersections. The plan
view shall be at a scale of one inch equals no more than 50 feet.
The vertical scale of the profile shall be one inch equals no
more than five feet. The plans shall include the following
information:
[1] Date, scale, and North arrow, indicating magnetic or true
North.
[2] Intersections of the proposed street with existing streets.
[3] Roadway and right-of-way limits, including edge of
pavement, edge of shoulder, sidewalks, and curbs.
[4] Kind, size, location, material, profile, and cross section of
all existing and proposed drainage structures and their
location with respect to existing natural waterways and
proposed drainageways.
[5] Complete curve data for all horizontal and vertical curves.
[6] Turning radii at all intersections.
§ 275-51 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-51
252:571
[7] Center-line gradients.
[8] Size, type, and locations of all existing and proposed
overhead and underground utilities, including but not
limited to water, sewer, electricity, telephone, lighting, and
cable television.
(c) Where the applicant proposes improvements within existing
public streets, the proposed design and construction details
shall be approved in writing by the Town Engineer or the
Maine Department of Transportation, as appropriate.
(d) Where the subdivision streets are to remain private roads, the
following notes shall appear on the recorded plan:
[1] The Town of Sanford shall not be responsible for the
maintenance, repair, plowing, or similar services for the
private way(s) shown on this plan.
[2] Any private way shown on this plan shall not be accepted
as a public street by the Town of Sanford unless the way
complies with the standards for public streets (including
right-of-way width) existing at the time acceptance is
requested.
(2) Street design standards.
(a) These design guidelines shall control the roadway, shoulders,
curbs, sidewalks, drainage systems, culverts, and other
appurtenances associated with the street. These guidelines
shall be met by all streets within a subdivision, unless the
applicant can provide clear and convincing evidence that an
alternate design is good engineering practice and will meet the
performance standards of Article X.
(b) Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited
except where their control is definitely placed with the
municipality.
(c) Adjacent to areas zoned and designed for commercial use, or
where a change of zoning to a zone which permits commercial
uses is contemplated by the municipality, the street right-ofway
and/or pavement width shall be increased on each side by
half of the amount necessary to bring the road into
conformance with the standards for commercial streets in
these regulations.
(d) Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow street (not
meeting the right-of-way width requirements of the standards
for streets in these regulations), or when the Comprehensive
Plan indicates plans for realignment or widening of a road that
would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the
§ 275-51 SANFORD CODE § 275-51
252:572
plan shall indicate reserved areas for widening or realigning
the road marked "Reserved for Road Realignment (Widening)
Purposes." Land reserved for such purposes may not be
included in computing lot area or setback requirements of
Chapter 280, Zoning. When such widening or realignment is
included in the municipality's capital investment plan, the
reserve area shall not be included in any lot but shall be
reserved to be acquired by the municipality or state.
(e) Any subdivision containing more than 15 dwelling units shall
have at least two street connections with existing public
streets, streets shown on an Official Map, or streets on an
approved subdivision plan for which performance guarantees
have been filed and accepted. Any street with an average daily
traffic of 200 trips per day or more shall have at least two
street connections leading to existing public streets, streets
shown on an Official Map, or streets on an approved
subdivision plan for which performance guarantees have been
filed and accepted.
(f) The design standards of Table 1 and the typical cross sections
in Appendix A 98 shall apply according to street classification.
The urban classifications shall apply in those areas designated
as growth areas in the Comprehensive Plan. The rural
classifications shall apply in those areas designated as rural in
the Comprehensive Plan. In addition, private ways shall
conform to the standards of § 280-85 of Chapter 280, Zoning.
(g) The center line of the roadway shall be the center line of the
right-of-way.
(h) Dead-end streets.
[1] In addition to the design standards in Table 1, dead-end
streets shall be constructed to provide a cul-de-sac
turnaround or other turnaround approved by the Director
of Public Works. Where a turning circle is used, it shall
meet the following requirements for radii:
[a] Property line: 85 feet.
[b] Outer edge of pavement: 75 feet.
[c] Inner edge of pavement: 50 feet.
[2] The Planning Board may require larger radii for turning
circles on a commercial street. The island in the circle
shall be landscaped in a manner requiring low
maintenance. Where the turning circle is in a wooded area
98.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter. Appendix A is on file at the
Town Clerk's office.
§ 275-51 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-51
252:573
prior to development, a stand of trees shall be maintained
within the center of the circle if possible. The Board shall
require the reservation of a twenty-foot easement in line
with the street to provide continuation of pedestrian traffic
or utilities to the next street. The Board may also require
the reservation of a fifty-foot easement in line with the
street to provide continuation of the road where future
subdivision is possible. If a hammerhead or "T" turnaround
is approved, no driveways shall enter onto the turnaround.
A dead-end street shall be limited to a maximum of 15
dwelling units (not including corner lots that gain their
access from another street). The length of a dead end
shall not exceed 1,500 feet. The Planning Board may waive
these requirements if the applicant demonstrates that:
[a] No other reasonable access exists; or
[b] The shape or configuration of the parcel makes a
longer dead end necessary for the reasonable
development of the property.
(i) Grades, intersections and sight distances.
[1] Grades of all streets shall conform in general to the
terrain, so that cut and fill are minimized while
maintaining the grade standards above.
[2] All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves
in order to provide the following minimum stopping sight
distances based on the street design speed:
Design Speed
(miles per hour)
20 25 30 35
Stopping sight
distance (feet)
125 150 200 250
[3] Stopping sight distance shall be calculated with a height of
eye at 3 1/2 feet and the height of object at two feet.
[4] Cross (four-cornered) street intersections shall be avoided
insofar as possible, except as shown on the Comprehensive
Plan or at other important traffic intersections.
(j) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed within all subdivisions
within areas designated as growth areas in the Comprehensive
Plan. Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of the street
where sidewalks are required. The Planning Board may permit
sidewalks on one side of the street or may waive the
requirement for sidewalks if the Board finds that there are
adequate alternative provisions for pedestrians outside of the
§ 275-51 SANFORD CODE § 275-51
252:574
right-of-way or that the scale of the project makes sidewalks
unnecessary on one or both sides. Where sidewalks exist
adjacent to a proposed subdivision outside of growth areas,
sidewalks shall be installed connecting to existing sidewalks.
Where installed, sidewalks shall meet these minimum
requirements:
[1] Location. Sidewalks shall be located adjacent to the curb.
[2] Sidewalk construction. Portland cement concrete
sidewalks shall be provided in all areas where sidewalks
are required and shall comply with the following
standards. The Planning Board may approve the use of
alternative materials with the approval of the Director of
Public Works. The applicant shall be responsible for
demonstrating that the alternative material is an
acceptable equivalent.
[a] The subbase aggregate shall be no less than 12 inches
thick after compaction.
[b] The 4,000 psi Portland cement concrete shall be
reinforced with six-by-six-inch square No. 6 welded
wire mesh or fiber reinforcement.
[c] The sidewalk shall be no less than four inches thick.
The depth shall be increased to six inches under
driveways.
[d] Handicapped access ramps shall be provided at all
intersections and other pedestrian crossings.
(k) Curbs shall be installed wherever a sidewalk is provided and in
other areas as needed to control stormwater drainage or
vehicle movement. The curb shall be a cast-in-place concrete
curb that is monolithic with the sidewalk. The specified
traveled way width shall be measured between the curbs.
(3) Street construction standards. Streets shall be constructed to the
following standards. For any aspect of construction not covered by
these standards, the appropriate material and construction
performance standards of the Maine Department of Transportation
shall apply. The Planning Board may waive or modify these
standards with the approval of the Director of Public Works if it
finds that the alternative will be equivalent.
(a) The minimum thickness of material after reaching 95% of
modified Proctor maximum density shall meet the
specifications in the following table:
§ 275-51 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-51
252:575
Minimum Pavement Materials Thicknesses
Street
Materials CommercialCollector Local
Private
Way
Aggregate
subbase course
(maximum sized
stone 6 inches)
(inches)
20 15 15 12
Crushed
aggregate base
course (inches)
4 3 3 3
Hot bituminous
pavement
(inches)
Total
thickness
4 1/2 3 3 N/A
Surface
course
[MeDOT
403.210
Superpave
Mix 3/8 inch
(9.5mm)]
1 1/2 1 1 N/A
Base course
[MeDOT
403.207
Superpave
Mix 3/4 inch
(19mm)]
3 2 2 N/A
Surface gravel
(inches)
N/A N/A N/A 2
(b) Preparation.
[1] Before any clearing has started on the right-of-way, the
center line and side lines of the new road shall be staked
or flagged at fifty-foot intervals.
[2] Before grading is started, the entire area within the rightof-
way necessary for traveled way, shoulders, sidewalks,
drainageways, and utilities shall be cleared of all stumps,
roots, brush, and other objectionable material. All shallow
ledge, large boulders and tree stumps shall be removed
from the cleared area.
[3] All organic materials or other deleterious material shall be
removed to a depth of six feet below the finished grade of
§ 275-51 SANFORD CODE § 275-51
252:576
the roadway. Rocks and boulders shall also be removed
to a depth of six feet below the finished grade of the
roadway. On soils that have been identified by the Town
Engineer as not suitable for roadways, the subsoil shall be
removed from the street site to a depth of six feet below
the finished grade and replaced with material meeting the
specifications for gravel aggregate subbase below.
[4] Except in a ledge cut, side slopes shall be no steeper than
a slope of one foot vertical to three feet horizontal and
shall be graded, loamed, limed, fertilized, and seeded
according to the specifications of the erosion and
sedimentation control plan. Where a cut results in exposed
ledge, a side slope no steeper than four feet vertical to one
foot horizontal is permitted.
[5] All underground utilities shall be installed prior to paving
to avoid cuts in the pavement. Building sewers and water
service connections shall be installed to the edge of the
right-of-way prior to paving.
(c) Bases and pavement.
[1] Bases/subbase.
[a] The aggregate subbase course shall be sand or gravel
of hard durable particles free from vegetative matter,
lumps or balls of clay and other deleterious
substances. The gradation of the part that passes a
three-inch-square mesh sieve shall meet the grading
requirements of the following table. Aggregate for the
subbase shall contain no particles of rock exceeding
six inches in any dimension.
Aggregate Subbase Grading Requirements
Sieve Designation
Percentage by Weight
Passing Square Mesh
Sieves
1/4 inch 25% to 70%
No. 40 0% to 30%
No. 200 0% to 7%
[b] An aggregate base course shall be placed on top of the
subbase course. The aggregate base course shall be
screened or crushed gravel of hard durable particles
free from vegetative matter, lumps or balls of clay and
other deleterious substances. The gradation of the
part that passes a three-inch-square mesh sieve shall
meet the grading requirements of the following table.
§ 275-51 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-51
252:577
Aggregate for the base shall contain no particles of
rock exceeding two inches in any dimension.
Base Course Grading Requirements
Sieve
Designation
Percentage by Weight
Passing Square Mesh Sieves
3/8 inch 45% to 70%
1/4 inch 30% to 55%
No. 50 0% to 20%
No. 200 0% to 5%
[2] Pavement joints. Where pavement joins an existing
pavement, the existing pavement shall be cut along a
smooth line to form a neat, even, vertical joint.
[3] Pavements.
[a] Minimum standards for the base layer of pavement
shall be the Maine Department of Transportation
Specification 403.207 for Superpave mix 3/4 inch (18
millimeters). The pavement may be placed between
April 15 and November 15, provided that the air
temperature in the shade at the paving location is 35°
F. or higher and the surface to be paved is not frozen
or unreasonably wet.
[b] Minimum standards for the surface layer of pavement
shall be the Maine Department of Transportation
Specification 403.210 for Superpave mix 3/8 inch (9.5
millimeters). The pavement may be placed between
April 15 and October 15, provided that the air
temperature in the shade at the paving location is 50°
F. or higher.
[4] Surface gravel. Private ways approved in accordance with
§ 280-85 of Chapter 280, Zoning, need not be paved and
may have a gravel surface. Surface gravel shall be placed
on top of the aggregate subbase, shall have no stones
larger than two inches in size and meet the grading
requirements of the following table:
Surface Gravel Grading Requirements
Sieve Designation
Percentage by Weight
Passing Square Mesh
Sieves
2 inch 95% to 100%
2 inch 30% to 65%
No. 200 7% to 12%
§ 275-51 SANFORD CODE § 275-52
252:578
§ 275-52. Wildlife habitat, rare natural areas or public access to
shoreline.
A. Preservation of natural beauty and aesthetics.
(1) Subdivisions within the Rural Residential and Rural Mixed-Use
Zones shall maintain a vegetated buffer along existing roads as
provided in §§ 280-40H and 280-41H of Chapter 280, Zoning. The
buffer may be broken only for driveways and streets.
(2) Unless located in areas designated as a growth area in the
Comprehensive Plan, building locations shall be restricted from
open fields and shall be located within forested portions of the
subdivision. When the subdivision contains no forest or insufficient
forested portions to include all buildings, the subdivision shall be
designed to minimize the appearance of building when viewed from
existing public streets.
(3) When a proposed subdivision street traverses open fields, the plan
shall include the planting of street trees. Street trees shall include
a mix of tall shade trees and medium-height flowering species.
Trees shall be planted no more than 50 feet apart.
B. Retention of natural or historic features.
(1) Sites selected primarily for scenic or passive recreation purposes
shall have such access as the Board may deem suitable and no less
than 25 feet of road frontage. The configuration of such sites shall
be deemed adequate by the Board with regard to scenic attributes
and significant wildlife habitat to be preserved, together with
sufficient areas for trails, lookouts, etc., where necessary and
appropriate.
(2) Proposed subdivisions which include or are adjacent to buildings or
sites on the National Register of Historic Places or which the
Comprehensive Plan has identified as being of historical
significance shall be designed in such a manner as to minimize the
impacts on the historic features. When the historic features to be
protected include buildings, the placement and the architectural
design of new structures in the subdivision shall be compatible with
the historic structures. The Board shall seek the advice of the
Maine Historic Preservation Commission in reviewing such plans.
C. Protection of significant wildlife habitat and important habitat areas.
The following guidelines are designed to protect the significant wildlife
resources identified in the municipality. The Board recognizes that
wildlife management must take into account many site-specific
variables. Applicants proposing to subdivide land within identified
wildlife resources must consult with the Maine Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife or a qualified wildlife biologist and provide their
written comments to the Board. The guidelines of this section shall
§ 275-52 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-52
252:579
§ 275-53. Stormwater management design guidelines.
apply to only those subdivisions which include significant wildlife
habitat or resources identified in § 275-38C.
(1) Protection of habitat of endangered or threatened species.
(a) The habitat of species appearing on the official state or federal
lists of endangered or threatened species shall be maintained
as open space.
(b) Deed restrictions and notes on the plan shall reflect standards
from the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife for
removal of vegetation within 250 feet of the habitat for species
appearing on the list of endangered or threatened species
unless the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife has
approved cutting of vegetation in writing.
(2) Protection of waterfowl habitat.
(a) There shall be no cutting of vegetation within the strip of land
extending 75 feet inland from the normal high-water mark of
high and moderate value waterfowl habitats, including nesting
and feeding areas.
(b) This restriction shall appear as a note on the plan and as a
deed restriction to the affected lots.
(3) Protection of deer wintering areas. The report prepared by a
wildlife biologist, selected or approved by the Board, shall include a
management plan for deer wintering areas.
(4) Protection of shoreland areas.
(a) All areas subject to shoreland zoning shall comply with the
relevant standards.
(b) These restrictions shall appear as notes on the plan and as
deed restrictions to the affected lots.
(5) If the proposed subdivision includes other important wildlife
habitat as identified by the Department of Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife or the Comprehensive Plan, the restrictions on activities in
and around these areas shall be reviewed by the Department or a
qualified wildlife biologist and its or his comments presented in
writing to the Board.
A. The design of best management practices shall be substantially
equivalent to those described in "Stormwater Management for Maine:
Best Management Practices," published by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection, 1995.
§ 275-52 SANFORD CODE § 275-53
252:580
B. Drainage easements for existing watercourses or proposed
drainageways shall be provided at least 30 feet wide, conforming
substantially to the lines of existing natural drainage.
C. The minimum pipe size for any storm drainage pipe shall be 15 inches
for driveway entrances and 18 inches for cross culverts. The minimum
pipe size between drainage structures and at inlets and outfalls shall be
15 inches. Maximum trench width at the pipe crown shall be the outside
diameter of the pipe plus two feet. Pipe shall be bedded in a fine
granular material reaching a minimum of six inches below the bottom of
the pipe and extending to six inches above the top of the pipe. The
material shall contain no stones larger than three inches, lumps of clay,
or organic matter.
D. Catch basins shall be installed where necessary and when located
within a street shall be located at the curbline.
E. Storm drainage construction standards.
(1) Materials.
(a) Storm drainage pipes shall conform to the requirements of
Maine Department of Transportation materials specifications
Section 706 for nonmetallic pipe and Section 707 for metallic
pipe. Plastic (polyethylene) pipes shall not be installed except
in closed systems such as street under drains. Bituminouscoated
steel pipes shall not be used.
(b) Where the storm drainage pipe is to be covered by 10 feet or
more of fill material, pipe material with a fifty-year life shall be
used. These materials include concrete pipe, polymer coated
galvanized corrugated steel pipe, polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
pipe, and corrugated aluminum alloy pipe.
(2) Pipe gauges. Metallic storm drainage pipe shall meet the thickness
requirements of the following table, depending on pipe diameter.
Culvert Size and Thicknesses Material
Inside Diameter
(inches)
Galvanized CMP
Aluminum/Zinc
Coated CMP
Corrugated
Aluminum Alloy
Aluminum Coated
CMP
Polymer Coated CMP
15 to 24 14 ga. 16 ga.
30 to 36 12 ga. 14 ga.
42 to 54 10 ga. 12 ga.
60 to 72 8 ga. 10 ga.
§ 275-53 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-53
252:581
§ 275-54. Impact on water quality or shoreline.
§ 275-55. Blocks.
Where street lengths exceed 1,000 feet between intersections with other
streets, the Board may require a utility/pedestrian easement, at least 20 feet
in width, to provide for underground utility crossings and/or a pedestrian
pathway of at least five feet in width constructed in accordance with design
standards in § 275-51C(2)(j). Maintenance obligations of the easement shall
be included in the written description of the easement.
§ 275-56. Lots.
(3) Drain inlet alignment shall be straight in both horizontal and
vertical alignment unless specific approval of a curvilinear drain is
obtained in writing from the Board, after consultation with the
municipal engineer.
(4) Manholes shall be provided at all changes in vertical or horizontal
alignment and at all junctions. On straight runs, manholes shall be
placed at a maximum of four-hundred-foot intervals.
F. Upon completion, each catch basin or manhole shall be cleaned of all
accumulation of silt, debris or foreign matter and shall be kept clean
until final acceptance.
A. All areas subject to shoreland zoning shall comply with the relevant
standards.
B. These restrictions shall appear as notes on the plan and as deed
restrictions to the affected lots.
A. Wherever possible, side lot lines shall be perpendicular to the street.
B. The subdivision of tracts into parcels with more than twice the required
minimum lot size shall be laid out in such a manner as either to provide
for or preclude future division. Deed restrictions and notes on the plan
shall either prohibit future divisions of the lots or specify that any
future division shall constitute a revision to the plan and shall require
approval from the Board based upon the criteria of the subdivision
statute at the time of the revision, the standards of the Town's
Subdivision Ordinance then in effect, and any conditions placed on the
original approval.
C. If a lot on one side of a stream, road or other similar barrier fails to
meet the minimum requirements for lot size, it may not be combined
with a lot on the other side of the stream, tidal water, or road to meet
the minimum lot size.
D. Flag lots and other odd-shaped lots in which narrow strips of less than
25 feet in width are joined to other parcels in order to meet minimum
lot size requirements are prohibited.
§ 275-53 SANFORD CODE § 275-57
252:582
§ 275-57. Utilities.
Utilities serving subdivisions in areas designated by the Comprehensive
Plan as growth areas shall be installed underground. Utilities serving lots
outside of growth areas with a street frontage of 125 feet or less shall also
be installed underground. The Board may approve overhead utilities when
the applicant provides evidence that the increased costs of underground
utilities will raise the costs of the housing beyond the market in that
location. When utilities are installed underground, the subdivider shall
install appropriate signs indicating the location of such utilities.
§ 275-58. Monuments.
§ 275-59. Cluster developments.
Residential subdivisions may be approved that conform to the residential
cluster development standards found in § 280-89 of Chapter 280, Zoning.
§ 275-60. Phosphorus export.
When a proposed subdivision is within the direct watershed of a great pond
and qualifies for the simplified review procedure, stormwater controls that
remove at least 40% of the total suspended solids (TSS) or vegetated buffer
strips shall be provided. Buffer strips shall be provided on the downhill side
of all lots along all tributaries to great ponds and along the great pond. The
minimum required width of buffer strips is designated in the following table
and depends on the size of the lot, the hydrologic soil group, and whether
deed restrictions are proposed to limit the area which may be cleared on
each lot.
A. Stone or precast reinforced concrete monuments shall be set at all
street intersections and points of curvature but no further than 750 feet
apart along all street lines.
B. Stone or precast reinforced concrete monuments shall be set at all
corners and angle points of the subdivision boundaries where the
interior angle of the subdivision boundaries is 135° or less.
C. Stone or precast reinforced concrete monuments shall be a minimum of
four inches square at the top and four feet in length and set in the
ground at final grade level. If site conditions prohibit the installation of
a four-foot monument, the Town Engineer may approve alternative
provisions for permanent monumentation. After they are set, a drill hole
two inches deep shall locate the point or points described above.
D. All other subdivision boundary corners and angle points, as well as all
lot boundary corners and angle points, shall be marked by suitable
monumentation, as required by the Maine Board of Registration of Land
Surveyors.
§ 275-57 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-60
252:583
Buffer Strip Widths
Buffer Width Per Lot
(feet)
Lot Size
(acres) HSG
Clearing Restricted
to 12,500 Square Feet
No Clearing
Restrictions
Less than 1 A 50 75
B 75 100
C N/A N/A
D N/A N/A
1 to 1.99 A 25 25
B 25 55
C 55 190
D 200 N/A
2 to 2.99 A 25 25
B 25 25
C 25 50
D 25 200
Notes:
HSG is the hydrologic soil group.
All lots three acres and larger shall provide a minimum twenty-five-foot
buffer.
§ 275-60 SANFORD CODE § 275-60
252:584
ARTICLE XII
Performance Guarantees
§ 275-61. Types of guarantees.
§ 275-62. Contents of guarantee.
The performance guarantee shall contain a construction schedule, cost
estimates for each major phase of construction, taking into account
inflation, provisions for inspections of each phase of construction,
provisions for the release of part or all of the performance guarantee to the
developer, and a date after which the applicant will be in default and the
Town shall have access to the funds to finish construction.
§ 275-63. Escrow account.
A cash contribution for the establishment of an escrow account shall be
made by either a certified check made out to the Town, the direct deposit
(or a functional equivalent) into a savings account, or the purchase of a
certificate of deposit in such form as permitted by law and approved as to
form by the Town Attorney. For any account opened by the applicant, the
consent of the Town Manager shall be required for a withdrawal.
§ 275-64. Letter of credit.
An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other lending institution
shall indicate that funds have been set aside for the construction of the
A. With submittal of the application for final plan approval, the applicant
shall provide one of the following performance guarantees for an
amount adequate to cover the total construction costs of all required
improvements, taking into account the time span of the construction
schedule and the inflation rate for construction costs:
(1) Either a certified check payable to the municipality or a savings
account or certificate of deposit for the establishment of an escrow
account in such form as permitted by law and approved as to form
by the Town Attorney;
(2) An irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution
establishing funding for the construction of the subdivision, from
which the Town may draw if construction is inadequate, approved
by the Town Council or Town Attorney; or
(3) Any other performance guarantee approved by the Town Council
and Town Attorney, provided that, in their opinion, such
performance guarantees provide substantially similar financial
protection for the Town as Subsection A(1) or (2).
B. The conditions and amount of the performance guarantee shall be
determined by the Planning Board with the advice of the Town
Engineer, Public Works Director, Town Council, and/or Town Attorney.
§ 275-61 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-64
252:585
subdivision and may not be used for any other project or loan and may be
released only upon written authorization of the Town Manager.
§ 275-65. Phasing of development.
The Board may approve plans to develop a major subdivision in separate
and distinct phases. This may be accomplished by limiting final approval to
those lots abutting that section of the proposed subdivision street which is
covered by a performance guarantee. When development is phased, road
construction shall commence from an existing public way. Final approval of
lots in subsequent phases shall be given only upon satisfactory completion
of all requirements pertaining to previous phases.
§ 275-66. Duration of guarantee.
The performance guarantee shall remain in force for the entire period
during which development of the subdivision occurs (or, in the case of
default, while the Town pursues its remedies for default) until the guarantee
is released by the Town in accordance with § 275-67. If the time frame for
constructing the improvements covered by the guarantee is extended, the
performance guarantee shall also be extended.
§ 275-67. Release of guarantee.
Prior to the release of any part of the performance guarantee, the Planning
Board shall determine to its satisfaction that the proposed improvements
meet or exceed the design and construction requirements for that portion or
phase of the subdivision for which the release is requested. The approval of
the Planning Board shall occur at a regular meeting of the Board following
the review of the request at a workshop meeting. The decision of the
Planning Board shall be based upon the report of the Town Engineer or
other engineer retained by the Director of Public Works and any other
agencies and departments who may be involved.
§ 275-68. Default.
If, upon inspection, the Town Engineer or other engineer retained by the
Director of Public Works finds that any of the required improvements have
not been constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications filed
as part of the application, he or she shall so report in writing to the Director
of Public Works, Planning Director, Town Manager, and the applicant or
builder. The Town Manager shall take any steps necessary to preserve the
Town's rights.
§ 275-69. Improvements guaranteed.
Performance guarantees shall be tendered for all improvements required
to meet the standards of these regulations and for the construction of
the streets, stormwater management facilities, public sewage collection or
disposal facilities, public water systems, and erosion and sedimentation
control measures.
§ 275-64 SANFORD CODE § 275-69
252:586
ARTICLE XIII
Waivers
§ 275-70. Waiver of submission requirements authorized.
Except as otherwise provided by law, where the Planning Board makes
written findings of fact that there are special circumstances relating to a
particular parcel proposed to be subdivided, it may waive portions of the
submission requirements, unless this chapter specifically prohibits waivers.
For a waiver to be granted, the applicant must demonstrate that:
§ 275-71. Waiver of standards authorized.
Except as otherwise provided by law, where the Board makes written
findings of fact that due to special circumstances of a particular lot
proposed to be subdivided the provision of certain required improvements
is not required to provide for the public health, safety or welfare or is
inappropriate because of inadequate or lacking connecting facilities
adjacent to or in proximity of the proposed subdivision, the Board may
waive the requirement for such improvements, subject to appropriate
conditions, provided that:
§ 275-72. Conditions.
Waivers may only be granted in accordance with §§ 275-70 and 275-71.
When granting waivers, the Board shall set conditions so that the purposes
of these regulations are met.
A. The performance standards of these regulations and the criteria of the
subdivision statute 99 have been or will be met;
B. The public health, safety, and welfare are protected; and
C. The waivers do not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose
of the Comprehensive Plan, Chapter 280, Zoning, or these
requirements.
A. The waivers do not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose
of the Comprehensive Plan, Chapter 280, Zoning, or these regulations;
and
B. The performance standards of these regulations and the criteria of the
subdivision statute 100 have been or will be met by the proposed
subdivision.
99.Editor's Note: See 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4401 et seq.
100. Editor's Note: See 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4401 et seq.
§ 275-70 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-73
252:587
§ 275-73. Waivers to be shown on final plan.
When the Board grants a waiver to any of the improvements required by
these regulations, the final plan, to be recorded at the Registry of Deeds,
shall indicate the waivers granted and the date on which they were granted.
§ 275-73 SANFORD CODE § 275-73
252:588
ARTICLE XIV
Appeals
§ 275-74. Appeals to Superior Court.
An aggrieved party may appeal any decision of the Board under these
regulations to Maine Superior Court (York County) within 30 days of the
date the Board issues a written order of its decision.
§ 275-74 WOOD, SALE OF § 275-74
252:589
Chapter 280
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Airport — See Ch. 70.
Building construction — See Ch. 90.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 128.
Impact fees — See Ch. 136.
Licensing — See Ch. 149.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 265.
Shoreland zoning — See Ch. 270.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 275.
§ 275-74 SANFORD CODE § 275-74
252:590
ARTICLE I
Title, Purpose and Applicability
§ 280-1-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Sanford."
§ 280-1-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter, made in accordance with the Comprehensive
Plan, is to decrease congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire and
other dangers; to provide adequate provision of transportation, sewerage,
schools, parks, and other community facilities and utilities; and to promote
the health, safety, and general welfare. This chapter is made with
reasonable consideration, among other things, of the character of each
district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses and with a view to
conserving and stabilizing the value of property and encouraging the most
appropriate use of land throughout the community.
§ 280-1-3. Applicability.
No building or structure shall be erected, structurally altered, enlarged,
moved, or used and no land shall be used unless in conformity with the
regulations of this chapter.
§ 280-1-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-1-3
252:591

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 280-2-1. Word usage.
All words not defined herein shall carry their customary and usual
meanings. Words used in the present tense shall include the future. Words
used in the singular shall include the plural. The words "shall" and "will"
shall be used interchangeably. References to the City, specific departments
or department heads, including as example only the Fire Department,
Planning Department, Public Works Director; districts, including by
example only the Water or Sewerage District; locations, including by way
of example only City Hall, downtown; maps, plans, documents, or codes,
including by example only Assessor's Map, Comprehensive Plan, Code of
Ordinances; and organizations, including by way of example only the
Historical Society shall mean those departments, department heads or
their designees, districts, locations, maps, plans, documents, codes, and
organizations which are part of City government or are located in and
provide services to the City.
§ 280-2-2. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABATTOIR — A slaughterhouse, including the wholesale and retail sale of
meat processed on the premises, and containing less than 5,000 square feet
of gross floor area.
ABUTTING PROPERTY — Any lot which is physically contiguous with the
subject lot even if only at a point and any lot which is located directly across
a street or right-of-way from the subject lot such that the extension of the
side lot lines of the subject lot would touch or enclose the abutting property.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — An apartment created by converting part of an
existing single-family detached dwelling into a separate dwelling unit which
is accessory to the single-family use. The accessory apartment shall conform
to all of the following standards:
The accessory apartment shall not have a separate, identifiable front
entrance.
A.
The accessory apartment shall not alter the single-family character of
the structure.
B.
The principal unit in the structure shall be occupied by the owner, and
the owner shall file a declaration indicating that only one unit will ever
be rented.
C.
Continued occupancy of the accessory apartment upon sale or transfer
of the property shall be conditioned upon the new owner agreeing to
the owner-occupancy requirement.
D.
§ 280-2-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-2-2
252:593
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A detached, subordinate building the use of
which is clearly incidental and related to that of the principal building or
use of the land and which is located on the same lot as that of the principal
building or use.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A use or structure which is incidental
and subordinate to the principal use or structure. Accessory uses, when
aggregated, shall not subordinate the principal use of the lot. A deck or
similar extension of the principal structure or a garage attached to the
principal structure by a roof or a common wall is considered part of the
principal structure.
ADULT BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT —
ADULT DAY SERVICES — A licensed facility designed to provide older
adults and adults with disabilities with community-based services, including
structured social, recreational and therapeutic activities, limited health
services, meals, supervision, support services, personal care services,
information and referrals and respite for caregivers. Adult day services
promote personal independence through a variety of activities offered to
participants based on individual needs and interests.[Added 8-21-2018 by
Order No. 18-348-01]
Any business, regardless of its category of use, a substantial or
significant portion of which involves providing goods or services which
appeal to prurient interests or which display, depict, simulate or
describe the following:
Activities involving the human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal;
(1)
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy;
Activities involving the fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, the pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts; or
(3)
Activities involving the live display of female breasts and/or male
or female genitals.
(4)
A.
Adult business establishments include, but are not limited to, the
following types of uses:
Stores that sell sexual devices or films or rent films for viewing
on the premises that involve or depict any of the activities listed
above.
(1)
Theaters or cabarets that feature movies that depict any of the
activities listed above or entertainers, such as topless dancers,
strippers, male or female impersonators, or erotic dancers, who
exhibit or perform any of the activities listed above.
(2)
(3) Relaxation spas that provide unlicensed massage services.
B.
§ 280-2-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-2-2
252:594
AGGRIEVED PARTY — An owner of land whose property is directly or
indirectly affected by the granting or denial of a permit or variance under
this chapter; a person whose land abuts land for which a permit or variance
has been granted; or any other person or group of persons who have
suffered particularized injury as a result of the granting or denial of such
permit or variance.
AIRPORT — The Sanford Seacoast Regional Airport.
AIRPORT MASTER PLAN — The final report of the Sanford Municipal
Airport Master Plan Update, dated December 1987, or any subsequent
updated plan which has been accepted by vote of the municipal officers.
ALTERNATIVE COMMUNICATION TOWER — Mounting structures for
telecommunications antennas, such as, but not limited to, clock towers,
bell steeples, utility and light poles, stacks, water towers, and rooftop
mechanical facilities, that conceal the presence of the communications
antenna from view from public streets and adjacent properties and which
are used primarily for purposes other than to support an antenna.
AMUSEMENTS — A park or business operated by an entity other than a
unit of government, with a predominance of outdoor games and activities
for entertainment, including but not limited to motorized rides, water slides,
miniature golf, batting cages, and the like.
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY — The commercial breeding and raising of livestock,
including the keeping of horses and similar animals. Animal husbandry does
not include a kennel, which is defined separately, nor the keeping of pigs,
chickens, or fowl for commercial purposes.
ANTIQUE STORE — An establishment, attached to or located on a singlefamily
home parcel, engaged in retailing antiques, except motor vehicles
such as automobiles, RVs, motorcycles, and boats; motor vehicle parts;
tires; and mobile homes. An antique, for the purpose of this chapter, shall
be a work of art, piece of furniture, decorative object or the like, of or
belonging to the past, and at least 30 years old.
APPLICANT — The person applying for a permit or other approval required
under this chapter.
AQUACULTURE — The commercial raising of fish or seafood in pens, tanks,
or other artificial environments.
AQUIFER — A geologic unit consisting of rock, gravel, sand, silt, or clay
which stores and yields significant quantities of groundwater to wells,
springs, and streams.
ARCHERY RANGE — A facility, whether indoors or outdoors, for bow and
arrow shooting in a controlled and supervised environment.
ARTERIAL — A public street or road identified in the Comprehensive Plan
as an arterial roadway, including Route 202, Route 109 from the Oak Street/
Bridge Street intersection in Springvale to the Wells town line, Route 4,
Route 11A and Route 224 and other roads that are major elements of the
highway network, including Route 99.
§ 280-2-2 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-2-2
252:595
AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT) — The average number of vehicles per day
that enter and exit the premises or travel over a specific section of road.
BENEFICIATION — The process whereby the extracted material is reduced
to particles which can be separated into mineral and waste, the former
suitable for further processing or direct use. These activities are primarily
mechanical, such as grinding, washing, magnetic separation, and
centrifugal separation.
BUFFER AREA — A part of a property or an entire property which is
specifically intended to screen and/or separate and thus minimize the
effects of land use activity on adjoining uses, water bodies, and/or wildlife,
including, but not limited to, noise, dust, visibility, glare, on adjacent areas.
BUILDING — Any permanent structure, having one or more floors and
a roof, that is used for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals or
property. When any portion thereof is separated by a division wall without
opening, then each such portion shall be deemed a separate building.
BUSINESS OFFICE — A place of business where activities such as general
management, bookkeeping, accounting, telephone sales, and
telecommunications take place but where no consumer retail services are
performed. This shall include businesses involved in real estate sales and
management, insurance sales, and similar activities not involving the sale
of physical products on the premises.
BUSINESS SERVICE — An activity that supplies a direct service to
businesses, including, by way of example, advertising, credit reporting and
collection, mailing and reproduction, care of buildings, personnel supply,
computer and data processing, market research, and management and
public relations.
CAMPGROUND — Any area or tract of land to accommodate two or more
parties in temporary living quarters, including but not limited to tents,
recreational vehicles, or other shelters.
CANDELA — The base unit of luminous intensity in the International System
of Units that is equal to the luminous intensity in a given direction of a
source which emits monochromatic radiation of frequency 540 by 1012 hertz
and has a radiant intensity in that direction of 1/683 watt per unit solid
angle.[Added 12-19-2017 by Order No. 17-163-01]
CHILD-CARE PROVIDER — A person or facility that has received a
certificate from the Department of Health and Human Services. There are
three classes of child-care providers:[Amended 8-21-2018 by Order No.
18-348-01]
FAMILY CHILD CARE — An owner-occupied residence licensed with
the State of Maine that provides care and instruction for fewer than 13
children.
A.
CHILD-CARE CENTER AND NURSERY SCHOOL — A facility licensed
by the State of Maine that provides care and/or instruction. There are
two classes of child-care center and nursery school:
B.
§ 280-2-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-2-2
252:596
CHURCH — A place of worship, regardless of denomination.
CITY — City of Sanford.
CITY ENGINEER — Any registered professional engineer hired or retained
by the City, either as staff or on a consulting basis.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A subdivision meeting the requirements of
§ 280-15-4, in which the lot sizes are reduced below those normally required
in the zoning district in which the development is located in return for the
provision of permanent open space.
COLLECTOR — A public street or road identified in the Comprehensive
Plan as a collector roadway and not defined by this chapter as an arterial,
including River Street, High Street, Route 109 from the Oak Street/Bridge
Street intersection to the Shapleigh town line, Riverside Avenue, William
Oscar Emery Drive, North Avenue, Grammar Road, New Dam Road, Pioneer
Street, Rushton Street, Hanson Ridge Road, Brook Street, June Street,
Grammar Street, School Street, Emery Street, Lenox Street, Twombley
Road, Berwick Road, Jagger Mill Road and Old Mill Road.
COMMERCIAL AGRICULTURE — An agricultural business that files a
Schedule F as part of its federal income tax return that is involved in the
cultivation of the soil, production of crops, and/or raising of livestock or a
commercial greenhouse.
Child-care center or nursery school for fewer than 13 children
where the licensed provider does not live on the premises.
(1)
(2) Child-care center or nursery school for 13 or more children.
A commercial agricultural use may include the following activities:
(1) Animal husbandry as defined in this chapter;
The processing of products raised or grown as part of the
commercial agricultural use, including processing carried out
pursuant to a home food manufacturing license issued by the Maine
Department of Agriculture;
(2)
The sale of agricultural products raised or produced as part of the
commercial agricultural use;
(3)
The sale of other foodstuffs, including processed food products,
such as jams, jellies, pickles, sauces or baked goods, not grown or
produced as part of the commercial agricultural use; and
(4)
The sale of handmade handicrafts and similar homemade items
produced on or off the premises.
(5)
A.
The sale of products shall occur within an existing agricultural building,
within a farm stand with a gross floor area of not more than 2,000
square feet, or in an outside area immediately adjacent to the indoor
sales space. Not more than 30% of the sales area shall be outside. The
floor area devoted to the sale of processed foodstuffs and/or handicrafts
B.
§ 280-2-2 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-2-2
252:597
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL ZONE — Commercial or industrial zone
includes the Urban Zone, Industrial Business Zone, Industrial Reuse Zone,
and the Airport Development Zone.
COMMERCIAL PARKING FACILITIES — Facilities for the parking of
licensed motor vehicles for a fee or to serve another use that is not located
on the same parcel.
COMMERCIAL SCHOOL — A business which provides instruction or
training in vocational, recreational, or athletic areas, including but not
limited to business or computer institutes, martial arts studios, schools for
dance, music, riding, gymnastics, photography, driving, craft schools and
trade schools.
COMMERCIAL STREET — Streets serving industrial or commercial uses.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Land, not individually owned or within an
individual lot, which is designed and intended for the common use or
enjoyment of the residents of the development or the general public. It
may include complementary structures and improvements typically used
for maintenance and operation of the open space, such as for outdoor
recreation.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT — A nonpossessory interest in real property
imposing limitations or affirmative obligations, the purposes of which
include retaining or protecting natural, scenic or open space values of real
property, assuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational or
open space use, protecting natural resources, or maintaining air or water
quality.
CONTAMINANT — Any substance whose concentration in surface or
ground water exceeds the background level or the current public health
drinking water standards for Maine or standards for aquatic toxicity,
whichever is more stringent.
CONTAMINATION OF PROCESSES OR PRODUCTS — For purposes of this
chapter, this term is defined in Chapter 149, Licensing.101
CONTRACTOR — A business that provides building construction or similar
services on a contract basis at the client's site and in which all material or
equipment storage at its place of business is contained within a building or
other fully enclosed area.
CONVALESCENT, REST OR NURSING HOME — A facility in which nursing
care and medical services are performed under the general direction of
persons licensed to provide medical care in the State of Maine for the
accommodation of convalescent or other persons who are not in need of
hospital care but who do require, on a twenty-four-hour basis, nursing care
and related medical services. A convalescent, rest home or nursing home
not produced by the commercial agricultural use shall not exceed 75%
of the total sales area.
101. Editor's Note: See § 149-1.1.
§ 280-2-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-2-2
252:598
is distinct from a boarding or congregate care facility, which is separately
defined in this section.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street with only one outlet and having the other end for
the reversal of traffic movement.
CURB CUT — The opening along the curbline or street right-of-way line at
which point vehicles may enter or leave the street.
DEBILITATING MEDICAL CONDITION — As defined in Maine Medical
Use of Marijuana Act and Rules.[Amended 2-20-2018 by Order No.
17-188-01]
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS — Numerical standards relating to
spatial relationships, including but not limited to setback, lot area, frontage
and height.
DIRECT WATERSHED OF A GREAT POND — That portion of the watershed
that drains directly to a great pond without first passing through an
upstream great pond. For the purposes of these regulations, the watershed
boundaries shall be as delineated in the Comprehensive Plan. Due to the
scale of the map in the Comprehensive Plan, there may be small
inaccuracies in the delineation of watershed boundary. Where there is a
dispute as to the exact location of a watershed boundary, the Planning
Board, or its designee, and the applicant shall conduct an on-site
investigation to determine where the drainage divide lies. If the Planning
Board and the applicant cannot agree on the location of the drainage divide
based on the on-site investigation, the burden of proof shall lie with the
applicant to provide information from a registered engineer showing where
the drainage divide lies.
DISCHARGE — The accidental or intentional injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking, incinerating, or placing of hazardous materials upon or into any
land or waters.
DRINKING PLACE — A commercial establishment primarily for the sale
or dispensing of liquor. It includes nightclubs, lounges, bottle clubs, and
similar establishments.
DRIVE-UP WINDOW, DRIVE-UP or DRIVE-THROUGH — A portion of a
business or a structure which allows the distribution of products through an
access point to serve clients in motor vehicles.
DRIVEWAY — A vehicular accessway serving two or fewer dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — A group of rooms within a dwelling designed and
equipped as living quarters for a person or for a family, including provisions
for living, sleeping, cooking, bathing, and eating.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building used for residential occupancy by
three or more families, each living independently of the others in separate
dwelling units.
§ 280-2-2 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-2-2
252:599
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building used for residential
occupancy by not more than one family. The term shall include
manufactured housing as defined in this section. Where an accessory
apartment is allowed, it shall not be deemed to turn a single-family
detached dwelling into a two-family dwelling.[Amended 2-20-2018 by
Order No. 17-188-01]
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building used for residential occupancy
by two families living independently of each other in separate dwelling
units.[Amended 2-20-2018 by Order No. 17-188-01]
EATING PLACE — A place for the serving of prepared food and beverages
to the public in which most of the food is consumed on the premises and
there are no specially designated takeout or drive-through facilities.
EATING PLACE, DRIVE-THROUGH — A place for the serving of prepared
food and beverages to the public in which food may be obtained through the
use of drive-up/drive-through windows.
EATING PLACE, TAKEOUT — A place for the serving of prepared food
and beverages to the public in which food is offered to be taken from the
premises or eaten in motor vehicles.
ENCLOSED, LOCKED FACILITY, and ENCLOSED OUTDOOR AREA — A
closet, room, building, greenhouse, or other enclosed area that is equipped
with locks or other security devices that permit access only by the individual
authorized to grow, cultivate, process, store, and distribute marijuana in
conformance with the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act and Rules or
the Marijuana Legalization Act, as appropriate.[Amended 2-20-2018 by
Order No. 17-188-01]
ENLARGEMENT OR EXPANSION OF A STRUCTURE — An increase of the
building footprint and/or increase in the height of the structure beyond its
present highest point. (See definition of "height" for an explanation of how
the highest point is determined.) Alterations of existing buildings which
are required in order to meet the requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) and/or the State Fire Code are not considered to be
enlargements or expansions of the structures and are not required to meet
otherwise applicable setback requirements, provided that the alterations
are the minimum necessary to satisfy the ADA and/or State Fire Code.
ENLARGEMENT OR EXPANSION OF USE — Any intensification of use
in time, volume, or function, whether or not resulting from an increase
in the footprint, height, floor area, land area or cubic volume occupied
by a particular use. Increases which are required in order to meet the
requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act and/or the State Fire
Code are not considered to be enlargements or expansions of use. Also,
please note that for a change of use, use is separately defined in this article.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The following facilities, provided that they serve
primarily the City or a neighborhood or structure within the City: steam,
fuel, gas, communication, internet, transportation, electric power, or water
transmission or distribution lines and related equipment; telephone cables
or lines, poles and related equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry or other similar
§ 280-2-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-2-2
252:600
pipelines; sewage lines or collection or supply systems; and associated
storage tanks. Such systems may include poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes,
conduits, cables, fire alarms and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants,
and similar accessories but shall not include pumping stations or
transmitter towers or buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of
such services. See also the definitions of "public utility" and "transmitter
tower." Essential services shall not be subject to the space and bulk
standards of this chapter.
EXCAVATING AND GENERAL CONTRACTOR — A business that provides
earth or site work or building construction services on a contract basis at
the client's site and that stores construction equipment, heavy trucks, or
building materials and supplies outside at its place of business.
EXISTING AGRICULTURAL BUILDING — A building or structure currently
used for agricultural purposes in conjunction with an agricultural use or
which was formerly used for agricultural purposes and has not been
converted to another use.
EXPANSION OF A STRUCTURE — An increase in the floor area or volume
of a structure, including all extensions, such as, but not limited to, attached
decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
FAMILY — One or more persons, including domestic employees, occupying
a dwelling unit and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit. A
community living facility, defined as a State-licensed housing facility for
eight or fewer persons in need of and receiving social services, such as but
not limited to mentally handicapped or developmentally disabled persons,
living as a housekeeping unit shall also be considered to house a single
family.
FINAL PLAN — The final drawings on which the applicant's plan is
presented to the Planning Board for approval and which, if approved, shall
be recorded at the York County Registry of Deeds.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — A business or nonprofit organization
providing retail financial services, including but not limited to banks, credit
unions, financial exchanges, and check cashing facilities.
FIRE CHIEF — City of Sanford Fire Department's authority having
jurisdiction, including his/her designee.
FIREARMS RANGE — A facility, whether indoors or outdoors, for the firing
of handguns, rifles, or shotguns in a controlled and supervised environment.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the horizontal areas of the floors of a structure
enclosed by exterior walls.
FLOOR AREA RATIO or FAR — The gross floor area of all buildings and
structures on a lot divided by the total lot area.
FOR-PROFIT NONMOTORIZED OUTDOOR RECREATION — Commercial
facilities that provide recreational opportunities that do not involve
motorized vehicles or amusements, such as tennis clubs, riding stables, and
similar uses.
§ 280-2-2 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-2-2
252:601
FOREST MANAGEMENT — Timber cruising and other forest evaluation
activities, management planning activities, insect and disease control,
pruning and other stand improvement, regeneration of forest stands, and
other similar associated activities, but not the construction of roads or
timber harvesting.
FOUNDATION — The supporting substructure of a building or other
structure, including but not limited to basements, slabs, sills, posts, or frost
walls.
FRESHWATER WETLAND — Areas that are inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and for a duration sufficient to
support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils and that are
not part of a great pond, coastal wetland, river, stream or brook. Freshwater
wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do
not do not conform to the above criteria.
FULLY ENCLOSED PLACE OF RECREATION — A place enclosed by walls,
roof, and floor, designed and equipped for the conduct of indoor sports,
leisure time activities, and other customary and usual recreational
activities, and operated by an entity other than a unit of government. These
include, by way of example only, skating rinks, gymnasiums, bowling alleys,
video arcades, and the like.
FUNERAL HOME — Building used for the preparation of the dead for burial
or cremation, the storage of the dead prior to interment, and the display
of the deceased, including ceremonies connected therewith before burial or
cremation. Crematories shall not be included as part of a funeral home.
GREAT POND — Any inland body of water that in a natural state has a
surface area in excess of 10 acres, and any inland body of water artificially
formed or increased which has a surface area in excess of 30 acres. For the
purposes of these regulations, no artificially formed or increased pond will
be considered a great pond if it is completely surrounded by land held by a
single owner.
GROUNDWATER — All of the water found beneath the surface of the
ground. For purposes of aquifer protection, this term refers to the
subsurface water present in aquifers and recharge areas.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — A product or waste or combination of
substances that, because of quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical,
or infectious characteristics, poses a substantial present or potential hazard
to human health, safety, or welfare and the natural environment. This
term applies to any materials or substances designated as hazardous by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency and/or the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection.
HEALTH SERVICE FACILITY — An outpatient establishment furnishing
medical services to humans, including the offices of physicians, dentists,
and other health practitioners, clinics, medical laboratories, outpatient
surgery, and blood banks.
§ 280-2-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-2-2
252:602
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from the
adjoining curb level to the highest point of ceiling of the top story in the
case of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, and to the mean height
level between eaves and ridge of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof; provided,
however, that where buildings are set back from the street right-of-way line,
the height of the building may be measured from the average elevation of
the finished lot grade at the front of the building.
HIGH-WATER MARK — That line that is apparent from visible markings,
changes in the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water, or
changes in vegetation that distinguish between predominantly aquatic and
predominantly terrestrial land. In the case of wetlands adjacent to rivers,
streams, brooks, or ponds, the normal high-water mark is the upland edge
of the wetland and not the edge of the open water.
HOME BUSINESS — A business which is operated by a member of a
family occupying a single-family detached dwelling, which business use is
accessory to the residential use, occupies not more than 1,000 square feet
of floor area in the dwelling and/or accessory buildings, and does not alter
the residential character of the buildings or grounds.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit or
accessory structure, provided that:
No person other than a member of the family residing on the premises
shall be engaged in such occupation;
A.
The use of the premises for the home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants;
B.
There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building
or premises or any visible evidence of the conduct of such home
occupation other than signs in conformance with § 280-14-13.5.1,
which shall not be illuminated, exceed six square feet in area per street
frontage, or extend more than six feet above the ground; [Amended
12-19-2017 by Order No. 17-163-01]
C.
No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater
volumes than would be expected in the neighborhood, and any need for
parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met
off the street and other than in a required front yard;
D.
No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the home occupation is
conducted in a single-family detached dwelling, or outside the dwelling
unit if conducted in any other form of dwelling. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates
visual or audible interference in any radio or television receiver off the
premises or causes fluctuations in line voltage of the premises;
E.
§ 280-2-2 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-2-2
252:603
HORSE SHOW — An exhibition of horses that usually includes competition
in riding, driving and jumping of horses.
HOSPITAL — An institution providing health services and medical or
surgical care of the sick or injured, including, as an integral part of the
institution, such related facilities as laboratories, outpatient departments,
training facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices.
HYDRAULIC TRAVEL TIME — The amount of time it takes for a leachable
material to travel through subsurface material from one point to another.
INCIDENTAL WASTE — Items which are not permitted to be accepted
at material re-use facilities but which incidentally or accidentally appear
in loads of otherwise acceptable materials received by the facilities. The
handling of these materials will be addressed in the operations manual for
the specific operation.
INFLATABLE DEVICE — Any inflatable material used as part of the outdoor
advertising for a commercial use that exceeds 18 inches in any dimension.
JUNKYARD — A yard, field, or other outside area used to store, dismantle or
otherwise handle:
There shall be no stock-in-trade regularly maintained or any new
commodity sold on the premises;
F.
If the home occupation is proposed to be conducted within a residence
which is not owned by the resident, the resident shall have the written
consent of the property owner before commencing the home
occupation;
G.
The home occupation shall undergo an initial inspection by the Code
Enforcement Department and the Fire Chief to verify that the home
occupation meets all applicable requirements of the City's building,
electrical, fire, and other health, safety and technical codes, including
but not limited to Chapter 90, Building Construction and Chapter 128,
Fire Prevention. The applicant shall request an inspection with the
Code Enforcement Department and the Fire Chief a minimum of 24
hours in advance and shall not receive a certificate of occupancy until
after the scheduled inspection. When an inspection is conducted for
a use that is sensitive to contamination of its processes or products,
as identified by the operator of the home occupation, the Code
Enforcement Officer and/or Fire Chief shall follow the protection from
contamination protocols described in Chapter 149, Licensing; and
H.
The following are specifically excluded as home occupations:
convalescent or nursing home, tourist home, animal hospital,
restaurant, doctors' and dentists' offices, small engine repair, and
automotive tune-up.
I.
Discarded, worn-out or junked plumbing, heating supplies, electronic
or industrial equipment, household appliances or furniture;
A.
B. Discarded, scrap and junked lumber; and
§ 280-2-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-2-2
252:604
KENNEL — An establishment operated as a business to house dogs or other
domesticated animals and where such animals are groomed, bred, boarded,
trained, or sold.
LABORATORIES — Facilities involved in chemical, biological, electronic, or
mechanical analysis of materials. Testing facilities are considered to be a
separate use. (See definition of "testing facility.")
LEACHABLE MATERIAL — A substance that, when introduced into the
environment, has the ability to travel through subsurface soil or
unconsolidated materials.
LEVEL OF SERVICE — A description of the operating conditions a driver
will experience while traveling on a particular street or highway, calculated
in accordance with the provisions of the Highway Capacity Manual, 1991
Edition, published by the National Academy of Sciences, Transportation
Research Board. There are six levels of service ranging from Level of
Service A, with free traffic flow and no delays, to Level of Service F, with
forced flow and congestion resulting in complete failure of the roadway.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — The mechanical or chemical transformation of
materials or substances into new products, either finished or semifinished,
and including the assembling of component parts, the manufacturing of
products and the blending of materials. All production operations shall
occur within a fully enclosed building or structure.
LOCAL STREET — A public street or road which is not identified as an
arterial or collector, a proposed street shown on an approved and recorded
subdivision plan, or a private way shown on an approved and recorded plan.
LODGING — An overnight accommodation with sleeping arrangements
provided for a fee. For the purposes of this chapter, the following types of
lodging have specific meanings:
Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber
debris, waste and all scrap iron, steel and other scrap ferrous or
nonferrous material.
C.
HOTEL or MOTEL — A building or group of buildings built or converted
to accommodate for a fee travelers who are staying for a limited
duration. A hotel or motel may include restaurant facilities where food
is prepared and meals served to its guests and other customers. A motel
is distinguished from a hotel only in that the sleeping rooms of a motel
are accessed from the exterior of the building or from exterior hallways,
parking is typically adjacent to the sleeping rooms, and occupancy is
oriented to the automobile traveler.
A.
INN/BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A single building containing fewer than
20 sleeping rooms and built or converted to accommodate for a fee
travelers who are staying for a limited duration. An inn may provide
dining services to its guests and may host special functions, such as
weddings, but does not include a restaurant to serve the public at large,
unless restaurants (eating places) are otherwise allowed in the district.
B.
§ 280-2-2 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-2-2
252:605
LOT AREA — The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot,
minus land below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge
of a wetland and areas beneath roads serving more than two lots.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the lot lines of a lot
measured along the setback line as established by this chapter or, if no
setback line is established, the distance between the side lot lines measured
along the front lot line.
LUMBERYARD — A business involved in milling or distribution of lumber
and/or the retail or wholesale sale of lumber and building materials.
MAINE MEDICAL USE OF MARIJUANA ACT — State statute contained in
22 M.R.S.A. Chapter 558-C which, in combination with State administrative
rules contained in 10-144 CMR Chapter 122, authorizes and provides
guidance on the cultivation, production, possession, storage, distribution,
and use of medical marijuana.
MAINE MEDICAL USE OF MARIJUANA RULES — State administrative
rules contained in 10-144 CMR Chapter 122 which, in combination with
the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act, authorizes and provides guidance
on the cultivation, production, possession, storage, distribution, and use of
medical marijuana.[Amended 2-20-2018 by Order No. 17-188-01]
MANUFACTURED HOUSING UNIT — Structures, transportable in one or
more sections, which were constructed in a manufacturing facility and are
transported to a building site and designed to be used as dwellings when
connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, airconditioning
and electrical systems contained therein.
MARGINAL ACCESS ROAD — A road or drive located outside of the road
right-of-way and parallel to the roadway which provides access to multiple
parcels or uses.
MARIJUANA — As defined in Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act and
Rules, or the Marijuana Legalization Act, as applicable.[Amended
2-20-2018 by Order No. 17-188-01]
MARIJUANA LEGALIZATION ACT — State law contained in 7 M.R.S.A. Ch.
417 as amended.[Added 2-20-2018 by Order No. 17-188-01]
MARIJUANA PARAPHERNALIA — Equipment, products, or materials
defined as paraphernalia in Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act and Rules
or the Marijuana Legalization Act, as applicable.[Amended 2-20-2018 by
Order No. 17-188-01]
MARIJUANA WASTE AND/OR RESIDUE — Stems, stalks, roots and other
materials used in the growth, cultivation, production, and storage of
marijuana. Marijuana waste and/or residue does not include an incidental
RENTING OF ROOMS AND FURNISHING OF BOARD — The provision
of not more than two rooms for rent in a building of residential
character, which is used principally as a single-family dwelling, in
which the family or person residing permanently in the home acts as
proprietor and in which meals may be taken.
C.
§ 280-2-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-2-2
252:606
amount of marijuana or excess prepared marijuana as defined in the Maine
Use of Medical Marijuana Act and Rules or the Marijuana Legalization Act,
as appropriate.[Amended 2-20-2018 by Order No. 17-188-01]
MARINA — A water-dependent facility that makes available to members of
the public space for berthing watercraft. The facility also may store, service,
supply, and fuel watercraft and may sell boats and related equipment.
MARINE SALES AND SERVICE — A facility for the retail sale and repair of
watercraft and related equipment and supplies.
MATERIALS RE-USE FACILITY — A yard, field, or other outside area used
to store, dismantle, recycle, separate, or otherwise handle wood, debris,
construction and demolition materials, scrap and junk lumber, and waste
materials for commercial purposes. A materials re-use facility shall operate
and abide by an approved operations manual reviewed and approved by the
Planning Board. This use may be considered as an accessory use or may be
a stand-alone business. Materials re-use facility activities shall not include
acceptance of soluble solid materials, biodegradable materials, or municipal
solid waste, and does not include activities applicable to garbage dumps,
solid or liquid waste dumps, burning facilities, sanitary landfills, automobile
graveyards, or unlicensed junkyards as defined by Maine State statutes.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA — Marijuana that is acquired, possessed, cultivated,
manufactured, used, delivered, transferred or transported to treat or
alleviate a qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms
associated with the qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA HOME OCCUPATION — A home occupation that is
conducted by a registered primary caregiver who resides in the dwelling
as his/her primary residence in conformance with standards described in
§§ 280-15-10.1 and 280-15-10.2 and:[Amended 2-20-2018 by Order No.
17-188-01]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA HOME PRODUCTION — Growing, cultivating,
processing, and/or storing medical marijuana by a medical marijuana
qualifying patient or patients at his/her/their primary residence as an
accessory use in conformance with standards described in §§ 280-15-10.1
through 280-15.10.2 and the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act and
Rules. This use shall be considered an accessory use to a legally permitted
residential dwelling unit.[Amended 2-20-2018 by Order No. 17-188-01]
Is performed within a single-family dwelling or within an accessory
building to that single-family dwelling or within a unit in a multifamily
structure;
A.
Is for the purpose of assisting one or more qualifying patients with the
medical use of marijuana who do not reside in the dwelling and are not
family members of the primary caregiver; and
B.
Complies with the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act and Rules or
the Marijuana Legalization Act, as appropriate.
C.
§ 280-2-2 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-2-2
252:607
MEDICAL MARIJUANA PRODUCTION FACILITY — A facility used for
cultivation, processing, storage, and/or distribution of medical marijuana at
a location which is not the medical marijuana registered primary caregiver's
primary residence in conformance with standards described in
§ 280-15.10.3 and the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act and Rules. This
shall be considered a commercial use.[Amended 2-20-2018 by Order No.
17-188-01]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA QUALIFYING PATIENT — As defined in Maine
Medical Use of Marijuana Act and Rules.[Amended 2-20-2018 by Order
No. 17-188-01]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA REGISTERED PRIMARY CAREGIVER — As defined
in Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act and Rules.[Amended 2-20-2018
by Order No. 17-188-01]
MEDICINAL AND BOTANICAL MANUFACTURING (NAICS NO. 325411) —
Establishments primarily engaged in:
MENTAL HEALTH AND ABUSE CLINIC (NORTH AMERICAN INDUSTRY
CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM NO. 621420) — This industry comprises
establishments with medical staff primarily engaged in providing outpatient
services related to the diagnosis and treatment of mental health disorders
and alcohol and other substance abuse. These establishments generally
treat patients who do not require inpatient treatment. They may provide a
counseling staff and information regarding a wide range of mental health
and substance abuse issues and/or refer patients to more extensive
treatment programs, if necessary.
MINERAL EXPLORATION — Hand sampling, test boring, or other methods
of determining the nature or extent of mineral resources which create
minimal disturbance to the land and which include reasonable measures to
restore the land to its original condition.
MINERAL EXTRACTION — Any operation which removes soil, topsoil, loam,
sand, gravel, clay, rock, peat, or other like material from its natural location,
except in conjunction with approved construction, and transports the
product removed away from the extraction site. The operation may also
involve the beneficiation of the product and the processing of both onsite
and imported material. All activity and/or operations will cease to
be approved with the exception of reclamation when the removal of the
material is no longer active.
MINI STORAGE WAREHOUSE — Any self-service storage building housing
individual storage units or lockers, each of which is accessible through a
private entrance and rented to the public for storage of personal or business
belongings.
Manufacturing uncompounded medicinal chemicals and their
derivatives (i.e., generally for use by pharmaceutical preparation
manufacturers); and/or
A.
B. Grading, grinding, and milling uncompounded botanicals.
§ 280-2-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-2-2
252:608
MISCELLANEOUS CROP FARMING (NAICS NO. 111998), INCLUDING
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION — Establishments primarily engaged
in one or more of the following:
MOBILE HOME — Those units, single width or otherwise, which the
manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance with the State of
Maine's Manufactured Housing Act and regulations, meaning structures,
transportable in one or more sections, which are not constructed on a
permanent chassis and are designed to be used as dwellings on permanent
foundations when connected to required utilities, including the plumbing,
heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under unified ownership designed
and/or used to accommodate three or more manufactured housing units.
MODULAR HOME — Those units, single width or otherwise, which the
manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance with the State's
Manufactured Housing Act102 and regulations, meaning structures,
transportable in one or more sections, which are not constructed on a
permanent chassis and are designed to be used as dwellings on permanent
foundations when connected to required utilities, including the plumbing,
heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR FACILITIES — This use includes those
operations which provide services to motor vehicles which involve body
work, painting, engine rebuilding, or structural repairs or alterations.
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES AND SERVICE — The use of any building or
land area for the display and sale of new or used automobiles, trucks,
vans, trailers and recreation vehicles, and including repair facilities for such
vehicles; does not include vehicles defined as "power sport vehicles."
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE FACILITIES — This use includes those
operations which provide service, maintenance, and minor repairs for motor
vehicles, including the accessory sale of gasoline, parts, and supplies. This
use shall include service stations, muffler, transmission, and brake shops,
car washes, tune-up centers, and similar uses but shall not include
operations involving body work, painting, engine rebuilding, or structural
repairs or alterations.
Growing crops, except oilseeds and/or grains, vegetables and/or
melons, fruits and/or tree nuts, greenhouse, nursery, and/or floriculture
products, tobacco, cotton, sugarcane, hay, sugar beets, or peanuts;
A.
Growing a combination of crops, except a combination of oilseed and
grain, and a combination of fruit and tree nuts, with no one crop or
family of crops accounting for 1/2 of the establishment's agricultural
production (i.e., value of crops for market); or
B.
C. Gathering tea or maple sap.
102. Editor's Note: See 10 M.R.S.A. § 9001 et seq.
§ 280-2-2 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-2-2
252:609
MULTIFAMILY DEVELOPMENT — A subdivision that contains three or
more dwelling units on land in common ownership such as apartment
buildings, condominiums, or mobile home parks.
MUNICIPAL USE — A use undertaken or a building occupied by a local
governmental body, agency or organization or by a quasi-municipal agency
or organization carrying out a recognized public purpose.
MUSEUM — An institution for the acquisition, preservation, study, and
exhibition of works of artistic, historical, or scientific value.
NET DEVELOPMENT AREA — The net area of a parcel of land usable for
determining the maximum allowable density of a site. Net development area
shall be determined by subtracting the following from the gross site area:
NET RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The total number of dwelling units
permitted per 40,000 square feet of net development area.
NEWER MOBILE HOMES —
The area located within the full width of the right-of-way of any
proposed public or private street or access drive. If a right-of-way is not
delineated, an area equal to a minimum fifty-foot right-of-way shall be
deducted.
A.
Any portion of the site which is cut off from the main portion of the
site by an existing road, water body, or similar physical condition which
interrupts the continuity of the site.
B.
Any land area which is regularly covered by water, including lakes,
ponds, and rivers.
C.
D. Any land area identified as a Class 1 wetland.
Any land located within utility easements or rights-of-way, if the
restrictions preclude use of the land for development.
E.
Those units constructed after June 15, 1976, which the manufacturer
certifies are constructed in compliance with the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development standards, meaning
structures transportable in one or more sections which, in the traveling
mode, are 14 body feet or more in width and are 750 square feet
or more, which are built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as dwellings when connected to the required utilities, including
plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained
therein, and which has a pitched roof and exterior siding which is
residential in appearance and is located on a permanent foundation.
A.
ALL OTHER MOBILE HOMES — All other mobile homes and trailers
are terms that may be used interchangeably and mean any factorybuilt
home which fails to meet the definition of modular home or mobile
home. It shall include any mobile home constructed prior to June 15,
1976, and mobile homes constructed after that date which do not
B.
§ 280-2-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-2-2
252:610
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A structure that does
not meet one or more of the following dimensional requirements: the
minimum setback, maximum lot coverage, or maximum height standards of
the zone in which it is located. It is allowed solely because it was in lawful
existence at the time this chapter or subsequent amendment took effect.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A single lot of record which, at the effective
date of this chapter, does not meet the lot area, frontage, or width
requirements of the zone in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE — Use of buildings, structures, premises, land or
parts thereof which is not permitted in the zone in which it is situated, but
which is allowed to remain solely because it was in lawful existence at the
time this chapter or subsequent amendments took effect and, if established
after 1953, which has been issued a valid certificate of occupancy.
NONPROFIT CLUBS OR LODGES — Facilities for nonprofit social and
fraternal organizations, including accessory facilities for use as meeting
rooms, function halls, and similar uses that may be rented to outside users.
NONPROFIT MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY — A not-for-profit entity
registered under 22 M.R.S.A. § 2428 that acquires, possesses, cultivates,
manufactures, delivers, transfers, transports, sells, supplies or dispenses
marijuana or related supplies and educational materials to cardholders. A
nonprofit dispensary is a primary caregiver.
NONPROFIT SERVICE ORGANIZATION — A nonprofit organization which
provides and promotes sports facilities with a broad range of programs,
such as sports and games, personal fitness, child care, adult day services,
overnight camping, employment readiness programs, conference centers
and educational activities.[Amended 8-21-2018 by Order No.
18-348-01]
NONRESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND
NATURE INTERPRETATION PURPOSES — A structure containing not more
than 500 square feet of total floor area associated with a natural, historic,
or similar resource to provide information about the resource.
NORTH AMERICAN INDUSTRY CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM, 2002 (NAICS)
— A numerical identification system developed to provide a consistent
framework for the collection, analysis and dissemination of industrial
statistics used by government policy analysts, academics and researchers,
the business community, and public. NAICS provides a definition for
activities that are not single-family and two-family residential uses.
OBSTRUCTION TO AIR NAVIGATION — Any structure, growth or other
object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height as set
forth in § 280-11-10B.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — The highest level of flooding that, on the
average, has a one-percent chance of occurring in any given year.
have pitched, shingled roofs and exterior siding that is residential in
appearance.
§ 280-2-2 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-2-2
252:611
OUTDOOR RECREATION — Outdoor recreation activity operated by an
entity other than a unit of government, whether operated for profit or not,
including but not limited to cross-country ski centers, ball fields, parks
and playgrounds, livery, and ski tows, provided that they fulfill State and
City public health requirements, but not including campgrounds, outdoor
movies, and outdoor dine and dance facilities, or games and activities as
described in the definition of "amusements."
OUTPATIENT ADDICTION TREATMENT CLINIC (NORTH AMERICAN
INDUSTRY CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM NO. 621420) — A program or
facility operated for the purpose of and specializing in the care, treatment
and/or rehabilitation of persons suffering with addictions, including but
not limited to gambling, alcohol or controlled-substance addictions. This
includes, but is not limited to, substance abuse treatment programs licensed
by the State of Maine Department of Behavioral and Developmental
Services Office of Substance Abuse. An outpatient addiction treatment
clinic does not include an inpatient or residential addiction treatment
program, or a program consisting solely of support group activities without
treatment by licensed health practitioners, such as Alcoholics Anonymous,
Narcotics Anonymous, and similar programs.
PARKING DEMAND MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS — A layer of policies,
programs, information, services, and tools that together constitute
comprehensive management strategies focused on changing or reducing
parking demand. Parking demand management programs encourage
widespread use of options that may include, but not be limited to,
ridesharing, car and/or van pools, bicycling, walking, telecommuting and/
or alternative work schedules, flex hours, staggered shifts, job sharing,
removing subsidies/adding costs for parking, as alternatives to driving
alone, which requires a greater number of parking spaces to accommodate
workers and exacerbates the demand for parking during peak work hours,
times, or special events. With the right incentives, or disincentives,
employees and visitors to facilities that employ a parking demand
management program may be influenced to use transportation systems in a
way that contributes to less parking demand.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality,
trust, estate, partnership, association, two or more individuals having a joint
or common interest, or other legal entity.
PERSONAL SERVICE — Establishments primarily engaged in providing
services involving the nonmedical care of a person or of his or her apparel,
as exemplified by beauty shops, barbershops, shoe repair, photographic
studios, coin-operated laundries, fitness studios, and similar
establishments.
PETROLEUM — Oil, gasoline, petroleum products and by-products, and
all other hydrocarbons which are liquefied under normal atmospheric
conditions.
PLANNING DIRECTOR — The staff person responsible for the management
of the Department of Planning and Development, his/her designee, or other
§ 280-2-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-2-2
252:612
person designated by the City Council to be responsible for development
review.
PORCH — A roofed or unroofed open structure projecting from a building.
A porch for the purpose of this chapter is considered part of a building and
may not project into any required yard.
POWER SPORT VEHICLES SALES AND SERVICE — This activity refers
to the sales and/or repair of motorcycles, motor scooters, motor bikes,
mopeds, off-road all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), personal watercraft,
snowmobiles and/or powered golf carts. The activity is limited to structures
with a gross footprint, including attached porches and patios, no larger than
5,000 square feet and an unattached outdoor display area of 1,000 square
feet. The use of the unattached outdoor display area is limited to hours
when the facility is open for business.
PREMISES — A parcel, lot or tract of land, or a combination of contiguous
lots and/or tracts of land which is under single ownership as reflected in the
City's assessing records.[Added 12-19-2017 by Order No. 17-163-01]
PREPARED MARIJUANA — As defined in Maine Medical Use of Marijuana
Act and Rules or the Marijuana Legalization Act, as appropriate.[Amended
2-20-2018 by Order No. 17-188-01]
PRIMARY RESIDENCE — An individual's main residence or dwelling where
he or she usually lives, typically a house or a unit in a multifamily structure.
An individual can only have one primary residence at a given time, though
he or she may share the residence with other individuals.[Amended
2-20-2018 by Order No. 17-188-01]
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — A building other than one which is used for
purposes wholly incidental or accessory to the use of another building or
use on the same premises.
PRINCIPAL USE — A use other than one which is wholly incidental or
accessory to another use on the same premises.
PRIVATE WAY — A minor street meeting the requirements of Article XVI,
Site Plan Review.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer registered in the
State of Maine.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a person engaged in architecture,
engineering, law, medicine, dentistry, or other activity in which specialized
services to clients are performed by persons possessing a degree from
a recognized institution of higher learning demonstrating successful
completion of a prolonged course of specialized intellectual instruction
and study, or its equivalency, and also possessing evidence of professional
capability, such as membership in a professional society.
PUBLIC UTILITY — A private organization, subject to governmental
regulation, that provides an essential service or commodity, such as water,
electricity, transportation, communication or internet, to the public and
which is intended to serve primarily populations or activities outside of
§ 280-2-2 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-2-2
252:613
the City. This term also includes buildings and pumping stations which are
necessary for the furnishing of essential services, as defined in this chapter,
whether local or greater in scope.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — A water supply system that provides water to
at least 15 service connections or services water to at least 25 individuals
daily for a least 30 days a year.
RECHARGE AREA — Area composed of permeable, porous material through
which precipitation and surface water infiltrate and directly replenish
groundwater in aquifers.
RECORD DRAWINGS — Scaled, detailed drawings of the proposed,
completed or encountered existing infrastructure within a public right-ofway
or easement. The plans shall be prepared and organized in a form
that is consistent with the design plans submitted to the Planning Board
during the review process or engineering review by the City Engineer. The
plans shall be drawn and noted with field measurements, i.e., three-way
ties, made by the contractor installing the infrastructure. The plans shall
note the infrastructure materials, widths, diameters, elevations, service
connection locations at the main and the right-of-way line, ledge profile,
permanent reference benchmark, and other appropriate data necessary
to show the completed or encountered existing infrastructure. The record
drawing plan set shall include a copy of the signed plan.
RECORDING PLAN — An original of the final plan, suitable for recording at
the York County Registry of Deeds, that shows only information relevant to
the transfer of an interest in the property and which does not show other
information presented on the plan, including but not limited to sewer and
water line locations and sizes, culverts, and building line.
REPAIR SERVICES — Businesses providing for the repair of personal and
business property, such as radios and televisions; electrical and electronic
equipment; watches, clocks, and jewelry; furniture and upholstery; sporting
equipment; small engines and equipment; and similar items but not
including the repair of motor vehicles, boats, or heavy equipment. Retail
sales of parts and supplies shall be allowed, provided that such sales are
accessory to the repair service.
REPAIRS — Activities intended to restore an existing building or structure
to a sound condition without changing the size or use of the building or
structure. Repairs do not include:
A. An enlargement of the building or structure.
B. The enclosing of decks, porches, and similar areas.
The reconstruction of a building or structure which has been damaged,
destroyed, or removed.
C.
The modification of structural elements of the building or structure
unless required to comply with code requirements.
D.
§ 280-2-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-2-2
252:614
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITY — A laboratory or other facility
for carrying on investigation in the natural, physical, or social sciences
or engineering and development of end products as an extension of such
investigation. Such a facility does not engage in the manufacture or sale
of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of research and
investigation.
RESIDENTIAL CARE OR CONGREGATE CARE FACILITIES — Residential
facilities which provide lodging and shared community space to their
occupants. These types of facilities may or may not provide medical care
or supervision and house residents who are capable of living independently.
These facilities may consist of either:
RESIDENTIAL ZONE — Includes the Single-Family Residential Zone and
the Residential Development Zone.
RETAIL STORE — An establishment that sells goods or commodities directly
to the consumer or other end user. For the purposes of this chapter, the term
"retail store" shall include sales rooms or showrooms but not yard sales,
motor vehicle sales, either new or used, gas stations, or eating places.
RETAIL STORES, LIMITED — Retail store with 5,000 square feet or less of
gross floor area, including sales, storage, and support areas but excluding
yard sales as defined in this chapter.
RURAL ZONES — Rural zones include the Rural Residential Zone and Rural
Mixed Use Zone.
SETBACK, FRONT — An open area extending the entire width of a lot
from lot side line to lot side line and extending in depth at a right angle
from the street right-of-way to such depth as specified. Such area shall be
unoccupied and unobstructed by any building from the ground upward. In
the case of a corner lot that abuts two or more streets, a front setback
shall be maintained adjacent to each street right-of-way. Where the required
setback is based upon a uniform setback relationship, a building on a corner
lot shall maintain the established setback relationship on all streets where
such a relationship exists.
SETBACK, REAR — An open area extending the entire width of a lot from
lot side line to lot side line and extending at a right angle from the rear
property line of such lot to such depth as specified. Such area shall be
unoccupied and unobstructed by any building from the ground upward.
SETBACK, SIDE — An open area extending along each side line of a lot
between the front setback and the rear setback on such lot and extending at
a right angle from the side lines of such lot to such depth as specified. Such
area shall be unoccupied and unobstructed by any building from the ground
upward. In the case of a corner lot, a side setback shall be maintained along
any lot line that is not a street right-of-way.
A. Individual dwelling units with full facilities for cooking; or
B. Residential units which do not have their own cooking facilities.
§ 280-2-2 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-2-2
252:615
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of an unobstructed view from a particular
access point to the farthest visible point of reference on a roadway. It is used
in these regulations as a reference for unobstructed road visibility.
SIGN — Any object, device, plaque, display, structure, or part thereof,
situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display,
direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization,
business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including
words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or
projected images. Sign does not include the flag or emblem of any nation,
organization of nations, state, city, or religious, fraternal, or civic
organization; also merchandise and pictures or models of products or
services incorporated in a window display, works of art which in no way
identify a product, or scoreboards located on athletic fields. A sign may be
temporary or permanently installed.[Amended 12-19-2017 by Order No.
17-163-01]
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign whose message describes the availability
of goods or services at a location where such goods and services are
no longer available and have ceased to be available and have ceased to
be available for a period of more than one year or, in the alternative,
a sign which is noncommercial in nature and the content of the sign
pertains to a time, event or purpose which has elapsed or expired in the
preceding 365 days. Such abandonment includes intentional conduct,
such as failure to pay taxes or permit fees, or to maintain the sign, or a
negligent failure to do so.
A.
AWNING SIGN — A building-mounted sign that provides additional
functionality as shelter. An awning or canopy which contains lettering
or other commercial identification shall be considered to be a sign. That
portion of the awning or canopy bearing the commercial message shall
be counted as a sign face in computing total sign area.
B.
BANNER — A sign made of fabric or other nonrigid material with no
enclosing framework. A banner includes a vertical banner erected on a
pole.
C.
BUILDING SIGN — Any wall sign, projecting sign, suspended sign,
awning sign, any sign painted on a wall surface, or any sign attached
to an exterior part of a building. Interior window displays, such as
products or other items on display, are not considered building signs
and are not included in the maximum calculation of sign area in the
measurement standards.
D.
DISPLAY — That portion of the surface area of a changeable sign that
is, is deisnged to be, or is capable of being periodically altered for the
purpose of conveying a message.
E.
ELECTRONIC AND CHANGEABLE DISPLAYS — An on-the-premises
sign created, designed, manufactured or modified in such a way that its
message may be electronically, digitally or mechanically altered by the
F.
§ 280-2-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-2-2
252:616
substitution or replacement of one display by another on each side. This
definition includes time and temperature signs.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign supported by structures or supports
that are placed on or anchored in the ground and that are independent
from any building or other structure.
G.
GRAPHIC — A sign which is an integral part of a building facade.
The sign is painted directly on, carved in, or otherwise permanently
embedded in the facade. Signs in shop windows are included unless
they qualify as nonaccessory signs.
H.
INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign that has the light source
enclosed within it so the source is not visible to the eye.
I.
MOVING SIGN — A sign which has moving parts or is lit in such
a manner as to flash, including but not limited to inflatable devices
designed for movement by the wind or mechanical means.
J.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign that does not conform to all
or part of the provisions of this chapter and was in existence and
maintained and was lawfully erected, altered, or displayed prior to the
effective date of this chapter.
K.
OFF-THE-PREMISES SIGN — A sign located on a premises other than
the location at which the business or activity is located; an official
business directional sign; a sign which is part of a publicly erected
informational board or center.
L.
OFFICIAL BUSINESS DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any distinctive sign
approved, erected, altered, displayed, or maintained by the City or the
State to indicate to the traveling public the route and distance to public
accommodations, facilities, commercial services for the traveling public
and points of scenic, historical, cultural, recreational, educational, or
religious interest.
M.
ON-THE-PREMISES SIGN — A sign erected and maintained on the
property on which the business, facility or point of interest advertised
by the sign is located.
N.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign which is attached to and projects from a
structure or building face. The sign face of a double-faced projecting
signs is calculated by measuring one face of the sign only.
O.
PUBLIC SAFETY SIGN — A sign that is erected by a governmental body
which is necessary for the public safety and welfare or as required by
law, ordinance, or government regulation.
P.
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN — A self-supporting, freestanding sign
located on the sidewalk or in the esplanade directly in front of the
business advertised.
Q.
§ 280-2-2 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-2-2
252:617
SIGN AREA — The entire surface area of the sign, not including the
supporting structure or bracing of the sign unless the supporting structure
or bracing is made part of the sign. Where a sign has two faces back
to back, the area of only one face shall be considered part of the sign
area. When a sign has more than one face, all areas which can be viewed
simultaneously shall be considered the sign area. When a sign provides no
border or frame, the sign area shall be the areas of the smallest rectangle
which encompasses all characters and elements of the sign area.[Added
12-19-2017 by Order No. 17-163-01]
SIGN FACE — That area of a sign which:
SMALL-SCALE MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE, REPAIR OR SALES FACILITY
— A use that involves a motor vehicle service facility, a motor vehicle repair
facility, and/or motor vehicle sales and service that involves a building or
structure of 2,000 square feet or less of gross floor area and the exterior
storage or display of fewer than 10 vehicles; does not include vehicles
defined as power sport vehicles.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS — A solar collection system used to capture,
convert, and supply electrical energy or thermal power and consisting of
one or more freestanding, ground-, roof-, or wall-mounted solar arrays or
SUSPENDED SIGN — A sign hanging from a marquee, awning, or
porch.
R.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign not permanently attached to the ground or
a permanent structure or a sign designed to be transported, including,
but not limited to, signs on A- or T-frames, sandwich board signs,
banners, inflatable signs, or large-scale tethered balloons.
S.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign that is painted on, attached to, or suspended
directly inside a window or the glass portion of a door.
T.
In the case of a freestanding, projecting, and marquee sign consists of
the entire surface area of the sign on which copy could be placed. The
supporting structure or bracing of a sign shall not be counted as a part
of the sign face area unless such structure or bracing is made a part of
the sign's message. Where a sign has two display faces back to back,
the area of only one face shall be considered the sign face area. Where
a sign has more than one display face, all areas which can be viewed
simultaneously shall be considered the sign face area.
A.
In the case of a sign, other than freestanding, projecting, or marquee
sign, whose message is fabricated together with the background which
borders or frames that message, the sign face area shall be the total
area of the entire background.
B.
In the case of a sign, other than freestanding, projecting, or marquee
sign, whose message is applied to a background which provides no
border or frame, the sign face area shall be the area of the smallest
rectangle which can encompass all words, letters, figures, emblems,
and other elements of the sign message.
C.
§ 280-2-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-2-2
252:618
modules, or solar-related equipment, intended to reduce consumption of
utility and/or fuel-solar generated power.[Added 3-7-2017 by Order No.
17-31.07]
STAFF — Shall consist of the City's Code Enforcement Officer, City
Engineer, Assistant City Engineer, Planning Director, and any other
professional identified by the Planning Board for the purposes of reviewing
land use applications.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it. A basement shall be counted
as a story for the purpose of height measurement where more than 1/2 of
its height is above the ground. A half story is a story with at least two of its
opposite walls situated in a sloping roof, the floor area of which as measured
four feet above the floor level does not exceed 2/3 of the floor immediately
below it.
STREET —
STREET FRONTAGE — The distance between the side lines of a lot as
measured along the front lot line at the street right-of-way limits.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any exterior change which would prolong
the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as
bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.
RESIDENTIAL SOLAR SYSTEM (RSS) — Intended for residential uses,
a RSS may be up to 2,000 square feet in surface area with a rated
nameplate capacity of up to 20 kilowatts (kW).
A.
COMMERCIAL SOLAR SYSTEM (CSS) — Intended for a multifamily
dwelling, multifamily dwelling above the ground floor of mixed use
developments, mobile home park, convalescent, rest, or nursing home,
residential care or congregate care facility, institutional use,
recreational use, commercial or industrial use, a CSS may be up to
20,000 square feet in surface area with a rated nameplate capacity of
up to 250 kilowatts (kW).
B.
UTILITY SOLAR SYSTEMS (USS) — Intended for off-site utility grid use,
an USS is larger than 20,000 square feet in surface area with no limit
on the rated nameplate capacity.
C.
A public way laid out and established by the State of Maine or York
County;
A.
B. A public way accepted by the City;
A way shown on a plan of a subdivision approved by the Planning Board;
or
C.
A private way approved by the Planning Board in accordance with the
provisions of Article XVI.
D.
§ 280-2-2 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-2-2
252:619
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected which requires location on
the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground, but
not including a tent, vehicle, road, path, or trail.
STUDIO OF ARTISANS — A building or portion of a building used as a
place of work by an artist, photographer, or person similarly skilled in the
production of a particular product. Unless otherwise indicated, a studio may
include the retail sale of items produced on the premises.
SUBDIVISION — For purposes of this chapter, this term is defined in 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4301.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision containing 10 or more lots or
dwelling units or any subdivision requiring any new street or municipal
facilities.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — Any subdivision containing nine or fewer lots or
dwelling units. All lots shall be located on an existing accepted public street,
and no new public services or extensions of municipal facilities shall be
required.
TESTING FACILITY — A facility, whether within a laboratory or
freestanding, whose primary purpose is the testing of products for
conformance with industrial specifications or with public regulations. Such
facilities include, by way of example only, assaying services, automobile and
emissions testing services, calibration and certification services, and food
testing services. A testing facility within a building primarily devoted to
manufacturing shall be considered accessory to the manufacturing.
TIMBER HARVESTING — The cutting and removal of trees from their
growing site and the attendant operation of mobile or portable chipping
mills and of cutting and skidding machinery, including the creation and use
of skid trails, skid roads, and haul roads.
TRACT OR PARCEL OF LAND — All contiguous land in the same ownership,
provided that lands located on opposite sides of a public or private road
shall be considered each a separate tract or parcel of land unless such road
was established by the owner of the land on both sides thereof.
TRADESMAN — An establishment occupied by a craftsperson or a person
in a skilled trade, including, by way of example only, plumbing, carpentry,
or electrical work. The term also shall include establishments engaged in
the repair of electrical goods and appliances, watches, jewelry, equipment,
furniture, or other goods, exclusive of motor vehicles, where such services
are the primary use and not accessory to another use, such as retail sales.
The shop may include work space, storage space, and office space but may
not exceed 2,000 square feet of total floor area.
TRANSMITTER TOWER — A facility for the location of telecommunications
antennas and/or internet equipment. This includes radio, radar, television,
cellular telephone, or radio-telephone transmitting, repeating or
broadcasting towers and necessary accessory structures but not studios or
offices for such activities.
§ 280-2-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-2-2
252:620
TRAVELED WAY — That part of the street used for the movement of vehicles
and/or pedestrians, including the part of the street reserved for vehicles,
sidewalks, and bicycle and parking lanes.[Added 12-19-2017 by Order
No. 17-163-01]
TRUCKING AND DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES — Facilities for the shortterm
storage and transshipment of materials or goods, including common
carriers, oil terminals, moving companies, and similar operations.
UNIFORM SETBACK RELATIONSHIP — The condition in which the two lots
on either side of the subject lot front on the same street and where the front
setback of each of the four lots does not vary from the average of all four
front setbacks by more than five feet.
USE — The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed, or
intended or for which either land or a building is or may be occupied or
maintained.
VARIANCE — A relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such variance
would not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions
peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant,
a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary or undue
hardship. A financial hardship shall not constitute grounds for granting a
variance. The crucial points of the variance are undue hardship and unique
physical circumstances applying to the property.
VEGETATION — All live trees, shrubs, ground cover, and other plants,
including, without limitation, trees both over and under four inches in
diameter, measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level.
VETERINARY CLINIC/GROOMING — A facility where animals or pets are
given medical or surgical treatment or where animals and pets are groomed
and in which the boarding of animals is short term and incidental to the
medical care or grooming.
WELL FIELD — A tract of land which contains a number of existing or
proposed wells for supplying water.
WELLHEAD — The specific location of a well and/or any structure built over
or extending from a well.
WHOLESALE SALES — Trade that involves the sale of merchandise, in bulk
or large quantities, to retailers for resale or to industrial, commercial, or
institutional users.
WILDLIFE HABITAT — Areas identified by a governmental agency, such as
the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, as having significant
value as habitat for birds or animals.
YARD SALE — The sale of tangible personal property from any given lot,
whether conducted indoors or outdoors, and occurring not more than four
calendar days in a calendar year. Activities occurring more than four
calendar days in one calendar year are considered a retail store or limited
retail store as defined in this chapter. Yard sale shall include the term
§ 280-2-2 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-2-2
252:621
"garage sale," "barn sale," "lawn sale," "rummage sale" or "moving sale" or
other such similar sales or activities.
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending the entire width of a lot from lot
side line to lot side line and extending in depth at a right angle from the
street boundary of such lot to such depth as specified. Such front yard is
unoccupied and unobstructed by any building from the ground upward.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending the entire width of a lot from side
line to side line and extending at a right angle from the rear line of such lot
such depth as specified. Such rear yard is unoccupied and unobstructed by
any building from the ground upward.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending along each side line of a lot
between the front yard and the rear yard on such lot and extending at a
right angle from the side line of such lot to such depth as specified. Such
side yard is unoccupied and unobstructed by any building from the ground
upward.
§ 280-2-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-2-2
252:622
ARTICLE III
Administration and Enforcement
§ 280-3-1. Code Enforcement Officer.
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by a Code Enforcement
Officer, except as otherwise noted. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
appointed by the City Council.
§ 280-3-2. Building, sign or use permits.
A. Permit required. No building or sign, or part thereof, shall be
constructed, structurally altered, enlarged, or moved unless a permit
for such action has been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer or his
or her agent, except as otherwise exempted from a permit in this
chapter. The contractor, builder, and developer, as well as the property
owner, shall be responsible for any and all permits. Site plan approval,
in accordance with Article XVI, may be required prior to the issuance of
a building permit for certain types of uses, including commercial,
industrial, and multifamily residential construction. [Amended
12-19-2017 by Order No. 17-163-01]
B. Compliance with this chapter. No building permit for a building, sign, or
structure on any lot shall be issued except to the owner of record
thereof, or his or her authorized agent, until the proposed construction
or alteration of a building or structure shall comply in all respects with
the provisions of this chapter or with a decision rendered by the Zoning
Board of Appeals, Planning Board, Site Plan Review Committee, and/or
others under this chapter. [Amended 12-19-2017 by Order No.
17-163-01]
C. Applications for permits. All applications for building, sign, or use
permits shall be submitted in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer
on forms provided for the purpose. The application shall be
accompanied by the following information: [Amended 12-19-2017 by
Order No. 17-163-01]
(1) A plot plan drawn to scale showing the shape and dimensions of the
lot to be built upon, the location and size of all buildings, signs, or
structures already existing on the lot, the locations of new
buildings, signs, or structures to be constructed, and the lines
within which all buildings and structures are to be constructed;
(2) A statement of the use intended to be made of the lot and buildings;
(3) Approved plumbing permits where applicable;
(4) A drawing of proposed and existing signs, indicating dimensions,
where applicable;
(5) Building elevation drawings for all attached signs, indicating the
proposed location and specifications; and
§ 280-3-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-3-2
252:623
(6) Evidence of site plan approval if required by Article XVI.
D. Action on applications. Within seven days of filing of an application for a
building or use permit, the Code Enforcement Officer shall approve,
deny, or refer to the Planning Board for conditional use approval all
such applications. If the proposed activity requires site plan review in
accordance with Article XVI, the Code Enforcement Officer shall refer
the applicant to the Planning Director. His/her decision shall be in
writing on a form designed for the purpose and communicated directly
to the applicant. One copy of the Code Enforcement Officer's decision
shall be filed in the Code Enforcement Officer's office. In cases where
the Code Enforcement Officer deems that a conditional use permit is
required, he or she shall also provide a copy of his or her decision to the
Planning Board.
E. Plumbing permit required. No building permit shall be issued for any
structure or use involving the construction, installation, or alteration of
plumbing facilities unless a valid plumbing permit has been secured by
the applicant or his or her authorized agent.
F. Start of work. No work shall be begun on a project requiring a building
permit, plumbing permit, site plan approval, and/or other municipal
approval or permit until all required permits and/or approvals have
been obtained. Start of work shall include clearing and grubbing of the
site, grading, excavation, or construction of buildings or structures.
G. Revision of proposed work. A new permit is required if any changes in
plans, construction, size, or use of any building, structures, or parts
thereof are made after issuance of the previous permit.
H. Time valid.
(1) A building permit secured under the provisions of this chapter shall
expire if the work or change is not commenced within six months of
the date on which the permit is granted and if the work or change is
not substantially completed within 18 months of the date on which
the permit is granted.
(2) Extensions of up to six months beyond the commencement or
completion dates may be granted by the Code Enforcement Officer
upon written request.
I. Pending applications. Nothing in this chapter shall require any change
in the plans, construction, size, or designated use for any building,
structure, or part thereof for which an application for a building permit
has been made or a building permit has been issued or upon which
construction has been commenced prior to the adoption or amendment
of this chapter, provided that construction shall start within 60 days
after the issuance of such permit.
§ 280-3-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-3-2
252:624
§ 280-3-3. Certificates of occupancy.
J. Required records. Applications for permits with their accompanying
plans and building permits shall be maintained as a permanent record
by the Code Enforcement Officer.
K. Rights related to a public right-of-way. Neither the granting of a permit
nor the installation or placement of a sign in the public right-of-way
conveys permanent property rights relating to the public right-of-way.
An illegal sign in the public right-of-way may be removed by the City
without notice, at the owner's expense, if the illegal sign is within the
public right-of-way. [Added 12-19-2017 by Order No. 17-163-01]
A. After the building, or part thereof, has been completed, altered or
enlarged or relocated, the owner or his or her agent shall obtain a
certificate of occupancy for the proposed use before the same may be
occupied or used. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer only if he or she finds that the project is in
compliance with this chapter, with any applicable site plan approval,
and any other regulations of the City.
B. A certificate of occupancy shall also be required for any of the
following:
(1) Increase in the number of dwelling units in a structure.
(2) Establishment of a home occupation in a residential district.
(3) Establishment of any professional office in connection with the
residence of a professional person.
(4) Change in the use of a nonconforming use.
(5) Occupancy and use of vacant land, except for the raising of crops,
or change in the use of land, except in the raising of crops.
(6) Any change in the use of a building from one category of use as set
forth in § 280-11-9 or the Table of Land Uses103 to another category
of use.
(7) Any change in the occupancy of nonresidential space.
C. In cases of use and occupancy of any building or part thereof during a
period of construction or alteration, the Code Enforcement Officer may
issue temporary certificates for periods not exceeding six months.
Temporary certificates of occupancy for single-family homes may be
renewed for additional six-month periods, provided that the owner
provides the Code Enforcement Officer with written evidence that
progress is being made toward the completion of the home.
103. Editor's Note: The Table of Land Uses is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 280-3-2 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-3-4
252:625
§ 280-3-4. Fees. [Amended 12-20-2016 by Order No. 16-158.07]
The City Council shall establish by order, after prior notice and public
hearing, a fee schedule for all permits, escrow, and construction compliance
reviews required by this chapter and for such other zoning fees as the
City Council deems appropriate. Permit, zoning, escrow, and construction
compliance fees are intended to help recover costs incurred by the City
in public notice, review, administration, and site inspection associated with
amendment of the text of this chapter, changes to Zoning Maps, contract
zoning, site plan, and other review and permitting of development. Permit
fees are deemed to be a cost of review, shall not be waived or contingent
on approval, and are nonrefundable. Any balance in an escrow account
remaining after the final decision shall be returned to the applicant in a
timely fashion.
A. These costs include:
(1) Publishing and public notice fees associated with advertising public
hearings and meetings on the proposed application. Public
hearings on the request shall not be scheduled until the fee is paid.
(2) Contracted staff, independent consulting, and peer review escrow
fee, including but not limited to architectural, landscape
architectural, geotechnical, hydrological, engineering, surveying,
planning, legal, and similar professional consulting services. The
results of such services shall be available for public review,
although such results shall be deemed to have been made solely for
the benefit of the City and shall remain its property. Such fees shall
be:
(a) Limited to reasonable and necessary review that exceeds the
expertise of City staff or its ability to review the application
materials within required time limits;
(b) Assessed only to recover costs directly associated with review
of the application submitted by the applicant to whom it is
assessed;
(c) Reasonable in amount, based on the consulting or peer review
time involved and complexity of the review;
(d) Assessed for the privilege of review and shall be payable
without regard to consulting or peer review results or outcome
of the application.
B. Escrow account. The applicant shall establish an escrow account with
the City to guarantee payment in advance of actual fees assessed
pursuant to this chapter. The original deposit shall be such amount as
specified in § 280-3-4. If the balance in the escrow account shall be
drawn down by 75%, the City shall notify the applicant and require that
an additional amount equal to 50% of the initial deposit be submitted to
cover the cost of remaining work. The City shall continue to notify the
§ 280-3-4 SANFORD CODE § 280-3-4
252:626
§ 280-3-5. Enforcement.
applicant and require that an additional amount be deposited whenever
the balance of the account is drawn down by 75% of the original
deposit. Any excess amount deposited with the City in advance shall be
refunded to the applicant in a timely fashion after final action on the
application.
C. Fee disputes. Any dispute regarding the application of § 280-3-4 or the
amount required to be paid, either in advance or upon completion, may
be appealed in writing within 10 days to the City Manager. The City
Manager, after due notice and investigation and for good cause shown,
may affirm, modify, or reverse the disputed decision or reduce the
amount assessed.
D. Payment of fees required. By submitting an application under this
chapter, the applicant agrees to reimburse the City for the reasonable
and necessary fees set forth herein, and the City shall not amend the
text of this chapter, change Zoning Maps, execute contract zoning
agreements until such amounts have been paid in full. In addition, no
building permit or certificate of occupancy may be issued nor approved
site, subdivision or other plan released until all fees assessed hereunder
have been paid in full. Any individual or firm who has an outstanding fee
balance shall not be eligible to submit a request to amend the text of
this chapter, change Zoning Maps, contract zoning, or a new or
amended site plan application or building or occupancy permit until the
outstanding balance is paid in full.
E. Administration. Fees associated with amendment of the text of this
chapter, changes to Zoning Maps, contract zoning, development
permits regulated under Article XVI, and other items overseen by the
Planning Board shall be administered by the Planning Director.
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer or his or her agent
to enforce the provisions of this chapter. If the Code Enforcement
Officer or his or her agent shall find that any provision of this chapter is
being violated, he or she shall notify in writing the person responsible
for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering
the action necessary to correct it. He or she shall order discontinuance
of illegal use of buildings, structures, or additions or work being done
or shall take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure
compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to institute or cause
to be instituted, in the name of the City, any and all actions, legal or
equitable, that may be appropriate or necessary for the enforcement of
this chapter; provided, however, that this section shall not prevent any
person entitled to equitable relief from enjoining any act contrary to the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 280-3-4 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-3-5
252:627
§ 280-3-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation, being the owner of or having control or
use of any building or premises, who or which violates any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $2,500 as
provided for by State law. Each day such a violation is permitted to exist
after notification shall constitute a separate offense.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer, in his or her discretion, where a
violation of this chapter has been brought to his or her attention, may so
advise the party in violation, in writing, and may give such violators
permission to continue for a period not exceeding 10 days, provided
that such violators intend and do appeal to the Zoning Board of
Appeals. Failure to perfect or commence such appeal within 10 days
will then subject the violator to prosecution under this section.
§ 280-3-5 SANFORD CODE § 280-3-6
252:628
ARTICLE IV
Interpretation, Amendments and Legal Provisions
§ 280-4-1. Administrative appeals.
Any person who believes that the Code Enforcement Officer has made an
error in the interpretation or application of the provisions of this chapter
may appeal such determination to the Zoning Board of Appeals as an
administrative appeal under the provisions of § 280-8-2. If the Zoning Board
of Appeals finds that the Code Enforcement Officer erred in his or her
interpretation of this chapter, it shall modify or reverse the action
accordingly.
§ 280-4-2. Amendments.
Amendments of this chapter may be initiated by the City Council, the
Planning Board, an individual or corporation or other entity having control
of the property that is the subject of the request, or by petition by 5% or
more of the registered voters of the City as provided for by the City Charter.
A. Fee.
(1) Any request for amendments to the text of this chapter or for
changes in zone boundaries or other revision to the Zoning Maps
initiated by the City Council or Planning Board or by petition by 5%
or more of the registered voters of the City in accordance with the
City Charter shall not be required to pay a fee.
(2) Any other request for a zoning amendment shall be accompanied
by a filing fee established by the City Council and administered in
conformance with § 280-3-4. [Amended 12-20-2016 by Order
No. 16-158.07]
B. Required information. All proposals for amendments or map changes
shall be accompanied by the following information:
(1) Address or exact location of the request, the exact location and
dimensions of any changed district boundaries, and a location map
that shows the relationship of the location to the surrounding area.
Any proposed map changes shall be shown on the appropriate
Assessor's Tax Map and shall indicate Tax Map and lot numbers.
(2) Name, address, and phone number of property owner.
(3) Name, address, and phone number of applicant.
(4) Statement regarding existing and proposed land use.
(5) Existing and proposed zoning classification or ordinance language.
(6) Statement regarding the way in which the proposed amendment or
change complies with or promotes the City's Comprehensive Plan.
§ 280-4-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-4-2
252:629
§ 280-4-3. Relation to other ordinances.
This chapter shall not repeal any other ordinance relating to the use of land
or buildings, provided that where this chapter imposes greater restrictions,
it shall control.
§ 280-4-4. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct,
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions.
(7) Documentation of right, title, or interest.
(8) Documentation of financial ability to carry out the purpose of the
amendment or change, if any.
C. Notification of affected parties. The applicant shall provide, at the time
of filing of the initial request, a list of property owners and their
addresses within 500 feet of the affected lots or parcels, together with
addressed and first class stamped envelopes with the City Planning
Department return address. Failure of any property owner to receive a
notice of public hearing shall not necessitate another public hearing. In
considering the proposed amendment or change, the Planning Board
may, without altering the meaning, intent, or substance of the proposal,
put it into such language or form as is appropriate to the format of this
chapter.
D. Public hearing required. No proposed amendments to the text of this
chapter or proposed changes in the zone boundary lines or other
proposed changes to the Zoning Map shall be referred to the City
Council until the Planning Board has held a public hearing on the
proposal, notice of which shall be given at least 12 days prior to such
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
E. Planning Board recommendation. The Planning Board, within 30 days
following the date of the public hearing, shall by majority vote report in
writing its findings and recommendation to the City Council, which
shall conduct its own public hearing, with notice as provided in the City
Charter. A representative of the Planning Board shall attend such public
hearing.
§ 280-4-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-4-4
252:630
ARTICLE V
Planning Board
§ 280-5-1. Creation and purpose.
Pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001, there is hereby created a Planning Board
for the City for the purpose of serving as an advisory board in matters
relating to the planned development and general land use of the City.
§ 280-5-2. Membership; terms of office; qualifications; vacancies;
removal.
§ 280-5-3. Officers; meetings; records; votes.
§ 280-5-4. Powers and duties.
A. The Planning Board shall consist of seven members who shall be
appointed by the City Council and who shall serve without pay and who
shall be representatives of the City at large. Each member shall be
appointed for three years or until a successor is appointed. Members
appointed shall be residents of the City. A City Councilor or his/her
spouse may not be a member of the Planning Board.
B. A vacancy may occur by reason of resignation, death, giving up
residency or failure to attend at least 75% of all meetings during the
previous 12 months. The Chair of the Board shall immediately notify the
City Council in writing of any vacancy when it occurs.
C. Members may be removed for cause by the City Council after
presentation of written charges and public hearing.
A. At the first regular meeting of the Board in January of each year, the
members shall meet and elect a Chair and Vice Chair and such other
officers as it may determine to serve for a period of one year or until a
successor is elected, and a member may succeed himself or herself in
office if so elected. The Planning Board shall hold a regular monthly
meeting and other meetings as it deems necessary from time to time.
Any records deemed public records under State law may be inspected
at the Planning Department during regular business hours.
B. On any and all voting matters pertaining to recommended adoption or
amendments of the Comprehensive Plan or to proposed adoption or
amendment of land use ordinances, an affirmative vote of a majority of
all members of the Planning Board shall be necessary for its passage
and only after a public hearing has been conducted on the matter. All
other voting matters shall be decided by a majority vote of those
present and voting and shall require at least three affirmative votes.
A. The Planning Board shall exercise such powers and perform such duties
and other functions as are authorized and provided for under the City's
ordinances and the laws of the State of Maine pertaining to zoning,
§ 280-5-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-5-4
252:631
subdivisions and land use throughout the City. Any amendments to the
Comprehensive Plan as recommended by the Planning Board shall be
submitted to the City Council for adoption.
B. The Planning Board shall have such other powers and perform such
other duties as may be necessary for the administration of its affairs on
behalf of the City, including, without limitation, the adoption of bylaws
and the procurement of goods and services necessary for its proper
functions within the limits of its budget as approved by the City Council.
§ 280-5-4 SANFORD CODE § 280-5-4
252:632
ARTICLE VI
Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 280-6-1. Creation and purpose.
Pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691, there is hereby created a Zoning Board
of Appeals for the City to hear appeals from any action or failure to act
of the Code Enforcement Officer in conjunction with the interpretation or
enforcement of this chapter.
§ 280-6-2. Membership; terms of office; qualifications; vacancies;
removal.
§ 280-6-3. Officers; meetings; records; quorum; rules of procedure.
The operation of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be governed by the
following:
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of seven members who shall
be appointed by the City Council and who shall serve without pay and
who shall be representatives of the City at large. Each member shall be
appointed for a term of three years. Members appointed shall be
residents of the City. A City Councilor or his/her spouse may not be a
member of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. A vacancy may occur by reason of resignation, death, giving up
residency or failure to attend at least 75% of all meetings during the
previous 12 months. The Chair of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
immediately notify the City Council in writing of any vacancy when it
occurs.
C. Members may be removed for cause by the City Council after
presentation of written charges and public hearing.
A. Officers. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall elect a Chair and such other
officers as it chooses from its own membership.
B. Meetings.
(1) Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at least twice
each month for the purpose of hearing all appeals in order for
hearing on said days as provided in § 280-8-2. The Zoning Board of
Appeals may cancel one or more of the required meetings if there
are no applications for its consideration. All meetings of the Zoning
Board of Appeals will be open to the public.
(2) The Chair shall also call meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals
when requested to do so by a majority of the members or by the
City Council.
C. Records. The Code Enforcement Officer shall maintain a permanent
record of all Zoning Board of Appeals meetings and all of its
§ 280-6-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-6-3
252:633
correspondence. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for
maintaining those records which are required as part of the various
proceedings which may be brought before the Zoning Board of Appeals,
such as, but not limited to, the vote of each member upon each
question. All records to be maintained or prepared by the Code
Enforcement Officer are deemed public, shall be filed in the Municipal
Clerk's office and may be inspected at reasonable times.
D. Quorum. A quorum of the Zoning Board of Appeals necessary to
conduct an official meeting shall consist of at least four members.
E. Conflict of interest. Prior to consideration of an application, any
member who believes he or she may have a conflict of interest relative
to the item shall advise the Chair of the potential conflict and the
reasons therefor. Any question of whether a particular issue involves a
conflict of interest sufficient to disqualify a member from voting thereon
shall be decided by a majority vote of the members, except the member
who is being challenged.
F. Evidence. The Zoning Board of Appeals may receive any oral or
documentary evidence but shall provide as a matter of policy for the
exclusion of irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence.
Every party has the right to present the party's case or defense by oral
or documentary evidence, to submit rebuttal evidence and to conduct
any cross-examination that is required for a full and true disclosure of
the facts.
G. Public record of deliberations. The transcript or tape recording of
testimony, if such a transcript or tape recording has been prepared by
the Zoning Board of Appeals, and the exhibits, together with all papers
and requests filed in the proceeding, constitute the public record. All
decisions become a part of the record and shall include a statement of
findings and conclusions, as well as the reasons or basis for the findings
and conclusions, upon all the material issues of fact, law or discretion
presented and the appropriate order, relief or denial of relief. Notice of
any decision shall be mailed or otherwise delivered to the petitioner, the
petitioner's representative or agent, the Planning Board, Planning
Department, and the City Council within seven days of the Zoning
Board of Appeals' decision.
H. Reconsideration of Zoning Board of Appeals actions. The Zoning Board
of Appeals may reconsider any decision reached under this section
within 30 days of its prior decision. A vote to reconsider and the action
taken on that reconsideration shall occur and be completed within 30
days of the date of the vote on the original decision. The Zoning Board
of Appeals may conduct additional hearings and receive additional
evidence and testimony as provided in this section.
I. Appeal of Zoning Board of Appeals actions. Any party may take an
appeal, within 45 days of the date of the vote on the original decision, to
Superior Court from any order, relief or denial in accordance with the
§ 280-6-3 SANFORD CODE § 280-6-3
252:634
§ 280-6-4. Powers and duties.
Appeals shall lie from the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer to the
Zoning Board of Appeals and from the Zoning Board of Appeals to the
Superior Court according to the provisions of Maine law. The Zoning Board
of Appeals shall have only the powers and duties listed below, except when
this chapter provides jurisdiction to hear other matters:
Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B. This time period may be
extended by the Court upon motion for good cause shown. The hearing
before the Superior Court shall be without a jury.
A. Administrative appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals is authorized to
hear and decide where it is alleged there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Code Enforcement
Officer in the enforcement of this chapter. The action of the Code
Enforcement Officer may be modified or reversed by the Zoning Board
of Appeals by concurring vote of a majority of the members present and
voting.
B. Dimensional variance appeals.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals is authorized to hear and decide, in
accordance with the criteria of Article VIII, upon appeal, in specific
cases where a relaxation of the terms of this chapter would not be
contrary to the public interest and owing to conditions peculiar to
the property which are not the result of the actions of the applicant.
(2) As used in this chapter, a dimensional variance is authorized only
for height, area, size of structure or size of yards or open spaces.
C. Use variance appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals is authorized to
hear and decide, upon appeal, in specific cases where a relaxation of
the terms of this chapter would not be contrary to the public interest
and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property which are not
the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this
chapter would result in unnecessary or undue hardship. A financial
hardship shall not constitute grounds for granting a variance. The
crucial points of variance are undue hardship and unique physical
circumstances applying to the property. A variance is not justified
unless both elements are present in the case.
D. Shoreland zoning appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals is authorized to
hear and decide appeals relating to the administration and enforcement
of Chapter 270, Shoreland Zoning.
§ 280-6-3 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-6-4
252:635

ARTICLE VII
Nonconformance
§ 280-7-1. Intent; transfer of ownership; maintenance.
§ 280-7-2. Nonconforming structures.
A. Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to promote land use conformities,
except that nonconforming conditions that existed before the effective
date of this chapter shall be allowed to continue, subject to the
requirements set forth in this article.
B. Transfer of ownership. Nonconforming structures, lots, and uses may
be transferred, and the new owner may continue the nonconforming
use or continue to use the nonconforming structure or lot, subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
C. Repair and maintenance. This chapter allows, without a permit, the
normal upkeep and maintenance of nonconforming uses and structures,
including repairs or renovations which do not involve expansion of the
nonconforming use or structure, and such other changes in a
nonconforming use or structure as federal, State, or local building and
safety codes may require.
A. Expansions. A structure which does not conform to the dimensional
requirements of the zone in which it is located may be added to or
expanded after obtaining a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer if
such addition or expansion does not increase the nonconformity of the
structure.
B. Relocation.
(1) A nonconforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries
of the parcel on which the structure is located, provided that the
site of relocation conforms to all setback requirements to the
greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board and
provided that, if the use is not connected to the public sewerage
system, the applicant demonstrates that the present subsurface
sewage disposal system meets the requirements of State law and
the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules or that a
new system can be installed in compliance with the law and said
rules. In no case shall a structure be relocated in a manner that
causes the structure to be more nonconforming.
(2) In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback
to the greatest practical extent, the Planning Board shall consider
the size of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil
erosion, the location of other structures on the property and on
adjacent properties, the location of the septic system, if any, and
other on-site soils suitable for septic systems, and the type and
amount of vegetation to be removed to accomplish the relocation.
§ 280-7-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-7-2
252:637
§ 280-7-3. Nonconforming uses.
§ 280-7-4. Nonconforming lots.
C. Reconstruction or replacement.
(1) Any nonconforming structure which is located less than the
required setback from the property line and which is removed or
damaged or destroyed may be reconstructed or replaced, provided
that a permit is obtained within one year of the date of said
damage, destruction, or removal and provided that such
reconstruction or replacement is in compliance with the setback
requirement to the greatest practical extent as determined by the
Planning Board in accordance with the purposes of this chapter. In
no case shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to
increase its nonconformity.
(2) In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement
meets the setback to the greatest practical extent, the Planning
Board shall consider, in addition to the criteria in § 280-7-2B, the
physical condition and type of foundation present, if any.
D. Change of use of a nonconforming structure.
(1) The use of a nonconforming structure may not be changed to
another use unless the Planning Board, after receiving a written
application and holding a public hearing, determines that the new
use will have no greater adverse impact on the subject or adjacent
properties and resources than the existing use.
(2) In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, the
Planning Board shall require written documentation from the
applicant regarding the probable effects on public health and
safety, erosion and sedimentation, and water quality.
A. Expansions. A use which is nonconforming in the zone in which it is
located may be expanded by a total of not more than 30% of the gross
floor area existing as of the date of adoption of this provision. The
expansion may occur at one time or incrementally, but in no case shall
the cumulative total of additional floor area exceed the thirty-percent
limit.
B. Resumption prohibited. A lot, building or structure in or on which a
nonconforming use is discontinued for a period exceeding one year, or
which is superseded by a conforming use, may not again be devoted to a
nonconforming use.
A. A nonconforming lot of record as of the effective date of this chapter or
amendment thereto may be built upon, without the need for a variance,
provided that such lot is in separate ownership and not contiguous with
any other lot in the same ownership and that all provisions of this
chapter, except lot size and frontage, can be met. Variances relating to
§ 280-7-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-7-4
252:638
setback or other requirements not involving lot size or frontage shall be
obtained by action of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Contiguous built lots.
(1) If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in a single or joint
ownership of record at the time of adoption of this chapter, and if
all or part of the lots do not meet the dimensional requirements of
this chapter, and if a principal use or structure exists on each lot,
the nonconforming lots may be conveyed separately or together,
provided that the State Minimum Lot Size Law104 and Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules are complied with.
(2) If two or more principal uses or structures existed on a single lot of
record on the effective date of this chapter, each may be sold on a
separate lot, provided that the above-referenced law and rules are
complied with. When such lots are divided, each lot thus created
shall be as conforming as possible to the dimensional requirements
of this chapter as determined by the Planning Board.
C. Contiguous lots, vacant or partially built. When two or more contiguous
lots or parcels are in single or joint ownership of record at the time of
adoption or amendment of this chapter or any time thereafter, if any of
these lots do not individually meet the dimensional requirements of this
chapter or subsequent amendments, and if one or more of the lots is
vacant or contains no principal structure, the lots shall be combined to
the extent necessary to meet the dimensional requirements of this
chapter; provided, however, that any two or more contiguous lawful lots
of record as of November 21, 1995, and located in the Rural Residential
or Rural Mixed Use Zones shall not be required to be combined
pursuant to this subsection.
104. Editor's Note: See 12 M.R.S.A. § 4807 et seq.
§ 280-7-4 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-7-4
252:639

ARTICLE VIII
Variances and Appeals
§ 280-8-1. Standards for granting dimensional and use variances.
A. In accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4353, except as provided in 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4353(4-A) or § 280-8-1B, the Zoning Board of Appeals may
grant a dimensional or use variance only when strict application of this
chapter to the petitioner and the petitioner's property would cause
undue hardship. The term "undue hardship" as used in this subsection
means:
(1) The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a
variance is granted;
(2) The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the
property and not to the general condition in the neighborhood;
(3) The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of
the locality; and
(4) The hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a
prior owner.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the lot area and
setback dimensional standards of this chapter when strict application of
this chapter to the petitioner and the petitioner's property would cause
a practical difficulty and when certain conditions set forth in this
subsection exist.
(1) As used in this subsection, "practical difficulty" means that the
strict application of this chapter to the property precludes the
ability of the petitioner to pursue a use permitted in the zoning
district in which the property is located and results in significant
economic injury to the petitioner.
(2) To approve a dimensional variance as permitted in this subsection,
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall find that the following conditions
exist:
(a) The need for the variance is due to the unique circumstances of
the property and not to the general condition of the
neighborhood;
(b) The granting of the variance will not produce an undesirable
change in the character of the neighborhood and will not
unreasonably detrimentally affect the use or market value of
abutting properties;
(c) The practical difficulty is not the result of action taken by the
petitioner or prior owner;
§ 280-8-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-8-1
252:641
§ 280-8-2. Appeal procedure.
(d) No other feasible alternative to a variance is available to the
petitioner;
(e) The granting of the variance will not unreasonably adversely
affect the natural environment; and
(f) The property is not located in whole or in part within the
shoreland areas as described in 38 M.R.S.A. § 435.
A. Filing of appeal. In all cases, a person aggrieved by a decision of the
Code Enforcement Officer shall commence his or her appeal within 30
days after a decision is made by the Code Enforcement Officer. The
appeal shall be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals on forms
approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals, and the aggrieved person
shall specifically set forth on the form the grounds for the appeal.
B. Hearing and notification.
(1) In the case of appeals involving space and bulk regulations, uses,
shoreland zoning, or administrative interpretation, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall notify, by mail, the applicant and the owners
of property abutting the property for which an appeal is taken, at
least 10 days in advance of the hearing, of the nature of the appeal
and of the time and place for the public hearing thereon.
(2) The owners of property shall be considered to be those against
whom taxes are assessed. Failure of any property owner to receive
a notice of public hearing shall not necessitate another hearing or
invalidate any action by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(3) Following the filing of an appeal, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
hold a public hearing on the appeal within 30 days. The Zoning
Board of Appeals shall notify the applicant, at least 10 days in
advance, of the time and place of the hearing and shall publish
notice of the hearing at least 10 days in advance in a newspaper of
general circulation in the area.
C. Hearing procedures.
(1) At any hearing, a party may be represented by agent or attorney.
Hearings shall not be continued to other times except for good
cause.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals may request the Code Enforcement
Officer or his or her designated assistant to attend hearings and/or
present to the Zoning Board of Appeals all plans, photographs, or
other materials the Zoning Board of Appeals deems appropriate for
an understanding of the appeal.
(3) The appellant's case shall be heard first. To maintain orderly
procedure, each side shall proceed without interruption. Questions
§ 280-8-1 SANFORD CODE § 280-8-2
252:642
§ 280-8-3. Recording of variances.
If the Zoning Board of Appeals grants a variance under this article, a
certificate indicating the name of the current property owner, identifying
the property by reference to the last recorded deed in its chain of title
and indicating the fact that a variance, including any conditions on the
variance, has been granted and the date of the granting shall be prepared
in recordable form. This certificate shall be recorded by the applicant in the
York County Registry of Deeds within 90 days of the date of the final written
approval of the variance or the variance is void. The variance is not valid
until recorded as provided in this section. For the purpose of this section,
the date of the final written approval shall be the date stated on the written
approval.
may be asked through the Chair. All persons at the hearing shall
abide by the order of the Chair.
D. Zoning Board of Appeals action.
(1) Within seven days of the public hearing, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall reach a decision on an appeal and shall inform, in
writing, the appellant, the Planning Board, and the City Council of
its decision and the reasons therefor.
(2) Upon notification of the granting of an appeal by the Zoning Board
of Appeals, the Code Enforcement Officer shall immediately issue a
building permit in accordance with the conditions of approval.
E. Time limit for completion. A variance under the provision of this
chapter secured by a vote of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall expire if
the work or change is not substantially completed within 18 months of
the date on which the appeal is granted, unless such time limit is
extended by vote of the Zoning Board of Appeals in response to a
written request of the applicant.
§ 280-8-2 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-8-3
252:643

ARTICLE IX
Zoning Districts and Zoning Maps
§ 280-9-1. Zoning districts.
The area of the City shall be divided into zones as identified in Articles
IX and X. The use of land, buildings, and structures shall conform to
the standards of the zone in which they are located except as otherwise
provided in this chapter. In addition, all uses shall conform to Chapter 265,
Floodplain Management, Chapter 270, Shoreland Zoning, and Chapter 275,
Subdivision of Land.
§ 280-9-2. Official Zoning Maps.
The location and boundaries of the above zones are hereby established
as shown on a map titled "Official Zoning Map of the City of Sanford"
dated February 1, 2014, certified by the attested signature of the City
Clerk and kept on file at City Hall and on the Airport Clear Zone Map,
Airport Protection Overlay Zone Map, Transmitter Tower Overlay Zone
Map, Rushton Street Institutional Controls Overlay Map and Public Water
Supply Protection Districts Maps, which maps, with all explanatory matter
thereon and all amendments thereto, shall be deemed to be and are hereby
are made a part of this chapter.
§ 280-9-3. Zoning boundaries.
The location of the zones shall be as shown on the Official Zoning Maps.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
zones as shown on the Zoning Maps, the following rules shall apply:
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center
lines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following well-established lot
lines shall be construed as following such lot lines, even if the location
of such lines is inaccurately represented on the Zoning Maps or tax
maps.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following municipal limits shall
be construed as following municipal limits.
D. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to
follow the normal high-water line, and in the event of natural change in
the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline;
boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of
streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be
construed to follow such center line.
E. Boundaries indicated as being parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in § 280-9-3A through D shall be so construed. Distances not
specifically indicated on the Zoning Map shall be determined by the
§ 280-9-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-9-3
252:645
§ 280-9-4. Division of lots by zone boundaries.
Zone boundaries shall follow property lines as of the date of this revision,
February 1, 2014. If it is found that a boundary line of a zone divides a lot,
then the property owner may petition the Planning Board for one of the zone
designations for the entire lot. Where the boundary line of a zone divides
a lot having frontage on a street in the less restricted zone, the provisions
of this chapter covering the less restricted portion of such lot may extend
to the entire lot, but in no case for a distance of more than 30 feet beyond
the zone boundary. Where the boundary line of a zone divides a lot having
frontage only on a street in a more restricted zone, the provision of this
chapter covering the more restricted portion of such lot shall extend to the
entire lot.
scale of the Map. Any conflict between the Zoning Map and description
of metes and bounds in a deed shall be resolved in favor of the
description by metes and bounds.
F. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground deviate from
those shown on the Zoning Map or as described in this section, or in
circumstances where the items covered by § 280-9-3A through E are
not clear, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall interpret the zone
boundaries.
§ 280-9-3 SANFORD CODE § 280-9-4
252:646
ARTICLE X
Establishment of Zones
§ 280-10-1. Division of City into zones.
To implement the provisions of this chapter, the City is hereby divided into
the following zones:
§ 280-10-2. Shoreland zoning.
In addition to the zones created in this chapter, the City has adopted
Chapter 270, Shoreland Zoning. This chapter creates two additional zones,
a Resource Protection Zone and a Shoreland Overlay Zone. The areas
covered by these zones are defined in Chapter 270 and are shown on the
Official Shoreland Zoning Map of the City. In adopting these provisions,
the City's standards are intended to be at least as restrictive as the State's
shoreland zoning provisions.
A. Rural Residential Zone (RR).
B. Rural Mixed Use Zone (RMU).
C. Single-Family Residential Zone (SFR).
D. Residential Development Zone (RD).
E. Urban Zone (U).
F. Industrial Business Zone (IB).
G. Industrial Reuse Zone (IR).
H. Airport Development Zone (AD).
(1) Airport Development Zone Airport Subdistrict.
(2) Airport Development Zone Support Subdistrict.
I. Public Water Supply Protection Districts.
J. Mousam River Watershed.
K. Great Works River Watershed.
L. Airport Protection Overlay Zone and Airport Clear Zone.
M. Transmitter Tower Overlay Zone.
N. Rushton Street Institutional Controls Overlay I and II Zones.
O. Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone.
P. Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone.
Q. Medical Marijuana Urban Overlay District.
§ 280-10-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-10-3
252:647
§ 280-10-3. Floodplain management.
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, areas of the City are located
within flood hazard areas as defined by Chapter 265, Floodplain
Management, and shall comply with the additional requirements of that
chapter.
§ 280-10-4. Contract zoning.
A. Contract zoning authorized. Pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4352(8),
contract zoning is hereby authorized for development where, for
reasons such as the unusual nature or unique location of the
development proposed, the City Council, exercising its sole and
exclusive judgment as the legislative body of the City, finds it necessary
or appropriate to impose, by agreement with the property owner or
otherwise, certain conditions or restrictions not generally applicable to
other properties similarly zoned. All rezoning under this section shall
establish rezoned areas that are compatible with the existing and
permitted uses within the original zones. Nothing in this section shall
authorize a rezoning, or an agreement to change or retain a zone, that
is inconsistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
B. Relationship to shoreland zoning. A parcel rezoned under this section
may include land areas subject to Chapter 270, Shoreland Zoning, but
any provision of a contract zoning amendment adopted by the City
Council that removes or modifies any restrictions or limitations
imposed by Chapter 270 shall not take effect until approved by the
Commissioner of Environmental Protection as required by 38 M.R.S.A.
§ 438-A(3), as may be amended from time to time.
C. Conceptual sketch plan.
(1) A person wishing to propose contract zoning under this section
may, prior to filing an application, submit a conceptual sketch plan
to the Site Plan Review Committee, together with a sketch plan
review fee in such amount as the City Council may from time to
time establish by City Council order. The conceptual sketch plan
submission shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
(a) A map showing existing and proposed zoning district lines.
(b) The address or exact location of the request, including the
Assessor's map references for the property to be rezoned.
(c) The name, address and telephone number of the property
owner and of the applicant, if the applicant is not the owner.
(d) Evidence of the applicant's right, title or interest in the
property.
(e) A site analysis that describes the major features of the
property, allowing the Site Plan Review Committee to make an
§ 280-10-3 SANFORD CODE § 280-10-4
252:648
informed judgment about how it will be used. Section 275-15,
as may be amended from time to time, shall be used as a
guideline for preparation of the site analysis.
(f) A conceptual development plan showing the approximate
layout of all buildings, structures, streets, driveways, parking
areas and other significant improvements to be constructed on
or above the surface of the ground plus any proposed open
spaces, conservation areas, buffer areas or other features of
the development, but it is not required to show subsurface
infrastructure installations, building plans, engineering plans
or other details which would be required for a subdivision plan
or site plan.
(g) A statement describing the existing use of the property and the
proposed new use and development and describing how the
proposed contract zone will be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan, shall be consistent with existing and
permitted uses within the existing zoning district classification
of the property, and shall have beneficial effects on the City as
a whole which would not result if the property were developed
under the existing zoning district classification.
(2) Such sketch plan review by the Site Plan Review Committee will
not be binding on the applicant or the City but is intended to permit
informal evaluation of the proposed rezoning before formal
application to the Planning Board. The sketch plan review fee is
nonrefundable.
D. Application procedures.
(1) Application. Notwithstanding § 280-10-4A, any proposal to amend
the Official Zoning Map of the City through the establishment of a
contract zone shall be filed with the Planning Board. A contract
zone application shall be in writing in such form as prescribed by
the City and shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
(a) All of the information required to be submitted for the
conceptual sketch plan review.
(b) A proposed contract zoning agreement which complies with
the requirements of this section.
(c) Any other information requested by the Planning Department
and/or the City Engineer.
(d) A nonrefundable application fee in such amount as the City
Council may from time to time establish by City Council order.
(2) Fees. Any request for contract zoning shall be accompanied by a
filing fee established by the City Council and administered in
§ 280-10-4 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-10-4
252:649
conformance with § 280-3-4. [Amended 12-20-2016 by Order
No. 16-158.07]
E. Public hearing.
(1) The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing prior to any
property being rezoned under this section. Notice of this hearing
shall be posted in the City Clerk's office at least 13 days prior to
each public hearing and shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation within the City at least two times, the date of
the first publication to be at least 12 days prior to the hearing.
(2) Notice shall also be sent to the owner or owners of the property to
be rezoned and to the owners of all property abutting the property
to be rezoned and to the owners of all property located within 500
feet of the property to be rezoned at their last known addresses.
Notice shall also be sent to a public drinking water supplier if the
area to be rezoned is within its source water protection area. This
notice shall contain a copy of the proposed conditions and
restrictions, with a map indicating the property to be rezoned.
F. City Council action on contract zoning request.
(1) If the City Council approves a request for contract zoning, the City
Council shall simultaneously approve an agreement setting forth
the conditions and restrictions to apply to the property, including
time limits for compliance with all conditions and restrictions. Such
agreement shall include a provision granting the City the power to
enforce all conditions and restrictions, both through enforcement
action pursuant to this chapter and through legal action for specific
performance. The rezoning shall not be effective until the
agreement is executed, delivered to the City Council and recorded
by the applicant at the York County Registry of Deeds. If the
agreement is not recorded at the York County Registry of Deeds
within 30 days after the City Council approves the request for
rezoning, then the approval shall become void and the rezoning
shall not take effect, but the City Council may extend the recording
period for an additional 30 days if the request for extension is made
prior to the expiration of the original thirty-day period.
(2) The conditions and restrictions set forth in the agreement shall run
with the land and bind all future owners of the land and any other
person who claims an interest in the property and may be removed
only by subsequent action of the City Council expressly removing,
relieving or discharging one or more of the specific conditions or
restrictions. If the conditions and restrictions are not fulfilled or
complied with within the specified time limits, the City Council may,
after review by the Planning Board, extend the time limits or may
initiate a rezoning to the original zoning district classification or to
another zoning district classification. The City Council may require
a bond, escrow agreement, irrevocable letter of credit, or other
§ 280-10-4 SANFORD CODE § 280-10-4
252:650
surety in such amount as is approved by the City Manager as being
reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the conditions
or restrictions required by the rezoning and, where necessary to
ensure continued compliance, may require such surety to remain
in effect after occupancy of rezoned property. Such surety shall
be posted before the agreement is recorded at the York County
Registry of Deeds.
G. Land use reviews.
(1) Where site plan or subdivision review is required for the use
proposed in the rezoning request, the Planning Board may conduct
the site plan or subdivision review concurrently with its review of
the request for rezoning, and the public hearing required by
§ 280-10-4E may be conducted simultaneously with a public
hearing conducted as part of site plan or subdivision review. If the
Planning Board determines that the proposed development meets
such land use approval standards, the Planning Board shall grant
preliminary, provisional approval to the plans, subject to enactment
of the contract zoning amendment by the City Council. The
Planning Board shall also advise the applicant of any changes or
revisions to the proposed contract zoning agreement necessary to
conform to the Planning Board's preliminary approval of the plan.
(2) After the contract zoning agreement is recorded in the York County
Registry of Deeds, the Planning Board shall complete its final site
plan review of the development proposal and final subdivision
review, if required. In the case of a subdivision, the Planning Board
shall adopt as its findings under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4404(9) and
Chapter 275, Subdivision of Land, the findings made by the City
Council regarding consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.
(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, where the
development proposed in a request for contract zoning is designed
to be constructed in phases and the Planning Board concludes that
it would be impractical to require preliminary subdivision and/or
site plan review and approval of all phases before approval of the
contract zoning amendment, the Planning Board, in its discretion,
may waive the provisions of this section requiring the Planning
Board to approve a preliminary plan before the City Council takes
final action on the contract zoning amendment, but only with
respect to phases subsequent to the first phase of the development
to be constructed. If the Planning Board grants such a waiver, the
City shall include a phasing schedule in the contract zoning
agreement, specifying the dates for completion of the subdivision
and/or site plan review, and may reserve in the contract zoning
agreement the right of the City Council to review the plans for
subsequent phases prior to their construction.
H. Contract zoning agreement.
§ 280-10-4 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-10-4
252:651
(1) Conditions and restrictions imposed under the authority of this
section shall relate only to the physical development and operation
of the property and may include, by way of example:
(a) Limitations on the number and types of uses permitted;
(b) Restrictions on the scale and density of development;
(c) Specifications for the design and layout of building and other
improvements, including landscaping;
(d) Schedules for commencement and completion of construction;
(e) Performance guaranties securing completion and maintenance
of improvements, including landscaping, and guaranties
against defects;
(f) Preservation of open space and buffers, and protection of
natural areas and historic sites;
(g) Contributions toward the provision of municipal services
required by the development;
(h) Provisions for enforcement and remedies for breach of any
condition or restriction; and
(i) Provisions for reservation or dedication of land for public
purposes.
(2) The City Council may impose conditions under this section that are
more restrictive than the applicable requirements of this chapter.
I. No rights created before City Council vote. The submission of a request
for contract zoning under this section, the payment of application fees,
or the expenditure of funds by the applicant in presenting such a
request shall not create any vested rights in the application. The
availability of contract zoning under this section shall not be construed
as creating any entitlement to approval of any request. The decision
whether or not to rezone remains committed to the City Council,
exercising its sole and exclusive judgment as the legislative body of the
City.
J. Time period for renewal of contract zoning request. No proposal to
amend the Official Zoning Map under this section shall be entertained
within one year from the date of denial of the same request.
§ 280-10-4 SANFORD CODE § 280-10-4
252:652
ARTICLE XI
Zone Requirements
§ 280-11-1. General provisions.
All land use activities within the City shall conform to the use, development,
and performance standards of the zone in which such use is located.
Throughout this article reference is made to the Table of Land Uses105 in
which permitted uses, uses allowed with site plan review, and conditional
uses are organized by categories of use, such as residential uses or
institutional uses. These headings or categories shall carry no legal
meaning, but rather serve only for organizational purposes.
§ 280-11-2. Rural Residential Zone (RR).
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Rural Residential (RR) Zone is to provide
areas in the City which promote high-quality rural residential
environments in sections of the community which cannot be served by
public water and sewerage systems, while maintaining the rural
character of these areas.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Uses shown on the Table of Land Uses as being permitted uses
shall be permitted by right in the RR Zone.
(2) Those parcels listed below are considered nonconforming lots of
record at the time they were rezoned in 2006 from Residential
Development and may be built upon, without the need for a
variance, with a single-family detached dwelling, provided that
such lot is in separate ownership and not contiguous with any other
lot in the same ownership and that all provisions of the Residential
Development Zone can be met.
Parcels Rezoned Residential Development to Rural
Residential February 2006 Considered Preexisting
Nonconforming
R8-3 G17-1 G17-3 R8-35B G17-2
H17-3 R8-30 G17-4 H17-4 G17-8
G17-7 H17-5 R8-6A G17-6 R8-28
R6-69C R8-5B R6-69 R8-5F R6-69D
H18-11 R8-7 R8-5D R11-55C R11-90
R11-55B R6-56 R8-72C R8-72D R8-8
C. Uses permitted with site plan review.
(1) Uses shown on the Table of Land Uses as being permitted with site
plan review in the RR Zone shall be allowed, but only upon the
105. Editor's Note: The Table of Land Uses is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 280-11-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-11-2
252:653
receipt of approval of a development plan in accordance with the
provisions of Article XVI.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Table of Land Uses, any
single-family home lawfully in existence as of the date of adoption
of this provision that was constructed prior to 1945 and that
contains a total gross floor area above ground of at least 1,800
square feet may be converted to a two-family dwelling, provided
that it complies with the following:
(a) A development plan for the conversion is approved in
accordance with the provisions of Article XVI;
(b) The gross floor area of the building is not increased; and
(c) Parking is provided in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
D. Conditional uses. Uses shown on the Table of Land Uses as being
conditional uses in the RR Zone shall be allowed only if a conditional
use permit for that use is approved by the Planning Board in
accordance with the provisions of Article XIII and XVI.
E. Prohibited uses. Any use not listed as a permitted use, a use permitted
with site plan review or a conditional use in the RR Zone shall be
prohibited within the RR Zone.
F. Standards. All buildings and structures shall be erected, structurally
altered, enlarged, or moved and all land within the RR Zone shall be
used in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Space and bulk standards.
(a) Maximum net residential density: one dwelling unit per two net
acres.
(b) Minimum lot size: see § 280-11-2F(2)(e).
(c) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: see § 280-11-2F(2)(e).
(d) Minimum street frontage:
[1] Arterial or collector in designated resource conservation
areas: 300 feet.
[a] Route 11A from Hanson Ridge Road to Harry Howes
Road.
[b] The Hanson Ridge Road.
[2] Arterial: 250 feet.
[3] Collector: 250 feet.
[4] Existing local street: 200 feet.
§ 280-11-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-11-2
252:654
[5] Proposed local street: 100 feet.
(e) Minimum front setback (principal and accessory buildings).
[1] Arterial: 75 feet.
[2] Collector: 40 feet.
[3] Existing local street: 40 feet.
[4] Proposed local street: 25 feet.
(f) Minimum side and rear setbacks.
[1] Principal residential buildings: 15 feet.
[2] Combined side setbacks of residential buildings: 40 feet.
[3] Accessory buildings or structures: 15 feet, except when
they directly abut a building used for agricultural
purposes.
[4] Nonresidential buildings or structures: one foot for each
foot of height but not less than 30 feet, excluding
agricultural buildings.
(g) Minimum vegetated area, side and rear, nonresidential use: 20
feet.
(h) Maximum height.
[1] Residential buildings and structures: 35 feet.
[2] Nonresidential buildings and structures: 55 feet.
[3] Transmitter towers and wind generators: none.
(2) Development standards. In addition to the space and bulk
standards set forth in § 280-11-2F(1), the following standards shall
apply as indicated:
(a) Subdivisions. The division of any parcel of land containing 10
or more acres as of the date of adoption of this subsection
shall:
[1] Be a cluster subdivision meeting the requirements of
§ 280-15-4; or
[2] Conform to the following development standards:
[a] Access to all new lots shall be from an existing or
proposed local street as defined in this chapter unless
no other reasonable alternative is feasible as
determined by the Planning Board.
§ 280-11-2 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-11-2
252:655
[b] A forty-foot area adjacent to any existing street or
road shall be maintained as a vegetated buffer.
[c] Where tree lines or wooded areas exist along existing
streets or roads, an effort shall be made to preserve
these features and suitable provisions made to protect
them through deed covenants or easements.
[d] The layout of lots and the placement of buildings on
lots shall respect natural features, including wetlands,
streams, and wildlife habitat, as well as existing site
features, such as tree lines and stone walls. In
approving plans for subdivisions, the Planning Board
may require the identification of building envelopes
within which all construction and development shall
occur.
(b) Reuse of agricultural buildings. Agricultural buildings existing
as of the date of adoption of this section may be reused for
nonresidential purposes subject to the following limitations:
[1] There is no retail sale of goods not otherwise allowed in
the zone.
[2] The nonresidential activity occurs completely within the
agricultural building and there is no outside storage of
materials, equipment, or products.
[3] The architectural character of the building is maintained.
[4] Exterior changes in the structure shall be limited to minor
changes and/or additions needed to provide access or
comply with code requirements.
(c) Outdoor storage of machinery, equipment, materials, or
products. Any outdoor storage permitted in conjunction with
an allowed nonresidential use shall be screened from view
from any public street or road or adjacent lot in residential use
by fencing or sight-impervious vegetation or a combination
thereof. This requirement shall not apply to the normal use and
storage of farm equipment in conjunction with an agricultural
use.
(d) Child-care center or nursery school for more than 13 children.
In addition to the requirements of conditional use, a child-care
center or nursery school for 13 or more children shall comply
with the following standards: [Amended 11-13-2018 by
Order No. 18-348-01]
[1] Minimum lot size shall be eight acres.
[2] The lot or parcel shall have four-hundred-fifty frontage on
Route 109 or Route 4. When a lot fronts on either Route
§ 280-11-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-11-2
252:656
109 or Route 4 and another road, access shall be from
Route 109 or Route 4.
[3] All building improvements associated with the proposed
use shall meet the following minimum vegetated front,
side and rear setbacks:
[a] Front yard setback: 100 feet.
[b] Side and rear setback: 75 feet.
[4] The use shall serve a maximum of 49 children. An existing
facility shall only be allowed to expand the number of
children if the property is located on an arterial, shall
demonstrate that there are adequate provisions for water
supply and sanitary wastewater disposal, and shall require
conditional use approval.
(e) Individual lot sizes. The creation of any individual lot shall
conform to the maximum net residential density provision of
one dwelling unit per two net acres. Individual lots may be as
small as 40,000 square feet, provided that the cumulative net
residential density of all lots created from the original parcel
conforms to the density standard. If a lot with a lot area of less
than two net acres or less than two net acres per proposed
dwelling unit is proposed to be created, the owner shall
provide the Code Enforcement Officer with written evidence
that the lot will be in conformance with the maximum net
residential density requirement of one dwelling unit per two
net acres. This evidence may include, but is not limited to, the
following:
[1] Evidence that the lot is part of an approved subdivision
that conforms to the maximum density requirement.
[2] Evidence that the proposed lots, in conjunction with other
lots created from the same parcel, conforms to the
maximum density requirement.
[3] Evidence that, in addition to the proposed lots, a
conservation area on the same parcel, adequate to allow
the combination of the lots and conservation area to
conform to the maximum density requirement, has been
permanently restricted from development through a
conservation or similar easement.
(3) Performance standards. Uses within the RR Zone shall conform to
all applicable performance standards, including but not limited to
the following:
(a) Section 280-15-1, Groundwater protection standards.
(b) Section 280-15-2, Watershed performance standards.
§ 280-11-2 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-11-2
252:657
§ 280-11-3. Rural Mixed Use Zone (RMU).
(c) Section 280-15-4, Residential cluster development standards.
(d) Section 280-15-5, Manufactured housing.
(e) Section 280-15-6, Mineral extraction standards.
(f) Section 280-15-7, Archaeological and historic resources.
(g) Section 280-15-10, Medical marijuana standards.
G. Overlay districts.
(1) Areas within the RR Zone are located within the Shoreland Overlay
Zone as defined by Chapter 270, Shoreland Zoning. All use of land
within the Shoreland Overlay Zone shall comply with the standards
and requirements of Chapter 270.
(2) Areas within the RR Zone may be located within the Airport
Protection Overlay Zone as defined in § 280-11-9. The provisions of
that section shall apply to all use of land within the Airport
Protection Overlay Zone.
H. Flood management. Areas of the RR Zone which are located within
flood hazard areas as defined by Chapter 265, Floodplain Management,
shall additionally comply with the terms of that chapter.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Rural Mixed Use (RMU) Zone is to provide
areas in the City which foster a working rural environment, including a
mix of residential and traditional rural uses, while maintaining the rural
character of these areas.
B. Permitted uses. Uses shown on the Table of Land Uses as being
permitted uses shall be permitted by right in the RMU Zone.
C. Uses permitted with site plan review. Uses shown on the Table of Land
Uses as being permitted with site plan review in the RMU Zone shall be
allowed, but only upon the receipt of approval of a development plan in
accordance with the provisions of Article XVI.
D. Conditional uses. Uses shown on the Table of Land Uses as being
conditional uses in the RMU Zone shall be allowed only if a conditional
use permit for that use is approved by the Planning Board in
accordance with the provisions of Articles XIII and XVI.
E. Prohibited uses. Any use not listed as a permitted use, a use permitted
with site plan review, or a conditional use in the RMU Zone shall be
prohibited within the RMU Zone.
F. Standards. All buildings and structures shall be erected, structurally
altered, enlarged, or moved and all land within the RMU Zone shall be
used in accordance with the following standards:
§ 280-11-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-11-3
252:658
(1) Space and bulk standards.
(a) Maximum net residential density: one dwelling unit per two net
acres.
(b) Minimum lot size: See § 280-11-3F(2)(a)[2][e].
(c) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: See
§ 280-11-3F(2)(a)[2][e].
(d) Minimum street frontage.
[1] Arterial: 250 feet.
[2] Collector: 250 feet.
[3] Existing local street: 200 feet.
[4] Proposed local street: 100 feet.
(e) Minimum front setback (principal and accessory buildings).
[1] Arterial: 75 feet.
[2] Collector: 40 feet.
[3] Existing local street: 40 feet.
[4] Proposed local street: 25 feet.
(f) Minimum side and rear setbacks.
[1] Principal residential buildings: 15 feet.
[2] Combined side setbacks of residential buildings: 40 feet.
[3] Accessory buildings or structures: 15 feet, except when
they directly abut an agricultural building.
[4] Nonresidential buildings or structures: one foot for each
foot of height but not less than 30 feet, excluding
agricultural buildings.
(g) Minimum vegetated area, side and rear, nonresidential use: 20
feet.
(h) Maximum height.
[1] Residential buildings and structures: 35 feet.
[2] Nonresidential buildings and structures: 55 feet.
[3] Wind generators: none.
(2) Development standards. In addition to the space and bulk
standards set forth in § 280-11-3F(1), the following standards shall
apply as indicated:
§ 280-11-3 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-11-3
252:659
(a) Subdivisions. The division of any parcel of land containing 10
or more acres as of the date of adoption of this subsection
shall:
[1] Be a cluster subdivision meeting the requirements of
§ 280-15-4; or
[2] Conform to the following development standards:
[a] Access to all new lots shall be from an existing or
proposed local street as defined in this chapter unless
no other reasonable alternative is feasible as
determined by the Planning Board.
[b] A forty-foot area adjacent to any existing street or
road shall be maintained as a vegetated buffer.
[c] Where tree lines or wooded areas exist along existing
streets or roads, an effort shall be made to preserve
these features and suitable provisions made to protect
them through deed covenants or easements.
[d] The layout of lots and the placement of buildings on
lots shall respect natural features, including wetlands,
streams, and wildlife habitat, as well as existing site
features, such as tree lines and stone walls. In
approving plans for subdivisions, the Planning Board
may require the identification of building envelopes
within which all construction and development shall
occur.
[e] Individual lot sizes. The creation of any individual lot
shall conform to the maximum net residential density
provision of one dwelling unit per two net acres.
Individual lots may be as small as 40,000 square feet,
provided that the cumulative net residential density of
all lots created from the original parcel conforms to
the density standard. If a lot with a lot area of less
than two net acres or less than two net acres per
proposed dwelling unit is proposed to be created, the
owner shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer
with written evidence that the lot will be in
conformance with the maximum net residential
density requirement of one dwelling unit per two net
acres. This evidence may include, but is not limited to,
the following:
[i] Evidence that the lot is part of an approved
subdivision that conforms to the maximum density
requirement.
§ 280-11-3 SANFORD CODE § 280-11-3
252:660
[ii] Evidence that the proposed lots, in conjunction
with other lots created from the same parcel,
conform to the maximum density requirement.
[iii] Evidence that, in addition to the proposed lots, a
conservation area on the same parcel, adequate
to allow the combination of the lots and
conservation area to conform to the maximum
density requirement, has been permanently
restricted from development through a
conservation or similar easement.
(b) Reuse of agricultural buildings. Agricultural buildings existing
as of the date of adoption of this section may be reused for
nonresidential purposes subject to the following limitations:
[1] There is no retail sale of goods not otherwise allowed in
the zone.
[2] The nonresidential activity occurs completely within the
agricultural building and there is no outside storage of
materials, equipment, or products.
[3] The architectural character of the building is maintained.
[4] Exterior changes in the structure shall be limited to minor
changes and/or additions needed to provide access or
comply with code requirements.
(c) Outdoor storage of machinery, equipment, materials, or
products. Any outdoor storage permitted in conjunction with
an allowed nonresidential use shall be screened from view
from any public street or road or adjacent lot in residential use
by fencing or sight-impervious vegetation or a combination
thereof. This requirement shall not apply to the normal use and
storage of farm equipment in conjunction with an agricultural
use.
(d) Access limitations to Route 4. In addition to the general access
limitations set forth in §§ 280-14-4 and 280-14-5, any
nonresidential use, including home businesses, located on a lot
with frontage on Route 4 shall either:
[1] Obtain its vehicular access from an existing or proposed
local street; or
[2] Provide for the coordination of vehicular access with
abutting properties where feasible through the use of
shared or combined access drives, the creation of marginal
access roads, or the interconnection of parking and service
areas. The Planning Board or the Site Plan Review
Committee may waive this requirement during site plan
§ 280-11-3 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-11-3
252:661
review under Article XVI if access is not feasible because
of existing conditions, the layout of lots, or physical
conditions of the site or adjoining lots.
(e) Residential buffer. Any commercial or industrial use, as
identified in the Table of Land Uses, that abuts a lot located in
a Single-Family Residential Zone shall maintain a fifty-foot
buffer strip along the adjoining lot line. This buffer strip shall
be maintained as a vegetated area and shall not be used for
parking, storage, display of materials, placement of dumpsters,
or similar items. A visual barrier shall be established within the
buffer strip by landscaping and/or fencing.
(f) Child-care center or nursery school for more than 13 children.
In addition to the requirements of conditional use, a child-care
center or nursery school for 13 or more children shall comply
with the following standards: [Amended 11-13-2018 by
Order No. 18-348-01]
[1] Minimum lot size shall be eight acres.
[2] The lot or parcel shall have four-hundred-fifty frontage on
an arterial or collector road. When a lot fronts on both an
arterial and/or collector road, access shall be from the
collector road unless otherwise approved by the Planning
Board.
[3] All building improvements associated with the proposed
use shall meet the following minimum vegetated front,
side, and rear setbacks:
[a] Front yard setback: 100 feet.
[b] Side and rear yard setback: 75 feet.
[4] The use shall serve a maximum of 49 children. An existing
facility shall only be allowed to expand the number of
children if the property is located on an arterial, shall
demonstrate that there are adequate provisions for water
supply and sanitary wastewater disposal, and shall require
conditional use approval.
[5] The use shall occur either within a single-family detached
dwelling or a separate structure. When the proposed use
will be located in a separate structure, the structure shall
be used exclusively for the child-care center or nursery
school.
(3) Performance standards. Uses within the RMU Zone shall conform
to all applicable performance standards of this chapter, including
but not limited to the following:
(a) Section 280-15-1, Groundwater protection standards.
§ 280-11-3 SANFORD CODE § 280-11-3
252:662
§ 280-11-4. Single-Family Residential Zone (SFR).
(b) Section 280-15-2, Watershed performance standards.
(c) Section 280-15-4, Residential cluster development standards.
(d) Section 280-15-5, Manufactured housing.
(e) Section 280-15-6, Mineral extraction standards.
(f) Section 280-15-7, Archaeological and historic resources.
(g) Section 280-15-10, Medical marijuana standards.
G. Overlay districts.
(1) Areas within the RMU Zone are located within the Shoreland
Overlay Zone as defined by Chapter 270, Shoreland Zoning. All use
of land within the Shoreland Overlay Zone shall comply with the
standards and requirements of Chapter 270.
(2) Areas within the RMU Zone may be located within the Airport
Protection Overlay Zone as defined in § 280-11-9. The provisions of
that section shall apply to all use of land within the Airport
Protection Overlay Zone.
H. Flood management. Areas of the RMU Zone which are located within
flood hazard areas as defined by Chapter 365, Floodplain Management,
shall additionally comply with the terms of that chapter.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Single-Family Residential (SFR) Zone is to
provide for the protection of existing single-family neighborhoods
within the built-up areas of Sanford and Springvale while allowing for
infilling and upgrading which is compatible with the existing character
of these areas.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Uses shown on the Table of Land Uses as being permitted uses
shall be permitted by right in the SFR Zone.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Table of Land Uses, any twofamily
dwelling legally existing within the SFR Zone as of the date
of adoption of this provision may be maintained, altered, or
expanded as if it were a permitted use, provided that any changes
comply with all setback and height requirements of the SFR Zone.
C. Uses permitted with site plan review.
(1) Uses shown on the Table of Land Uses as being permitted with site
plan review in the SFR Zone shall be allowed, but only upon the
receipt of approval of a development plan in accordance with the
provisions of Article XVI.
§ 280-11-3 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-11-4
252:663
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Table of Land Uses, any
single-family home lawfully in existence as of the date of adoption
of this provision that was constructed prior to 1945 and that
contains a total gross floor area above ground of at least 1,800
square feet may be converted to a two-family dwelling, provided
that it complies with the following:
(a) A development plan for the conversion is approved in
accordance with the provisions of Article XVI;
(b) The gross floor area of the building is not increased; and
(c) Parking is provided in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
D. Conditional uses. Uses shown on the Table of Land Uses as being
conditional uses in the SFR Zone shall be allowed only if a conditional
use permit for that use is approved by the Planning Board in
accordance with the provisions of Articles XIII and XVI.
E. Prohibited uses. Any use not listed as a permitted use, a use permitted
with site plan review, or a conditional use in the SFR Zone shall be
prohibited within the SFR Zone.
F. Standards. All buildings and structures shall be erected, structurally
altered, enlarged, or moved and all land within the SFR Zone shall be
used in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Space and bulk standards.
(a) Maximum net residential density.
[1] Basic: four dwelling units per net acre.
[2] With development review: up to six dwelling units per net
acre.
(b) Minimum lot size.
[1] Basic: 10,000 square feet.
[2] With development review: not less than 6,500 square feet.
[3] Any use that disposes of wastes by means of subsurface
waste disposal shall comply with the requirements of the
State Minimum Lot Size Law as set forth in 12 M.R.S.A.
§ 4807 et seq. for a single-family home. The minimum lot
size under the State law is 20,000 square feet.
(c) Minimum street frontage.
[1] Basic: 75 feet.
[2] With development review: 65 feet.
§ 280-11-4 SANFORD CODE § 280-11-4
252:664
(d) Front setback (principal and accessory buildings).
[1] Where the existing buildings have a uniform setback
relationship to the street, any new building or alteration of
an existing building shall maintain the existing
relationship.
[2] Where a uniform setback relationship does not exist, the
minimum front setback shall be 25 feet.
(e) Minimum side and rear setbacks.
[1] Principal buildings: 10 feet.
[2] Accessory buildings: 10 feet.
(f) Maximum height.
[1] Principal buildings: 35 feet.
[2] Accessory buildings and structures: 35 feet.
(2) Development standards. In addition to the space and bulk
standards set forth in § 280-11-4F(1), the following standards shall
apply as indicated:
(a) Development review.
[1] If the average net residential density of abutting
residential lots is greater than four units per acre, the
maximum net residential density of the subject parcel shall
be the average of the abutting properties to a maximum of
six units per net acre, provided that the project receives
site plan approval and the Planning Board finds that it
conforms to the following standards:
[a] The size of the proposed building is comparable to the
size of residential structures on abutting lots; and
[b] The building's placement on the lot with respect to
front and side lot lines is similar to the pattern of
existing developed lots.
[2] In addition, the minimum lot size may be reduced to the
average of abutting residential lots but not less than 6,500
square feet, and the minimum street frontage may be
reduced to not less than 65 feet.
(b) Use of front yard. Parking of motor vehicles in the area
between the front property line and the wall of the building or
structure closest to the street and running the full width of the
property shall be allowed only on driveways. No other parking
of vehicles shall be permitted in this area.
§ 280-11-4 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-11-4
252:665
(c) Reduced side and rear setbacks for accessory structures. The
required side and rear setback for accessory buildings and
structures may be reduced to not less than two feet subject to
the following:
[1] The relationship of the structure to the side and/or rear lot
line shall conform to the established pattern on abutting
residential lots;
[2] The accessory structure shall be located at least 10 feet
from any other structure on the same or an abutting lot;
[3] The owners of the abutting lots adjacent to the
encroachment approve of the reduced setback in writing;
and
[4] The Fire Department approves of the reduced setback in
writing.
(d) Commercial vehicle parking accessory to an allowed
residential use. Overnight parking of not more than one
commercial vehicle shall be permitted in conjunction with an
allowed residential use, provided that:
[1] The vehicle is parked on the same lot as the residential
use;
[2] The vehicle is regularly driven by a resident of the
premises; and
[3] The commercial vehicle is not over one ton in size.
(3) Performance standards. Uses within the SFR Zone shall conform to
all applicable performance standards of this chapter, including but
not limited to the following:
(a) Section 280-15-1, Groundwater protection standards.
(b) Section 280-15-2, Watershed performance standards.
(c) Section 280-15-4, Residential cluster development standards.
(d) Section 280-15-5, Manufactured housing.
(e) Section 280-15-7, Archaeological and historic resources.
(f) Section 280-15-10, Medical marijuana standards.
G. Overlay Districts.
(1) Areas within the SFR Zone are located within the Shoreland
Overlay Zone as defined by Chapter 270, Shoreland Zoning. All use
of land within the Shoreland Overlay Zone shall comply with the
standards and requirements of Chapter 270.
§ 280-11-4 SANFORD CODE § 280-11-4
252:666
§ 280-11-5. Residential Development Zone (RD).
(2) Areas within the SFR Zone may be located within the Airport
Protection Overlay Zone as defined in § 280-11-9. The provisions of
that section shall apply to all use of land within the Airport
Protection Overlay Zone.
H. Flood management. Areas of the SFR Zone which are located within
flood hazard areas as defined by Chapter 265, Floodplain Management,
shall additionally comply with the terms of that chapter.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Residential Development (RD) Zone is to
provide areas in the City for the extension of a compact pattern of
residential development in areas where public sewer and water service
can be extended.
B. Permitted uses. Uses shown on the Table of Land Uses as being
permitted uses shall be permitted by right in the RD Zone.
C. Uses permitted with site plan review. Uses shown on the Table of Land
Uses as being permitted with site plan review in the RD Zone shall be
allowed, but only upon the receipt of approval of a development plan in
accordance with the provisions of Article XVI.
D. Conditional uses. Uses shown on the Table of Land Uses as being
conditional uses in the RD Zone shall be allowed only if a conditional
use permit for that use is approved by the Planning Board in
accordance with the provisions of Articles XIII and XVI.
E. Prohibited uses. Any use not listed as a permitted use, a use permitted
with site plan review, or a conditional use in the RD Zone shall be
prohibited within the RD Zone.
F. Standards. All buildings and structures shall be erected, structurally
altered, enlarged, or moved and all land within the RD Zone shall be
used in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Space and bulk standards.
(a) Maximum net residential density.
[1] Basic: six dwelling units per net acre.
[2] With density bonus: 10 dwelling units per net acre.
(b) Minimum lot size.
[1] Single-family dwelling: 7,500 square feet.
[2] Other uses: 10,000 square feet.
(c) Minimum street frontage: 80 feet.
§ 280-11-4 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-11-5
252:667
(d) Minimum front setback (principal and accessory buildings): 25
feet.
(e) Minimum side and rear setbacks: 10 feet.
(f) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(2) Development standards. In addition to the space and bulk
standards set forth in § 280-11-5F, the following standards shall
apply as indicated:
(a) Connection to public sewerage system. Any new development
other than the construction of a new single-family home on an
existing lot shall be connected to the public sewerage system
operated by the Sewerage District. Any change in use and/or
expansion of an existing building or expansion or change in use
of a parcel of land which increases the design sewage flow as
determined by the Maine State Plumbing Code by more than
25% shall be permitted only if the use is connected to the
public sewerage system.
(b) Density bonus. The maximum net residential density shall be
increased to 10 dwelling units per net acre for any project
which the Planning Board finds in conformance with the
following standards:
[1] The overall layout of the streets, lots, and buildings
creates a neighborhood which has an urban character with
a pedestrian orientation.
[2] The buildings are oriented to the streets in an urban
fashion with buildings fronting on the streets.
[3] Parking and service areas are located to the side and rear
of the buildings.
[4] The layout provides for varying lot frontages and side
setbacks.
[5] Provisions are made for sidewalks or other pedestrianways
linking the neighborhood.
(c) Accessory office and retail uses. Projects meeting the
standards of § 280-11-5F(1)(b) may provide for low-intensity
nonresidential use of not more than 5% of the total lot area of
the project. These nonresidential uses shall be designed as
part of the overall project and shall be limited to business and
professional offices, business and personal services, and
limited retail stores as defined in this chapter, subject to the
granting of a conditional use permit by the Planning Board.
These types of uses shall not otherwise be permitted within the
zone.
§ 280-11-5 SANFORD CODE § 280-11-5
252:668
§ 280-11-6. Urban Zone (U).
(d) Commercial vehicle parking accessory to an allowed
residential use. Overnight parking of not more than one
commercial vehicle shall be permitted in conjunction with an
allowed residential use, provided that:
[1] The vehicle is parked on the same lot as the residential
use;
[2] The vehicle is regularly driven by a resident of the
premises; and
[3] The commercial vehicle is not over one ton in size.
(3) Performance standards. Uses within the RD Zone shall conform to
all applicable performance standards of this chapter, including but
not limited to the following:
(a) Section 280-15-1: Groundwater protection standards.
(b) Section 280-15-2: Watershed performance standards.
(c) Section 280-15-4: Residential cluster development standards.
(d) Section 280-15-5: Manufactured housing.
(e) Section 280-15-7: Archaeological and historic resources.
(f) Section 280-15-10: Medical marijuana standards.
G. Overlay districts. Areas within the RD Zone are located within the
Shoreland Overlay Zone as defined by Chapter 270, Shoreland Zoning.
All use of land within the Shoreland Overlay Zone shall comply with the
standards and requirements of Chapter 270.
H. Flood management. Areas of the RD Zone which are located within
flood hazard areas as defined by Chapter 265, Floodplain Management,
shall additionally comply with the terms of that chapter.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Urban (U) Zone is to provide areas for
urban commercial centers within the built-up areas of the City which
promote an urban rather than a suburban character of development.
The development is characterized as vertical mixed use which
emphasizes mixed uses in a structure, typically having two or more
stories, with a streetscape that encourages reduced traffic speeds and
increased walkability.
B. Permitted uses. Uses, shown on the Table of Land Uses as being
permitted uses shall be permitted by right in the U Zone.
C. Uses permitted with site plan review. Uses shown on the Table of Land
Uses as being permitted with site plan review in the U Zone shall be
§ 280-11-5 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-11-6
252:669
allowed, but only upon the receipt of approval of a development plan in
accordance with the guidelines and provisions of Article XVI.
D. Conditional uses. Uses shown on the Table of Land Uses as being
conditional uses in the U Zone shall be allowed only if a conditional use
permit for that use is approved by the Planning Board in accordance
with the provisions of Articles XIII and XVI.
E. Prohibited uses. Any use not listed as a permitted use, a use permitted
with site plan review, or a conditional use in the U Zone shall be
prohibited.
F. Standards.
(1) All land and nonresidential structures, except for single-family and
two-family dwellings, and their accessory structures, shall be
erected, structurally altered, enlarged, moved and used in
accordance with the provisions of Article XVI.
(2) Front setback (principal and accessory buildings):
(a) Where existing buildings have a uniform setback relationship
to the street, any new building or alteration of an existing
building shall maintain the existing relationship.
(b) Where a uniform setback relationship does not exist, or
abutting lots are not residentially developed, the minimum
front yard setback shall be 20 feet.
(c) Notwithstanding § 280-11-6F(2)(b), an attached, unenclosed
porch may be added to a legally existing nonconforming
principal and accessory structures that does not meet the
setback requirement of this section if such addition or
expansion:
[1] Does not further encroach on the setback than other
portions of the existing nonconforming principal and
accessory structures; and
[2] Is added to or enlarged in such a manner to maintain the
existing relationship to the street.
(3) Reuse of existing residential structures. Any residential structure
with at least 1,070 square feet of above-ground floor space existing
as of the date of adoption of this section may be reused for any
residential use permitted in the U Zone without conforming to the
maximum net residential density requirements of the zone in which
it was located prior to its redesignation in the U Zone, provided
that the reuse conforms to all of the following requirements:
(a) A site plan for the reuse is approved in accordance with the
provisions of Article XVI;
§ 280-11-6 SANFORD CODE § 280-11-6
252:670
(b) The gross floor area of the building is not increased except to
provide access;
(c) Parking is provided in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter; and
(d) Any residential dwelling unit created under this provision
complies with the following minimum floor area requirements
based on the type of unit:
[1] One-bedroom unit: not less than 535 square feet.
[2] Two-bedroom unit: not less than 720 square feet.
[3] Three-bedroom unit: not less than 920 square feet.
[4] Four-or-more-bedroom unit: not less than 1,120 square
feet.
(4) Design standards. Any proposal involving the change of use of an
existing building, expansion of the gross floor area of an existing
building, construction of a new building or structure, or exterior
modification of an existing structure or site in the Sanford
Downtown or Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zones,
except for a single-family home or demolition of an existing
structure, shall conform to the design standards of § 280-15-11 and
solicit review and comment by the Design Review Committee in
conformance with §§ 280-16-4C and 280-16-5D prior to final review
by the Planning Board, Site Plan Review Committee, Planning
Director, and/or Code Enforcement Officer. [Amended 10-2-2018
by Order No. 18-426-01]
(5) For the construction of new single-family or two-family units, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall review and approve the application
subject to any and all applicable state or local construction and/or
fire codes, and the following:
(a) Off-street parking. Any new off-street parking shall be located
to the side or rear of the principal building. No new off-street
parking for a nonresidential use shall be located in the area
between the front property line and the wall of the building or
structure closest to the street and running the full width of the
property.
(b) Lighting. Illumination from exterior lighting shall be shielded,
directed downward, and contained on the property, except as
otherwise provided for in §§ 280-15-11B and 280-15-11E(8)(b),
Design district standards.
(c) Building design.
[1] The architectural design of any new buildings shall be
compatible with the architectural style of neighboring
§ 280-11-6 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-11-6
252:671
buildings fronting on the same street. In determining the
compatibility of any new building with the Design District
Standards, the Code Enforcement Officer, Planning
Director, Planning Board or Site Plan Review Committee
shall consider the recommendations of the Design Review
Committee on the scale and massing of the structure, the
setback and orientation of the building to the street, the
relative proportion of the height and width of the building
as seen from the street, the overall height of the building,
the roof style and pitch, the location and sizes of windows,
and the exterior surface materials.
[2] Use of the front yard. In addition to the provision in
§§ 280-11-6.6.5.1 dealing with the location of
nonresidential off-street parking, parking of motor
vehicles for all other uses in the area between the front
property line and the wall of the building or structure
closest to the street and running the full width of the
property shall only be allowed on driveways with a
maximum width of 20 feet. No other parking of vehicles
shall be permitted in this area.
[3] Reduced side and rear setbacks for accessory structures.
The required side and rear setback of 10 feet for accessory
buildings and structures may be reduced to not less than
two feet subject to the following:
[a] The relationship of the structure to the side and/or
rear lot line shall conform to the uniform setback
relationship on abutting lots;
[b] The accessory structure shall be located at least 10
feet from any other structure on the same or an
abutting lot;
[c] The owners of the abutting lots adjacent to the
encroachment approve of the reduced setback in
writing; and
[d] The Fire Department approves of the reduced setback
in writing.
(d) Commercial vehicle parking accessory to an allowed
residential use. Overnight parking of not more than one
commercial vehicle shall be permitted in conjunction with an
allowed residential use, provided that:
[1] The vehicle is parked on the same lot as the residential
use;
[2] The vehicle is regularly driven by a resident of the
premises; and
§ 280-11-6 SANFORD CODE § 280-11-6
252:672
§ 280-11-7. Industrial Business Zone (IB).
[3] The commercial vehicle is not over one ton in size.
(6) Performance standards. Uses within the U Zone shall conform to all
applicable performance standards of this chapter, including but not
limited to the following:
(a) Section 280-15-1, Groundwater protection standards.
(b) Section 280-15-2, Watershed performance standards.
(c) Section 280-15-3, Industrial performance standards.
(d) Section 280-15-7, Archaeological and historic resources.
(e) Section 280-15-10, Medical marijuana standards.
G. Overlay districts. Areas within the U Zone may be located within the
Shoreland Overlay Zone as defined by Chapter 270, Shoreland Zoning.
All use of land within the Shoreland Overlay Zone shall comply with the
standards and requirements of Chapter 270.
H. Flood management. Areas of the U Zone which are located within flood
hazard areas as defined by Chapter 265, Floodplain Management, shall
additionally comply with the terms of that chapter.
I. Medical Marijuana Urban Overlay District. Areas of the U Zone which
are located within the Medical Marijuana Urban Overlay District shall
additionally comply with the standards and requirements of
§ 280-15-10.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Industrial Business (IB) Zone is to provide
areas for traditional industrial and business park development in a wellplanned
environment where public water supply and sewerage are
available or can be provided.
B. Permitted uses. Uses shown on the Table of Land Uses as being
permitted uses shall be permitted by right in the IB Zone.
C. Uses permitted with site plan review. Uses shown on the Table of Land
Uses as being allowed with site plan review in the IB Zone shall be
allowed, but only upon the receipt of approval of a development plan in
accordance with the provisions of Article XVI.
D. Conditional uses. Uses shown on the Table of Land Uses as being
conditional uses in the IB Zone shall be allowed only if a conditional use
permit for that use is approved by the Planning Board in accordance
with the provisions of Articles XIII and XVI.
E. Prohibited uses. Any use not listed as a permitted use, a use permitted
with site plan review, or a conditional use in the IB Zone shall be
prohibited within the IB Zone.
§ 280-11-6 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-11-7
252:673
F. Standards. All buildings and structures shall be erected, structurally
altered, enlarged, or moved and all land within the IB Zone shall be
used in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Space and bulk standards.
(a) Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum street frontage: 200 feet.
(c) Front setback (principal and accessory buildings): 50 feet.
(d) Minimum side and rear setbacks.
[1] Principal buildings: 50 feet.
[2] Accessory buildings and structures: 20 feet plus one
additional foot for each foot of building height in excess of
30 feet except where residential buffer requirement
applies.
(e) Maximum height.
[1] Principal buildings: 55 feet.
[2] Accessory buildings and structures: as determined by the
Planning Board.
(2) Development standards. In addition to the space and bulk
standards set forth in § 280-11-7F(1), the following standards shall
apply as indicated:
(a) Street line landscaped area. A strip of land not less than 25 feet
in width shall be maintained as a vegetated area adjacent to
the front property line. This area shall be appropriately
landscaped and maintained as a vegetated area. Where tree
lines exist along existing streets or roads, an effort shall be
made to preserve this feature and suitable provisions made to
protect it through deed covenants or easements. This
vegetated area shall not be used as parking, for the storage or
display of materials, or for the location of dumpsters or similar
items. Access drives or streets may cross this area, but drives
or accessways providing internal circulation shall not be
located within this area.
(b) Residential buffer. A fifty-foot buffer strip shall be maintained
along any lot line adjoining a lot located in a residential zone.
This buffer strip shall be maintained as a vegetated area and
shall not be used for parking, storage, or display of materials or
the placement of dumpsters or similar items. A visual barrier
shall be established within the buffer strip by landscaping and/
or fencing.
§ 280-11-7 SANFORD CODE § 280-11-7
252:674
(c) Access limitations to Routes 4 and 109. In addition to the
general access limitations set forth in §§ 280-14-4 and
280-14-5, any nonresidential use located on a lot with frontage
on Route 4 or Route 109 shall provide for the coordination of
vehicular access with abutting properties where feasible
through the use of shared or combined access drives, the
creation of marginal access roads, or the interconnection of
parking and service areas. The Planning Board or Site Plan
Review Committee may waive this requirement during site
plan review under Article XVI if access is not feasible because
of existing conditions, the layout of lots, or physical conditions
of the site or adjoining lots.
(d) Maximum height of accessory buildings and structures. In
approving the height of accessory buildings and structures, the
Planning Board shall not allow any encroachment above the
imaginary surface of the Airport as specified in § 77.13 of Part
77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations unless the Planning
Board finds that such encroachment will not have a
detrimental impact on the instrument landing approach
minimums currently in use or likely to be in use in the future.
(3) Performance standards. Uses within the IB Zone shall conform to
all applicable performance standards of this chapter, including but
not limited to the following:
(a) Section 280-15-1, Groundwater protection standards.
(b) Section 280-15-2, Watershed performance standards.
(c) Section 280-15-3, Industrial performance standards.
(d) Section 280-15-6, Mineral extraction standards.
(e) Section 280-15-7, Archaeological and historic resources.
(f) Section 280-15-10, Medical marijuana standards.
G. Overlay districts.
(1) Areas within the IB Zone are located within the Shoreland Overlay
Zone as defined by Chapter 270, Shoreland Zoning. All use of land
within the Shoreland Overlay Zone shall comply with the standards
and requirements of Chapter 270.
(2) Areas within the IB Zone are located within the Airport Protection
Overlay Zone as defined in § 280-11-9. The provisions of that
section shall apply to all use of land within the Airport Protection
Overlay Zone.
H. For areas within Tax Map R19, Lot 9A and 201-215, retail is allowed as
a conditional use subject to Planning Board approval and the provisions
of Articles XIII and XVI.
§ 280-11-7 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-11-7
252:675
§ 280-11-8. Industrial Reuse Zone (IR).
I. Flood management. Areas of the IB Zone which are located within flood
hazard areas as defined by Chapter 265, Floodplain Management, shall
additionally comply with the terms of that chapter.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Industrial Reuse (IR) Zone is to foster the
continued use, reuse, and redevelopment of existing mill complexes and
other under-utilized industrial areas.
B. Permitted uses. Uses shown on the Table of Land Uses as being
permitted uses shall be permitted by right in the IR Zone.
C. Uses permitted with site plan review. Uses shown on the Table of Land
Uses as being permitted with site plan review in the IR Zone shall be
allowed, but only upon the receipt of approval of a development plan in
accordance with the provisions of Article XVI.
D. Conditional uses. Uses shown on the Table of Land Uses as being
conditional in the IR Zone shall be allowed only if a conditional use
permit for that use is approved by the Planning Board in accordance
with the provisions of Articles XIII and XVI.
E. Prohibited uses. Any use not listed as a permitted use, a use permitted
with site plan review, or a conditional use in the IR Zone shall be
prohibited.
F. Standards. All buildings and structures shall be erected, structurally
altered, enlarged, or moved and all land within the IR Zone shall be
used in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Space and bulk standards.
(a) Maximum net residential density: none.
(b) Minimum lot size: none.
(c) Minimum street frontage: 50 feet.
(d) Front setback.
[1] Principal buildings. Where existing buildings have a
uniform setback relationship to the street, any new
building or alteration of an existing building shall maintain
the existing relationship. Where a uniform setback
relationship does not exist, or abutting lots are not
developed, the front setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet.
[2] Accessory buildings: 20 feet.
(e) Minimum side and rear setbacks (principal and accessory
buildings): 10 feet.
(f) Maximum height.
§ 280-11-7 SANFORD CODE § 280-11-8
252:676
[1] Principal buildings: 75 feet.
[2] Accessory buildings and structures: 75 feet.
(2) Development standards. In addition to the space and bulk
standards set forth in § 280-11-8F(1), the following standards shall
apply as indicated:
(a) Design standards. For any proposal involving the change of use
of an existing building, or the expansion of the gross floor area
of an existing building, or the construction of a new building or
structure, the Planning Board or Site Plan Review Committee
shall find that it complies with the following standards:
[1] Off-street parking. New off-street parking shall be located
to the side or rear of the principal building. No new offstreet
parking for a nonresidential use shall be located in
the area between the front property line and the wall of
the building or structure closest to the street and running
the full width of the property.
[2] Lighting. Illumination from exterior lighting shall be
shielded, directed downward, and contained on the
property.
[3] Residential buffer. Where feasible, a strip of land not less
than 10 feet in width shall be maintained as a vegetated
area along any lot line adjoining a lot located in a
residential zone. A visual barrier which may be created by
landscaping and/or fencing shall be established within the
required buffer strip.
[4] Storage. There shall be no exterior storage or display of
material or equipment in conjunction with a nonresidential
use in any required setback area.
(b) Minimum size of residential units. Any residential dwelling unit
created in the IR Zone shall comply with the following
minimum floor area requirements based on the type of unit:
[1] Studio/efficiency unit: not less than 410 square feet.
[2] One-bedroom unit: not less than 535 square feet.
[3] Two-bedroom unit: not less than 720 square feet.
[4] Three-bedroom unit: not less than 920 square feet.
[5] Four-or-more-bedroom unit: not less than 1,120 square
feet.
(3) Performance standards. Uses within the IR Zone shall conform to
all applicable performance standards of this chapter, including but
not limited to the following:
§ 280-11-8 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-11-8
252:677
§ 280-11-9. Airport Development Zone (AD).
(a) Section 280-15-1, Groundwater protection standards.
(b) Section 280-15-2, Watershed performance standards.
(c) Section 280-15-3, Industrial performance standards.
(d) Section 280-15-7, Archaeological and historic resources.
(e) Section 280-15-10, Medical marijuana standards.
G. Overlay districts. Areas within the IR Zone may be located within the
Shoreland Overlay Zone as defined by Chapter 270, Shoreland Zoning.
All use of land within the Shoreland Overlay Zone shall comply with the
standards and requirements of Chapter 270.
H. Flood management. Areas of the IR Zone which are located within flood
hazard areas as defined by Chapter 265, Floodplain Management, shall
additionally comply with the terms of that chapter.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Airport Development Zone (AD) is to create
an area that includes the Airport, adjacent clear zones and adjacent
properties with potential for providing support services to the airport
and to promote the smooth and efficient functioning of the airport. All
land use and development in this zone shall comply with all applicable
federal, State and local laws, including, without limitation, Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) rules and regulations, Maine Department
of Transportation rules and regulations and airport lease agreements.
All land use and development within the AD Zone shall be compatible
with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan, as may be
amended from time to time, and the Airport Master Plan, as may be
amended from time to time.
B. District boundaries. The AD Zone consists of the land shown on the
Official Zoning Map of the City, as may be amended from time to time.
The AD Zone is further divided into two subdistricts, the location and
boundaries of which are described as follows:
(1) AD Airport Subdistrict: all of the land area owned by the City or
private property owners that is used for airport runways and
airport runway direct access activities; this area is commonly
referred to as the area within the fence or the area with controlled
access.
(2) AD Support Subdistrict: all of the land area located in the AD Zone
but not in the AD Airport Subdistrict.
C. Permitted uses. Uses shown on the Table of Land Uses as being
permitted shall be permitted by right in the AD Zone. (NOTE:
Construction activities related to another permitted with site plan
review use are permitted with site plan review.)
§ 280-11-8 SANFORD CODE § 280-11-9
252:678
D. Review authority. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 280-16-3, review
authority for land use and development activities in the AD Zone shall
be as follows:
(1) Site plan review. The following land use and development activities
in the AD Zone shall require site plan review and approval as a
major development under Article XVI pursuant to § 280-11-9F(1)
and (2).
(a) Any new construction;
(b) Any expansion of an existing use of 25% or more in gross floor
area, parking, and/or impervious surface area;
(c) Any change in a preexisting, nonconforming use; and
(d) Any construction, expansion, renovation, alteration,
rehabilitation, division, or subdivision of any land, building or
structure that has not been previously reviewed and approved
by the Planning Board.
(2) Planning Director and Airport Manager review. The following land
use and development activities in the AD Zone shall require review
and approval by the Planning Director and the Airport Manager, or
his or her designee, pursuant to § 280-11-9F(1) and (2) and shall
not require site plan review and approval under Article XVI:
(a) A change in the ownership or management of a use previously
approved under this section;
(b) The expansion of a use previously approved under this section
of less than 25% in gross floor area, parking, and/or impervious
surface area; and
(c) Any building, structure or use considered accessory to a use
previously approved under this section.
E. Prohibited uses. A use that is not designated as a use permitted is
deemed to be a prohibited use in the AD Zone, except for accessory
buildings, structures, and uses.
F. Standards. All buildings and structures shall be erected, structurally
altered, enlarged, or moved and all land within the AD Zone shall be
used in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Space and bulk standards.
Standard
AD Airport
Subdistrict
AD Support
Subdistrict
Minimum lot size
(square feet)
Not applicable 40,000
Minimum street
frontage
Not applicable1 Not applicable1
§ 280-11-9 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-11-9
252:679
Standard
AD Airport
Subdistrict
AD Support
Subdistrict
Minimum front setback
(feet)
Not applicable 15
Minimum side setback
(feet)
Not applicable 15
Minimum rear setback
(feet)
Not applicable 15
Maximum impervious
surface2
100% 80%
Maximum building
height (feet)
Subject to FAA
regulations
60
Floor area ratio Not applicable 4.8
Notes:
1 Notwithstanding §§ 280-14-3 and 280-14-4, there is no
minimum street frontage in the AD Zone; provided, however,
that each land use and development plan in this zone shall
demonstrate to the applicable review authority that the
development can provide safe and convenient access to the site
relative to the site's location, use and accessibility from other
streets.
2 For purposes of this section, "impervious surface" is defined as
any material that prevents absorption of stormwater into the
ground.
(2) Development standards. In addition to the space and bulk
standards set forth in § 280-11-9F(1), standards for land use and
development within the AD Zone shall be in conformance with the
minimum standards set forth in the Chapter 70, Airport, as may be
amended from time to time, including, without limitation, Minimum
Standards for Industrial Development at the Airport and Minimum
Standards and Procedures for the Lease and/or Use of Property and
Facilities for Aeronautical Activities. Copies of these documents are
available for review in the Planning Department. In addition, land
use and development within the AD Zone shall be in conformance
with this chapter, including, without limitation, Article XIV, Article
XV and Article XVI, as applicable.
(3) Performance standards. Uses within the AD Zone shall conform to
all applicable performance standards of this chapter, including but
not limited to the following:
(a) Medical marijuana standards.106
106. Editor's Note: See § 280-15-10, Medical marijuana standards.
§ 280-11-9 SANFORD CODE § 280-11-10
252:680
§ 280-11-10. Airport Protection Overlay Zone and Airport Clear
Zone.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the compatibility of
land uses in the vicinity of the Airport, to prevent interference with the
safe and efficient operations of the Airport, and to protect the public at
large.
B. Airport Clear Zone.
(1) Clear zone defined. The Airport Clear Zone consists of those areas
identified as clear zones or the inner approach surfaces of Runway
7-25 or 14-32 as depicted in the Airport Master Plan.
(2) Clear zone standards. The following additional standards shall
apply within the Airport Clear Zone:
(a) Objects shall be considered obstructions to air navigation and
their construction or use shall be prohibited if they extend into
any aviation easement within the Airport Clear Zone. The Code
Enforcement Officer may waive this restriction upon receipt of
written approval from the Maine Bureau of Aeronautics (MBA)
and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Forms for
requesting an exemption may be obtained from the Code
Enforcement Office.
(b) No structure or tree shall be erected, altered, or allowed to
grow above the airport referenced imaginary surface, unless
found not objectionable by the MBA or FAA.
C. Airport Protection Overlay Zone.
(1) The Airport Protection Overlay Zone consists of the area lying
within the limit of the conical surface as shown on Drawing
Number 5 of the Airport Master Plan Update, as may be amended
from time to time.
(2) No use shall be permitted which creates electrical interference
with radio aids or communications, or results in glare in the eyes of
pilots using the Airport, or impairs visibility in the vicinity of the
Airport by the creation and discharge of smoke, steam, dust, or
other obstructions to visibility, or endangers the landing, taking off,
or maneuvering of aircraft.
(3) Construction standards which result in an outdoor-indoor noise
level reduction of at least 25 decibels shall be encouraged.
D. Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
building existing as of September 27, 1989, nor to any building for
which a building permit was issued on or before September 27, 1989,
nor to any lot in an approved subdivision. For the purposes of this
section, an approved subdivision shall include any subdivision for which
a sketch plan was accepted before September 27, 1989.
§ 280-11-10 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-11-10
252:681

ARTICLE XII
Rushton Street Institutional Controls Overlay I and II Zones
§ 280-12-1. Purpose.
The purpose of these zones is to:
§ 280-12-2. Area of zones.
The area of these zones shall be as delineated on the Rushton Street
Institutional Controls Overlay Zoning Map, prepared by Sevee and Mahar
Engineering and dated September 12, 2000.
§ 280-12-3. Rushton Street Institutional Controls Overlay I Zone.
The restrictions set forth in this section shall apply to any property or
portion of property located within the Rushton Street Institutional Controls
Overlay I (RSIC-I) Zone and shall be in addition to those restrictions set
forth in the underlying zoning district in which the property is located. The
owner of any property or portion of property located within the RSIC-I Zone
or any person authorized to act on behalf of the owner shall acquire written
approval from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection prior to
undertaking any of the following activities:
A. Protect the City's implementation of remedial control measures at the
former Rushton Street landfill site.
B. Prevent additional surface or ground water contamination.
C. Prevent exposure to contamination from the landfill itself.
D. Protect neighboring properties from the risk of groundwater
contamination that could occur in the absence of the restrictions
contained in this chapter.
E. Comply with the requirements of Paragraph 37 of the Administrative
Order by Consent signed by the City and the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection on November 11, 1999.
A. The drilling or digging of any water supply well.
B. Any dewatering, pumping, or injection into or out of the groundwater
on the property.
C. Any soil excavation on the site. This requirement shall not apply to
minor excavations associated solely with lawn maintenance or the
planting of small bushes or trees, where no soil will be removed from
the property.
D. Paving, soil compacting, or the placement of any impervious materials
on the site soils.
§ 280-12-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-12-3
252:683
§ 280-12-4. Rushton Street Institutional Controls Overlay II Zone.
The restrictions set forth in this section shall apply to any property or
portion of property located within the Rushton Street Institutional Controls
Overlay II (RSIC-II) Zone and shall be in addition to those restrictions set
forth in the underlying zoning district in which the property is located. The
owner of any property or portion of property located within the RSIC-II
Zone or any person authorized to act on behalf of the owner shall acquire
written approval from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection
prior to undertaking any of the following activities:
E. Any change in the use of the property that could affect the integrity or
effectiveness of the remedial measures or any monitoring well installed
under the terms of the Administrative Order by Consent.
A. The drilling or digging of any water supply well.
B. Any dewatering, pumping, or injection into or out of the groundwater
on the property.
C. Any excavation that will occur below the elevation of 242 feet above
mean sea level.
§ 280-12-3 SANFORD CODE § 280-12-4
252:684
ARTICLE XIII
Conditional Uses
§ 280-13-1. Purpose and definition.
§ 280-13-2. Conditional use approval required.
§ 280-13-3. Administrative procedures.
A. The purpose of this article is to establish the procedures and standards
to enable the City to review applications for conditional use permits.
B. A conditional use is a use that the City has determined to be generally
appropriate within a zone but that has the potential for creating undue
or unusual impacts on the public health, safety, and welfare,
surrounding properties, the natural environment, or on municipal
services and therefore requires case-by-case review and approval in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
A. A building, structure, or parcel of land may be used for a conditional
use if:
(1) The use is specifically listed as a conditional use in the zone; and
(2) Conditional use approval is granted by the Planning Board.
B. Any project involving the establishment of a new conditional use or the
construction or expansion of a building for a conditional use shall obtain
site plan approval by the Planning Board in accordance with Article
XVI.
C. Applications for location and/or construction of a mental health and
abuse clinic referred by the City Clerk require review as a conditional
use as part of Chapter 149, Licensing.
A. Prior to submitting a formal application for conditional use approval,
the applicant and/or his or her representatives should meet with the
Planning Director to informally discuss the proposed application and
the review process. The purpose of this meeting is informational to
allow the applicant to understand the process and clarify any questions
before submitting a formal application.
B. An application for conditional use approval shall be made to the
Planning Director on forms provided for that purpose.
C. The application form shall be accompanied by the supporting materials
set forth in §§ 280-16-6G and 280-16-6G(2)(d)[10] and an application
fee as established by the City Council.
D. Upon receipt of an application, the Planning Director shall review it for
completeness within 10 days and shall refer it to other departments for
review. If the application is complete, the Planning Director shall place
it on the Planning Board's agenda. If the application is not complete, the
§ 280-13-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-13-3
252:685
§ 280-13-4. Applications for mental health and abuse clinics.
[Amended 8-21-2018 by Order No. 18-348-01]
Applications for a mental health and abuse clinic shall also meet the
following criteria:
Planning Director shall provide the applicant with a written description
of the additional information required.
E. Within 45 days of the application being determined to be complete, the
application shall be considered by the Planning Board.
F. The Planning Department shall notify property owners of abutting
parcels within 250 feet of the subject parcel in writing of the receipt of
the application and the time, date, and place of the Planning Board
meeting at which the application will be considered. This written notice
shall be mailed by first class mail at least seven days prior to the
Planning Board meeting.
G. Prior to taking action on a conditional use application, the Planning
Board shall hold a public hearing on it.
H. The Planning Department shall advertise the public hearing in a
newspaper of local circulation in the City at least 10 days prior to the
meeting at which the application is considered.
I. Within 30 days of the initial consideration of the application by the
Planning Board, the Planning Board shall act to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the application. The period for consideration of the
application may be extended by mutual agreement of the applicant and
Planning Board.
A. Location criteria.
(1) No clinic may be located within 1/2 mile (walking distance) of any
church, school, family child-care, child-care center or nursery
school or public park or playground.
(2) No clinic may be located within the bounds of the following
revitalization and/or growth areas: Sanford Downtown, Lafayette
Circle and Springvale Village.
B. Neighborhood compatibility standards. No approval shall be
recommended if the Planning Board finds that the granting of the
license will violate one or more of the following neighborhood
compatibility standards:
(1) Neither the proposed use nor the proposed site on which the use
will be located is of a character such that the use will have
significant adverse impact on the value or quiet possession of
surrounding properties. The Planning Board shall not find that this
standard is satisfied unless:
§ 280-13-3 SANFORD CODE § 280-13-4
252:686
(a) The size of the proposed use is comparable to the size of
surrounding uses;
(b) The amount and type of traffic to be generated, hours of
operation, expanse of pavement, and the number of parking
spaces are comparable to surrounding uses;
(c) The generation of noise, dust, odor, vibration, glare, smoke,
litter and other nuisances is comparable to that generated by
surrounding uses;
(d) The impact of the use on the quality and quantity of
groundwater available to abutting properties is comparable to
that for surrounding uses;
(e) Unusual physical characteristics of the site, including size and
shape of the lot, topography, and soils, do not aggravate
adverse impacts upon surrounding properties.
(2) Vehicular and pedestrian access and circulation to, from, into and
within the site will be safe, and no public way will be overburdened
or made hazardous as a result of the new use and/or development
of the property.
(a) The Planning Board may not find that this standard has been
satisfied unless:
[1] Vehicular access to the site will be on roads which have
adequate capacity to accommodate the additional traffic
generated by the development. "Adequate capacity"
means that: Intersections on major access routes to the
site within a one-half-mile radius of any entrance road will
function after development, at a minimum, at Level of
Service C, as defined in Maine Department of
Transportation regulations, 17-229 C.M.R. Ch. 305, Rules
and Regulations Pertaining to Traffic Movement Permits
(2,000); or
[2] If any such intersection is functioning at a Level of Service
D, as defined in Maine Department of Transportation
regulations Chapter 305, cited above, or lower prior to the
development, the project will not reduce the current level
of service.
(b) The Planning Board may recommend approval of an
application not meeting this requirement if the applicant
demonstrates that a public agency has committed funds to
construct the improvements necessary to bring the level of
service to said standard, or the applicant will assume financial
responsibility for the improvements necessary to bring the
level of service to said standard and will guarantee the
§ 280-13-4 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-13-4
252:687
§ 280-13-5. Standards for conditional use approval.
completion of the improvements within one year of approval of
the license.
(3) The topography of the site shall permit the construction of all
driveways, entrances or proposed streets to meet the standards set
forth in §§ 280-14-4, 280-14-5, and 275-35 and 275-51.
(4) Adequate facilities are present to assure the safety of pedestrians
passing by or through the site.
(5) Municipal or other facilities serving the proposed use will not be
overburdened or made hazardous. The Planning Board shall not
find that this standard is satisfied unless:
(a) The capacity of sewerage and water supply systems is
adequate to accommodate the proposed use;
(b) The capacity of the storm drainage system is adequate to
accommodate the proposed use; and
(c) The ability of the Fire Department to provide necessary
protection services to the site and development is adequate.
(6) The soils on the proposed site shall have adequate capacity and
stability to support all loadings, including fill, developed by the
proposed use, and the use will not cause unreasonable soil erosion
or reduction in the capacity of the land to hold water to the extent
that a dangerous or unhealthy condition may result on the site or
the land of abutters. In considering whether this standard is
satisfied, the Planning Board shall take into account the elevation
of the site and surrounding properties above sea level, its relation
to floodplains, the slope and vegetation of the land and their effects
on drainage.
(7) The design of the proposed structures with respect to materials,
scale and massing shall be compatible with existing structures
within 500 feet of the site in areas where the existing structures are
of a similar scale and architectural treatment.
C. Screening requirements. All clinics shall be required to erect and
maintain opaque fencing to provide an effective visual screen at least
six feet in height, to be located along side and rear property lines that
abut properties in residential use. Said fencing is intended to screen the
clinic entrance and parking lot from ordinary view from all directly
adjoining properties.
A. The Planning Board shall approve a conditional use application, or
approve it with conditions, if it makes a positive finding, based on the
information presented, that the proposed use, with any conditions
attached, meets the following standards:
§ 280-13-4 SANFORD CODE § 280-13-5
252:688
(1) The proposed use will not place a burden on municipal services
which, due to its location or the characteristics of the site or
proposed development, is significantly greater than the burden that
would result from similar uses in other situations;
(2) The proposed use will not create hazards to vehicular or pedestrian
traffic on the roads and sidewalks serving the proposed use as
determined by the size and condition of such roads and sidewalks,
lighting, drainage, intensity of use by both pedestrians and
vehicles, and the visibility afforded to pedestrians and the
operators of motor vehicles;
(3) The proposed use will not cause water pollution, sedimentation, or
erosion, contaminate any water supply or reduce the capacity of
the land to hold water so that a dangerous, aesthetically
unpleasant, or unhealthy condition may result;
(4) The proposed use will not create unhealthful conditions because of
smoke, dust, or other airborne contaminants;
(5) The proposed use will not create nuisances to neighboring
properties because of odors, fumes, glare, hours of operation,
noise, vibration or fire hazard, or unreasonably restricted access of
light and air to neighboring properties;
(6) The proposed location for the use has no peculiar physical
characteristics due to its size, shape, topography, or soils which will
create or aggravate adverse environmental impacts on surrounding
properties;
(7) The proposed use has no characteristics that are atypical of the
general category of use that will depreciate the economic value of
surrounding properties; and
(8) If located in the Shoreland Overlay Zone, the proposed use will not
result in damage to spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird and
other wildlife habitat; will conserve shoreland vegetation; will
conserve visual points of access to waters as viewed from public
facilities; will conserve actual points of access to waters; will
conserve natural beauty; and will avoid problems associated with
floodplain development and use.
B. Nonprofit service organization. In addition to the requirements of this
section and any other applicable section of the City's ordinances, the
minimum parcel size for this use is 10 acres.
C. Horse shows. In addition to the requirements of this section and any
other applicable section of the City's ordinances, the minimum parcel
size for this use is 20 acres.
§ 280-13-5 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-13-5
252:689
D. Antiques stores. In addition to the requirements of this section and any
other applicable section of the City's ordinances, the following
guidelines shall be used in the review of applications:
(1) The limits of outdoor display will be determined by the Planning
Board during site plan review such that they are found to be
consistent with the character of the neighborhood.
(2) No stripping of antiques and/or furniture is permitted on the
premises.
(3) Signs shall be of residential character on simple posts and/or
attached to the building and shall be consistent with the
requirements of § 280-14-13. If a sign is illuminated, it shall be of
low wattage, not create a public hazard or nuisance, and be
compatible with the character of the property and the surrounding
neighborhood. [Amended 12-19-2017 by Order No. 17-163-01]
(4) Exterior lighting shall be of residential style.
(5) The business shall be owner-occupied.
(6) The building for the proposed antique store shall have been in
existence at least 10 years as of the date of the application.
(7) Any additional conditions determined by the Planning Board at the
time of review.
E. Nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary.
(1) The applicant shall have been approved by the State of Maine
Department of Health and Human Services, Division of Licensing
and Regulatory Services.
(2) No property containing a nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary
shall be within 500 feet of a preexisting public or private school.
(3) Any approval granted by the Planning Board shall be subject to any
and all regulations of the City and the State.
F. Commercial schools. In addition to the requirements of this section and
any other applicable section of the City's ordinances, the following
guidelines shall be used in the review of applications for commercial
schools:
(1) All activities shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building.
(2) Adequate off-street parking shall be provided, the number of
spaces to be based upon the maximum capacity as determined by
the Fire Chief divided by three.
(3) Signs shall be of residential character on simple posts and shall be
consistent with the requirements of § 280-14-13. If a sign is
illuminated, it shall be of low wattage, not create a public hazard or
§ 280-13-5 SANFORD CODE § 280-13-5
252:690
§ 280-13-6. Conditions of approval.
The Board may attach conditions to its approval of a conditional use. These
conditions may include, but are not limited to, requirements such as:
§ 280-13-7. Reapplication.
If the Planning Board denies a conditional use application, a second request
of a similar nature shall not be brought before the Planning Board within
one year from the date of denial of the first request, unless:
§ 280-13-8. Duration of conditional use approval.
nuisance, and be compatible with the character of the property and
the surrounding neighborhood. [Amended 12-19-2017 by Order
No. 17-163-01]
(4) Exterior lighting shall be of residential style.
(5) The activity may be a stand-alone business or an accessory use to a
residence as long as the business is owned by the resident of the
residence.
(6) Review and approval by the Planning Board is required, the
classification of the site plan to be determined by the Planning
Director based on the size of the structure and requirements of the
ordinance.
A. Off-site street improvements to address impacts generated by the
proposed conditional use.
B. Access restrictions.
C. Hours of use.
D. Buffering and screening.
E. Utility improvements.
F. Performance guaranties for off-site improvements.
A. In the opinion of the majority of the Planning Board, substantial new
evidence has been brought forward;
B. The Planning Board finds that an error of law or misunderstanding of
facts has been made; or
C. An amendment to this chapter has changed the status, circumstances,
or conditions of the matter which was brought before the Planning
Board.
A. Provided that all conditions and standards of approval are met, a
conditional use shall be a continuing grant of permission for as long as
§ 280-13-5 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-13-8
252:691
§ 280-13-9. Scope of approval.
Any permit or approval granted hereunder is subject to all elements of
the final plans and specifications submitted by the applicant and to all
representations, oral or written, made by or on behalf of the applicant in
support of the application or with respect to the nature and scope of the use,
activity or work proposed, and all such permits or approvals shall include,
as an express condition, a written statement to said effect.
§ 280-13-10. Appeal of conditional use decision.
Appeal from an action of the Planning Board on a conditional use
application shall be to the Superior Court in accordance with State law.
the property is used for such purposes. The conditional use shall expire
if the owner abandons the conditional use by:
(1) Physically altering the property and/or structure so it can no longer
be used for the conditional use; or
(2) Failing to actively use the property for the conditional use for five
years or more.
B. A conditional use may be expanded in area or function only with the
granting of a new conditional use approval by the Planning Board.
C. Construction, or occupancy if no construction is involved, shall
commence within one year of Planning Board approval of the
conditional use and a certificate of occupancy issued within three years
of approval. If construction or occupancy is not commenced or a
certificate of occupancy issued within these time limits, the conditional
use approval shall be null and void. The Planning Board may extend
these time limits upon written request of the applicant and a finding
that such extension is consistent with current requirements.
§ 280-13-8 SANFORD CODE § 280-13-10
252:692
ARTICLE XIV
General Standards
Note: General standards apply to activities which do not require site plan,
subdivision, or Planning Board approval.
§ 280-14-1. Conformance required.
The use of land, buildings, and structures shall conform to the following
general standards as applicable.
§ 280-14-2. Relationship of buildings to lots.
Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot as defined in
§ 280-2-2. In no case shall there be more than one principal residential
building and its accessory buildings on one lot, except in the case of projects
such as multiple dwelling or building developments intended and designed
to be managed as a unit on an unsubdivided lot.
§ 280-14-3. Access of lots to streets.
No building shall be erected on a lot unless the lot has frontage on a street
as defined in § 280-2-2.
§ 280-14-4. Creation of lots along arterials.
The following limitations shall apply to the creation of all new lots on all
land located adjacent to Route 4, Route 109, Route 202, Route 11A and
Route 224.
A. Access to new residential lots. Any new residential lots created adjacent
to the principal arterials listed above shall be divided so that vehicular
access to the lot is obtained from a local or collector street rather than
the arterial. Access to the new lots shall be obtained from any local or
collector street, a street in an approved subdivision, or a private way
approved by the Planning Board. This requirement shall apply to any
new lot whether or not the lot is part of a subdivision.
B. Waiver of the access limitation for new lots.
(1) The Planning Board may waive the access limitation provisions of
this subsection when there are unique conditions which make
access, other than from the arterial impractical. The Planning
Board may grant a waiver only if one of the following conditions is
met:
(a) There is too little road frontage to reasonably allow for the
creation of a local street, and there will be no further
subdivision of the parcel; or
§ 280-14-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-14-4
252:693
§ 280-14-5. Curb cuts and driveways.
(b) The shape or physical condition of the parcel does not permit
access to or the creation of a local street, and there will be no
further subdivision of the parcel.
(2) The owner of the lot seeking a waiver shall make a written request
to the Planning Board setting forth how the project conforms to the
above criteria.
C. Existing lots. Any lot of record existing as of the date of the adoption of
this section shall be permitted one vehicular access point to a principal
thoroughfare, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, unless
such lot also has frontage on a local street.
A. Curb cut permit required. No person may build or construct a driveway
which provides an access to a public street without first obtaining a
curb cut permit from the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall refer all permit applications to the City
Engineer for review. If the City Engineer finds that the application
meets the requirements of § 280-14-5B and C, the City Engineer shall
approve the curb cut and notify the Code Enforcement Officer to issue
the permit. Such permits shall be issued only to the property owner or
to the person having an option or lease on the property in question. If
the work authorized by a curb cut permit has not been completed within
12 months of the date of issuance, the permit shall be null and void.
B. Curb cut limitations.
(1) Each single-family and/or multifamily residential lot fronting on an
arterial or collector street shall be entitled to one curb cut, and no
more.
(2) The number of curb cuts allowed for any lot fronting on an arterial
or collector street that is used for institutional, retail, commercial,
service, or industrial use shall be determined based upon the
amount of its street frontage. The following curb cut standards
shall apply for these types of uses:
Feet of Street
Frontage Number of Curb Cuts
0 to 199 1
200 plus 2
(3) The Planning Board may waive these limitations if it finds that the
characteristics of the site and/or use necessitates additional curb
cuts and that the additional curb cuts can be provided without
affecting public safety.
§ 280-14-4 SANFORD CODE § 280-14-5
252:694
(4) Drive-up or drive-through windows, when allowed by the Planning
Board, will be designed such that there will be no direct access,
including entrances or exits, to Routes 4, 109, 202, 11A, and 224.
C. Curb cut requirements.
(1) Location. All curb cuts shall be located to minimize the impact on
traffic safety and flow at least 25 feet from the point of tangency of
streets as shown on the diagram in § 280-14-10B. For lots fronting
on arterial or collector streets, a curb cut may not be located less
than 50 feet from the point of tangency of streets at any
unsignalized intersection or less than 100 feet from the point of
tangency of streets at any signalized intersection.
(2) Width.
(a) The width of curb cuts shall conform to the following
standards:
[1] Single-family residential use: maximum 20 feet.
[2] Multifamily residential use: maximum 26 feet.
[3] Commercial use: maximum 26 feet.
[4] Industrial use: maximum 30 feet.
(b) The Planning Board or Site Plan Review Committee may allow
wider access drives if necessary to accommodate turning lanes
or the anticipated volume of traffic as part of site plan review.
(3) Separation.
(a) Within the Urban Compact Zone as defined in 23 M.R.S.A.
§ 754(2)(A), as may be amended from time to time, the distance
between curb cuts shall be 50 feet from the edge of each curb
cut. Outside of the Urban Compact Zone, for lots fronting on
arterial or collector streets, the minimum allowable distance
between the center lines of each curb cut shall be at least 50
feet.
(b) The Planning Board or Site Plan Review Committee may
approve applications for curb cuts that do not meet the
minimum standards if one or more of the following
circumstances is demonstrated:
[1] The development proposal reduces the number of curb
cuts that exist within the minimum separation distance;
[2] The proposal consolidates curb cuts for one or more
abutting lots; or
[3] The speed limit and sight line distance permit safe siting of
the curb cut.
§ 280-14-5 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-14-5
252:695
§ 280-14-6. Development of rear lots.
A rear lot is a lot which is located to the rear of another lot or lots which
front on a street as defined in this chapter. A rear lot existing as of the date
of adoption of this section may be used for uses allowed within the zone in
which it is located, provided that:
(c) Notwithstanding the existence of one or more of these
circumstances, the minimum separation standard of 20 feet
from edge to edge shall apply.
(4) Construction standards. Curb cuts shall be constructed in
accordance with a plan approved by the City Engineer and shall
meet the following standards:
(a) A permanent surface of asphalt or concrete shall be used for
the finished surface within the street right-of-way lines for all
curb cuts constructed for commercial or industrial uses.
(b) The existing grade of sidewalks which are crossed by curb cuts
shall be maintained so as to provide a safe area for people to
walk. Such sidewalks may be required to be reconstructed to
withstand expected traffic loads.
(c) Where the positioning of curb cuts requires the location,
removal, or installation of drainage facilities, such relocation,
removal, or installation shall be done in accordance with traffic
safety and drainage standards, as authorized by the City
Engineer. The City Engineer shall consider the effect of the
change on adjacent and downgrade properties, and the
potential for and probable impact of increased erosion and/or
flooding caused by pertinent factors relative to human and/or
environmental health and safety.
(d) The cost of curb cuts shall be borne by the applicant.
(e) All curb cuts which are constructed within the State right-ofway
shall conform to all provisions and regulations set forth by
the Maine Department of Transportation as well as the
provisions of this chapter. In the case of contradictory
regulations, the most restrictive prevail.
A. There is an unobstructed access to the rear lot from the street over land
which is not needed to meet the minimum requirements of the zone for
the front lot.
B. Access is at least 25 feet wide.
C. The access strip is in the same ownership as the rear lot.
D. The access strip may not be used to meet the requirement for minimum
lot size of the zoning district.
§ 280-14-5 SANFORD CODE § 280-14-6
252:696
§ 280-14-7. Projections into required setbacks.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, the following structural
elements may project into a required setback as set forth below:
E. The rear lot shall meet all requirements of the zoning district, other
than minimum frontage. For the purpose of setback requirements, the
setback line of such lots is deemed to be the prescribed setback
distance from the deepest rear property line of the lot or lots between
said rear lot and the nearest street.
A. A cornice, eave, or canopy or other similar architectural features, but
not including a bay window, may project up to two feet into required
setbacks.
B. A fire escape may project up to four feet into required setbacks.
C. A chimney may project up to two feet into required setbacks.
D. An open, unenclosed platform, stoop, or steps, not covered by a roof,
may project up to six feet into required setbacks. The platform or stoop
shall be no more than 16 square feet.
E. Any porch with a roof that existed as of the date of adoption of this
provision may be enclosed and used as living area even if it currently
encroaches on the required setback. The enclosed porch shall not
further encroach on the setback but it may be enlarged in such manner
as to maintain the existing relationship to the property line.
§ 280-14-6 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-14-7
252:697
§ 280-14-8. Structures permitted above height limits.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, roof structures for the
housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, fans, or other building operating
equipment; fire or parapet walls; skylights; steeples; flagpoles; chimneys;
smokestacks; domestic radio or television masts; and water tanks or silos
F. Facilities for handicapped access, including ramps, lifts, and elevators,
added to a building constructed prior to December 30, 1990, may
project into any required setback area, provided that the facilities are
approved by the Fire Department on the basis that they will not create
or aggravate any public safety or firefighting issues.
G. Signs consistent with the requirements of § 280-14-13.2. [Added
12-19-2017 by Order No. 17-163-01]
§ 280-14-7 SANFORD CODE § 280-14-8
252:698
may be erected not more than 20 feet above maximum height limits
specified in the zone in which they are located.
§ 280-14-9. Temporary activities and events.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, temporary uses of a
community or nonprofit nature, such as festivals, fairs, carnivals, and
similar events, may be permitted in any zone by vote of the City Council, as
long as such temporary use is not contrary to the objectives of this chapter.
A vote by the City Council allowing such temporary use shall not be deemed
a change in the zoning and shall apply to the specific event or activity only
for its stated duration.
§ 280-14-10. Required sight lines.
The purpose of this provision is to maintain a clear line of sight for drivers of
vehicles at street and driveway intersections. This requirement shall apply
to buildings, structures, fences, signs, landscaping or other elements.
A. Within the Urban Zone, no visual obstruction that interferes with a
vehicle operator's line of sight shall be located within the triangular
area created by measuring 10 feet back from the point of intersection of
the travel way of two streets or a street and a driveway and connecting
these points.
B. In other zones, no visual obstruction shall be located within the
triangular area created by measuring 25 feet back from the point of
intersection of the travel way of two streets or a street and a driveway.
§ 280-14-8 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-14-10
252:699
§ 280-14-11. Noise control.
All use of land, buildings, and structures shall conform to the requirements
of Chapter 178, Noise.
§ 280-14-12. Off-street parking.
C. Existing trees shall not be considered to be visual obstructions, nor
shall objects located within 30 inches of the ground or located more
than six feet above the ground. Any landscaping within this area shall
be maintained so that a clear line of sight is retained at all times.
A. Applicability. Off-street parking shall be provided for all new
construction, expansion, and change of use in accordance with the
requirements and standards of this section.
B. Minimum requirements for off-street parking. Off-street parking shall
be considered an accessory use when required or provided to serve any
legal use located in any zone. An off-street parking space shall be a
minimum of nine feet wide by 18 feet long and may be open or covered.
Access to individual parking spaces shall be unobstructed except for
parking for residential uses. Parking for single- and two-family
dwellings may be arranged in a stacked layout so that access to one
space is over another. Stacked parking may also be used for multifamily
residential uses if the parking spaces are assigned to units and the
access to one unit's parking space is not obstructed by the parking
space of another unit. In order to determine compliance with this
section, the Code Enforcement Officer shall require a plan showing the
§ 280-14-10 SANFORD CODE § 280-14-12
252:700
physical layout of all required off-street parking areas. Any change in
the evidence or conditions upon which the plan is approved shall nullify
such approval.
(1) Parking shall be provided on the lot occupied by the use for which
the parking is required or on an adjacent lot owned or controlled by
such use. In addition, uses located within the Urban Zone may
provide all or part of the required off-street parking through any of
the following:
(a) Private off-street parking located on another lot that is located
within 1,000 feet of the subject lot and that is controlled by
long-term lease or ownership by the proposed use.
(b) Off-street parking shared with other uses located within 1,000
feet of the subject lot, provided that the Planning Board or Site
Plan Review Committee finds that there is adequate parking
capacity to meet the parking requirements of all uses sharing
the parking due to variation in the time of parking demand
and/or anticipated use of parking to access multiple uses in a
single trip, and that the shared parking is controlled through a
leasehold or other enforceable agreement. The Planning Board
or Site Plan Review Committee may allow off-site parking to be
more than 1,000 feet from the site if it finds that the distance is
reasonable given the nature of the proposed use.
(c) For nonresidential uses, off-street parking located in a
municipal parking lot provided by the City, subject to the
Planning Board or Site Plan Review Committee finding that
there is adequate available parking to meet the needs of the
use based on the parking standards of this chapter. The
Planning Board or Site Plan Review Committee may allow legal
on-street parking to be used to meet the parking requirement
of a nonresidential use in the Urban and Industrial
Redevelopment Zones if it finds that this parking can
reasonably be expected to be available for customers of the use
and is located within close proximity of the use.
(2) Where multiple use of a lot occurs, off-street parking shall be
provided for each use in accordance with this section. Where the
applicant can demonstrate and document nonconflicting periods of
use, shared use of parking spaces may be permitted by the
Planning Board or Site Plan Review Committee.
(3) Travel and queuing aisles associated with off-street parking, drivein
facilities and motor vehicle fuel pumps shall be provided and
shall not interfere with the use of or be part of the required offstreet
parking.
(4) Minimum number of parking spaces required.
§ 280-14-12 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-14-12
252:701
(a) The following minimum number of spaces, rounded up to the
nearest whole number, shall be provided and maintained for
each use on a lot, including each use within all buildings. The
Planning Board or Site Plan Review Committee may reduce the
required parking:
[1] For reuse of an existing building by up to 30%. In granting
a reduction, the Planning Board or Site Plan Review
Committee shall find that the reduction will not create or
worsen parking problems in the neighborhood and that the
required number of spaces cannot be reasonably
accommodated on the lot; or
[2] For new or existing buildings, if the applicant
demonstrates to the Planning Board or Site Plan Review
Committee that proposed parking is adequate for the use
based on national or regional parking demand studies such
as those published by the Institute of Traffic Engineers or
by data on actual parking demand for similar uses in
similar situations and/or consideration of the availability of
parking demand management programs that reduce the
demand for on-site parking.
(b) The maximum number of employees scheduled during peak
demand/shift shall be used in calculating the number of
required parking spaces when employee is referenced in the
list below. Gross floor area shall be used in calculating the
number of required parking spaces, unless otherwise noted.
[Amended 8-21-2018 by Order No. 18-348-01]
Use Number of Spaces
Residential
Single-family dwellings,
including mobile and
manufactured homes
2 per dwelling unit
Two-family dwellings 2 per dwelling unit
Multifamily 1.5 per dwelling unit with 1 bedroom; 1.75 for
unit with 2 bedrooms; and 2 per unit with 3 or
more bedrooms
Renting of rooms;
furnishing board
1 per guest room, plus 2 per dwelling unit,
plus 0.5 per employee
Home occupation 2 in addition to required parking for
residences
Convalescent/rest or
nursing home and
residential or congregate
care
1 per 4 beds, plus 1 per employee
§ 280-14-12 SANFORD CODE § 280-14-12
252:702
Use Number of Spaces
Institutional
Municipal uses/public
utilities
1.25 per employee, plus 1 per 150 square feet
of public assembly and meeting area
Museums/libraries 1 per 300 square feet, plus 1 per employee
Places of public assembly,
such as theaters, cinemas,
auditoriums, stadiums and
sports arenas
1 per 4 seats, plus 1 per 2 employees
Church/synagogue 1 per 4 seats
Schools For schools containing places of public
assembly, parking shall be required per places
of public assembly above or the following,
whichever is greater
Grades K-8 1 per classroom, plus 1 for each employee
Secondary 8 per classroom
Post secondary 1 for each 2 students, plus 1 for each
employee
Child-care provider,
including nursery
schools and/or adult day
service center
1 per employee, plus a safe off-street area for
vehicle pickup and dropoff of students/
children/clients
Schools not listed above 1 per each 2 students at capacity, plus 1 for
each employee
Clubs and lodges 1 per 150 square feet, plus 1 per employee
Health service facility/
hospitals
1.25 per 4 beds, plus 1 per each full-time staff
doctor, plus 1 per each other employee
Commercial
Retail sales 3 per use or 3 per 1,000 square feet (or 1 per
333 square feet or portion thereof), plus 1 per
employee, whichever is greater
Gas and/or service station;
auto repair garage
0.25 per fuel pump, plus 1 per employee, plus
4 per service bay
§ 280-14-12 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-14-12
252:703
Use Number of Spaces
[For gas stations involving
other uses (e.g., gas
pumps with convenience
stores), the minimum
number of required
parking spaces shall be
the total of the
requirements for each
use, plus the standards
listed above]
Motor vehicle sales and
service
3 per 1,000 square feet (or 1 per 333 square
feet or portion thereof) of nonservice bay
area, plus 2 per employee
Banks 4 per use or 3 per 1,000 square feet (or 1 per
333 square feet or portion thereof), whichever
is greater
Studios of artisans 3 per 1,000 square feet (or 1 per 333 square
feet or portion thereof), whichever is greater
Personal services and
business services
3 per use or 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
(or 1 per 250 square feet or portion thereof),
whichever is greater
Business and professional
offices (nonmedical)
3 per use or 4 per 1,000 square feet (or 1 per
250 square feet or portion thereof), whichever
is greater
Professional office
(medical)
4 per doctor, plus 1 for each other employee
Wholesale sales/rental of
equipment
4 per use or 1 per 1,000 square feet, plus 1
per employee, whichever is greater
Restaurants/eating places/
drinking places
1 per 4 patrons at capacity, plus 1 per
employee (measurement of standing and
seating capacity shall be based upon the latest
adopted edition of the ICC International
Building Code and NFPA 101, whichever is
more stringent)
Motels, hotels and inns 1 per guest room, plus 1 per employee, plus 4
per 1,000 square feet (or 1 per 250 square
feet or portion thereof) of public assembly
area
Funeral homes 1 per 4 seats
Kennels 3 per use or 3 per 1,000 square feet
Veterinary clinics 4 per doctor, plus 1 per other employee
Industrial
§ 280-14-12 SANFORD CODE § 280-14-12
252:704
Use Number of Spaces
Manufacturing 1 per employee
Warehouse 1 per employee
Nonvehicular repair
facilities
1 per employee
Research and
development
1 per employee
Testing facilities 1 per employee
Tradesmen's shops 3 per use or 3 per 1,000 square feet,
whichever is greater
Recreation/Marine
Golf courses 4 per hole
Marina 1 per boat slip
Fully enclosed place of
recreation
5 per 1,000 square feet (or 1 per 200 square
feet or portion thereof)
Outdoor recreation
facilities
1 per 2 participants
Marine sales/services 3 per use or 3 per 1,000 square feet,
whichever is greater
Other Uses As determined by the Planning Board based
upon the ITE Parking Generation Manual
C. Off-street parking design standards. The following design standards
shall apply to all new and expanded off-street parking areas:
(1) Parking areas for uses other than single- and two-family dwellings
shall be designed so that vehicles will not back out into a street.
(2) Parking areas shall not inhibit emergency vehicle access to any
building or structure.
(3) Parking areas shall be separated from the front of all buildings by a
landscaped area at least five feet wide.
(4) Wheel stops/curbs shall be placed where needed to prevent
encroachment into walkways, landscaped areas, circulation aisles,
streets and structures.
(5) Where possible, parking spaces and travel aisles shall be clearly
delineated.
(6) All parking areas shall be designed to adequately control drainage.
In furtherance of this standard, drainage calculations used shall
reflect a paved condition, and all parking areas shall be
constructed with base material which can withstand normally
expected vehicle loading and winter maintenance.
§ 280-14-12 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-14-12
252:705
§ 280-14-13. Signs. [Amended 12-19-2017 by Order No. 17-163-01]
(7) In lots with 10 or more parking spaces, at least 5% of the parking
spaces shall be designed and designated for handicapped parking.
These spaces shall be located in close proximity to the entrances to
the building.
A. Applicability. All signs erected, altered, displayed, or maintained in all
areas of the City and visible from a street shall meet the standards of
this section. Signs not in conformance with this section shall be
removed. This section shall not apply to signs listed in Subsection A(1)
through (5).
(1) Traffic movement signs and devices erected, altered, displayed, or
maintained by the City or the State.
(2) Official business directional signs.
(3) Signs bearing noncommercial messages erected, altered,
displayed, or maintained in the street, outside of traveled ways, by
a duly constituted governmental body, soil and water conservation
district, or regional planning commission.
(4) Hand-held signs not affixed to the ground or buildings.
(5) Historic markers and/or plaques.
B. General provisions. All signs shall be in conformance with the following
provisions, except as may be otherwise regulated in this chapter,
including § 280-15-11:
(1) Signs shall be clean, legible, and free from all hazards, such as
faulty wiring, loose fastenings, or dilapidated or deteriorated
condition, including but not limited to, signs which have parts
which are falling off, and shall be maintained so as not to be
detrimental to the public health or safety or create a public
nuisance, distraction, or obstruction that impairs vehicular or
pedestrian traffic movement or safety. If the Code Enforcement
Officer finds that a sign does not meet the requirement of this
subsection or is a nuisance or safety hazard, the sign shall be
removed or repaired by the owner of the land, building, or
structure upon which the sign is located.
(2) Signs shall be designed, located, and maintained so that they do
not create a traffic, safety, or health hazard or nuisance due to
illumination, placement, display, or manner of construction. All
signs shall be located so as not to obstruct views of traffic and shall
be placed so as to maintain a clear line of sight for drivers at street
intersections and shall not be located within the area of a triangle
with vertices measured 25 feet from the intersection of the
curblines of a traveled way.
§ 280-14-12 SANFORD CODE § 280-14-13
252:706
(3) Signs shall conform to the Building and Electrical Codes.
(4) Existing nonconforming signs may be rebuilt, maintained,
repainted or refaced, except that a nonconforming sign shall be
brought into conformity with the provisions of this section when it
is enlarged or relocated or when the principal use of the property is
changed to a residential use as defined in the Table of Land Uses.107
(5) Signs shall be securely connected to the ground or a building
unless the sign can be temporarily moved from place to place
without equipment.
(6) Any sign which becomes a nuisance or safety hazard shall be
removed.
(7) Signs located on the inside of windows shall be permitted without a
permit and shall not be included when calculating total sign area.
(8) Any sign at a location where goods, services, or a point of interest
has ceased to be available for a period of one year or more shall be
considered abandoned and shall be removed by the owner of the
land, building, or structure upon which the sign is located. Any
abandoned sign shall not be replaced with a nonconforming sign. A
temporary sign on a property that is for sale may remain on the
property for up to two weeks after the date of sale of the property.
(9) Freestanding signs shall be set back 20 feet from the street,
outside of traveled ways, unless a waiver is granted by the Code
Enforcement Officer. The waiver shall be granted only if the
required setback cannot be met due to traffic safety, lot area, or
building or site constraints. A minimum setback of at least five feet
from the curbline or pavement edge shall be maintained.
(10) A sign shall not exceed 150 square feet in total sign area,
notwithstanding other provisions of this section.
(11) A sign shall not exceed 25 feet above the ground level upon which it
is located. The maximum height of a sign that is affixed to or is part
of a building is 10 feet above the roof of the building.
(12) Signs, awnings, and canopies may extend over or be placed in the
street, provided that the sign is located at least two feet behind the
curbline, or edge of pavement if no curb exists, and is located so as
not to obstruct pedestrian or vehicular movement.
(13) On-the-premises signs shall be located within 1,000 feet of the
principal building or structure where the business or facility is
carried on or practiced or within 1,000 feet of the point of interest.
(14) Any business or facility whose principal building or structure or
point of interest is located on a private way more than 1,000 feet
107. Editor's Note: The Table of Land Uses is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 280-14-13 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-14-13
252:707
from the nearest public way or which is not visible to traffic from
the nearest public way, may erect no more than one sign per
private way with a total surface are not to exceed 64 square feet in
keeping with the commercial standards in this section. These signs
shall be located outside of the edge of pavement. These sign shall
also be a minimum of 300 feet from the intersection of the public
and private way.
C. Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited in all areas unless
specifically provided for in this section:
(1) Off-the-premises business signs.
(2) Signs that imitate, resemble, or interfere with official traffic or
emergency control signs, signals, lights, or intersections.
(3) Signs that move, flash light intermittently, change color, blink, fade,
scroll, strobe, or have animated parts or the appearance of
movement, except for electronic and changeable displays, as
provided for in § 280-14-13.8. A revolving barber pole sign is not
considered to be a sign that moves.
D. Signs allowed without a permit. The following types of signs may be
installed in all zones without obtaining a sign permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer; however, they shall comply with all other
applicable standards of this section:
(1) Public safety signs.
(2) Signs indicating that access is prohibited.
(3) Temporary signs, not in the public right-of-way.
(4) Temporary signs bearing noncommercial messages placed within
the public right-of-way, with the following conditions:
(a) Placement is limited to a maximum of six weeks per calendar
year;
(b) Shall not be placed within 30 feet of another temporary sign
bearing the same or substantially the same message;
(c) Shall be labeled with the name and address of the individual,
entity, or organization that placed the sign; and
(d) Shall be labeled with the designated time period the sign shall
be maintained.
(5) Address numbers, nameplates, name of a building or structure, or
the name of the company that built or designed the building or
structure.
(6) Movement control signs, such as entrance and exit signs at any
premises, with the following conditions:
§ 280-14-13 SANFORD CODE § 280-14-13
252:708
(a) Shall be attached or freestanding;
(b) Shall not exceed five square feet;
(c) May contain words that shall not exceed six inches in height;
and
(d) Shall convey a message which directs vehicular or pedestrian
movement within or onto the premises on which the sign is
located.
E. Residential standards.
(1) Single-family residential properties shall:
(a) Be allowed one permanent sign, not to exceed six square feet
in total sign area per street frontage. Corner lots and lots with
frontage on more than one street shall be allowed one sign, not
to exceed six square feet, per frontage. No sign shall extend
more than six feet above the ground.
(b) Be allowed temporary signs.
(c) Not be allowed to be lighted.
(2) Residential subdivisions, apartments, multifamily dwellings,
condominium complexes, and other residential properties,
excluding mixed use properties shall:
(a) Be allowed one permanent freestanding sign, not to exceed 24
square feet. One such sign shall be allowed for each separate
street entrance and/or street frontage. No sign shall extend
more than six feet above the ground.
(b) Be allowed one sign per building, not to exceed 24 square feet
per each street frontage.
(c) Be allowed up to 10 temporary signs, not to exceed a total of 64
square feet in sign area.
(d) Not be allowed electronic and changeable displays.
(e) Be allowed to be lighted.
F. Commercial, industrial, institutional, agricultural, and mixed use
standards. Commercial, industrial, institutional, agricultural, and
mixed use properties shall:
(1) Be allowed up to 10 permanent on-the-premises signs, except when
the number of signs is in conformance with § 280-14-13.6.
(2) Be allowed one freestanding sign, not to exceed 64 square feet in
total sign area per street frontage. Corner lots and lots with
frontage on more than one street are allowed one additional
freestanding sign, not to exceed 64 square feet in total sign area.
§ 280-14-13 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-14-13
252:709
Freestanding signs used as a directory of tenants engaged in
commercial activity on the premises shall be allowed an additional
six square feet of sign area per tenant in excess of four tenants.
(3) Be allowed one building sign per tenant, not to exceed 24 square
feet, per street frontage.
(4) Be allowed additional building sign area, not to exceed:
(a) A cumulative sign area of 32 square feet; or
(b) A cumulative area of 64 square feet when a tenant occupies a
gross floor area greater than 10,000 square feet and the
building is set back from the street right-of-way more than 100
feet; or
(c) A cumulative sign area of 96 square feet when a tenant
occupies a gross floor area greater than 20,000 square feet and
the building is set back from the street right-of-way more than
200 feet.
(5) Be allowed up to 10 temporary signs, not to exceed a total of 64
square feet in sign area.
(6) Be allowed one electronic and changeable display for each sign
face, not to exceed 24 square feet per sign face.
G. Lighting standards.
(1) Luminaires shall be fully capped, shielded, and directed to the sign
being illuminated. No light shall be directed at any portion of the
public way or be of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or
impair the vision of an operator of any motor vehicle or otherwise
interfere with any driver's operation of a motor vehicle.
(2) Signs shall be illuminated so that they do not create a public hazard
or nuisance for the traveling public and/or neighborhood. Lamps
and light bulbs, in general, shall be shielded by landscaping and/or
other means and shall be directed to reduce glare and light
pollution beyond the signage.
(3) Internally illuminated signs shall be lighted so they do not create a
hazard or nuisance for the traveling public and/or neighborhood.
Lamps and light bulbs, in general, shall be fully shielded inside the
fixture to reduce glare and light pollution.
(4) Sign lighting shall not be motion activated.
H. Electronic and changeable displays.
(1) The display on each side of an electronic and changeable display
may not have a message period of less than 10 seconds. If a
message changes, it must be without transition or animation. The
change of message must occur simultaneously for the entire
§ 280-14-13 SANFORD CODE § 280-14-13
252:710
display. The display may not phase, fade, dissolve, pulse, roll, scroll,
flash, move, blend or contain any movement-type changes between
or during display periods. The display may not stream information
or contain video animation. Official public notices are exempt from
these standards.
(2) The display may consist of alphabetic or numeric text on a plain or
colored background and may include graphic, pictorial, and
photographic images.
(3) An electronic and changeable display shall contain automatic
dimming controls, either by photo cell or software settings and
shall comply with the maximum luminance level of 100 candelas
per square meter at least 1/2 hour before sunset and 1/2 hour after
sunrise as determined by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration for the specific geographic location and date.
(4) Be allowed one electronic and changeable display per street
frontage, not to exceed 64 square feet in total sign area.
I. Planning Board approval. The Planning Board may approve the
installation of either:
(1) Additional freestanding signs if it finds that due to the unique
physical characteristics of the site a single sign is impractical or
confusing; or
(2) Additional building signs, including electronic and changeable
displays, required to identify different product lines sold by the
business.
J. Substitution clause. For every commercial sign that is allowed under
this chapter, any noncommercial message may be legally substituted.
§ 280-14-13 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-14-13
252:711

ARTICLE XV
Performance Standards
Note: Performance standards apply to activities which do not require site
plan, subdivision, or Planning Board approval.
§ 280-15-1. Groundwater protection standards.
A. Applicability. The general provisions of this section apply to all land
uses, including storage of hazardous materials, new construction,
structural alteration, and substantial change in use, occurring in the
City. Additional standards and requirements apply in areas delineated
as Public Water Supply Protection Districts.
B. Delineation of the Public Water Supply Protection Districts.
(1) Public Water Supply Protection Districts shall be delineated on
copies of the Assessor's maps and shall be titled "Public Water
Supply Protection Districts Map: City of Sanford." This map shall
be deemed an integral part of this chapter and shall be maintained
on file in the Code Enforcement Office.
(2) The Public Water Supply Protection Districts shall operate as
overlay districts. If there is any conflict between the provisions of
the Public Water Supply Protection Districts and other sections of
this chapter, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
(3) The Public Water Supply Protection Districts are comprised of
areas in and around Water District well fields and in the Branch
Brook Aquifer where aquifer recharge occurs. Regulatory
standards apply to the following districts:
(a) District 1, as delineated on the official Public Water Supply
Protection Districts Map, consists of the New Dam Well, the
Eagle Drive 1 Well, the Eagle Drive 2 Well, and the Branch
Brook Aquifer.
(b) District 2, as delineated on the official Public Water Supply
Protection Districts Map, consists of the Old Mill Road Well,
the Route 109 at Sam Allen Road Well, Bernier Road Well, and
the Country Club No. 2 Well.
(c) District 3, as delineated on the official Public Water Supply
Protection Districts Map, consists of the Cobb 1 Well, the Cobb
2 Well, and the Main Well Field.
(4) Each area is further defined by two distinct zones delineated by the
hydraulic travel time to a wellhead. These zones designate different
levels of wellhead protection:
§ 280-15-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-1
252:713
(a) Zone A, as delineated on the official Public Water Supply
Protection Districts Map, consists of the area in which it would
take a leachable material introduced into the groundwater 200
days or less to reach a public water supply. The travel time
boundary of this zone is based on the length of time viruses
present in the wastewater can survive in the soil. Zone A is
therefore an area regulated for sanitary purposes.
(b) Zone B, as delineated on the official Public Water Supply
Protection Districts Map, consists of the areas from which it
would take a leachable material 200 to 2,500 days of travel
time to reach a public water supply. This zone is regulated to
reduce the risk of contamination of the groundwater supply
from land use activities that pose a major threat.
(c) Hydraulic travel times are the most commonly used
instruments for defining an area of groundwater protection.
Zones A and B have been mapped accordingly around existing
and proposed public water supply well fields and aquifers to
protect the health and safety of the public as well as maintain
the integrity of the groundwater resource.
(5) If any portion of a parcel is located in Zone A and/or Zone B, all of
the land located in Zone A shall be governed by the regulations for
Zone A, and all of the land located in Zone B shall be governed by
the regulations for Zone B.
(6) The delineation of all districts and Zones A and B may be revised
only by amendment to the Public Water Supply Protection Districts
Map in accordance with the provisions of § 280-4-2.
(7) If there are questions as to the location of the district or zone
boundaries, the location shall be determined in accordance with
provisions of § 280-9-3.
C. General performance standards. All use of land, buildings, and
structures in the City shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Sites at which hazardous materials are stored, used or generated
shall be designed to prevent spills and discharges to the surface of
the ground, groundwater, lakes, streams, rivers or wetlands.
(2) Areas and facilities for loading and unloading hazardous materials
and polluting materials shall be designed and constructed to
prevent discharge or runoff to groundwater.
(3) Facilities shall be designed so that all stored, spilled or leaked
hazardous materials are contained on site.
(4) Secondary containment for aboveground areas where hazardous
materials are stored or used shall be provided.
§ 280-15-1 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-1
252:714
(5) Existing and new storage tanks shall meet all State and federal
requirements.
(6) Outdoor storage of hazardous materials shall use product-tight
containers which are protected from weather, leakage, accidental
damage, and vandalism.
(7) Discharge of fluids from any motor vehicle shall not be permitted
into or onto the ground.
(8) General purpose floor drains shall be approved by the local
Plumbing Inspector prior to installation. The local Plumbing
Inspector may consult with the Water District and/or Sewerage
District prior to approving floor drains.
D. Additional performance standards in Public Water Supply Protection
Districts. All uses of land, buildings, and structures in a designated
Public Water Supply Protection District shall comply with the following
standards in addition to those set forth in § 280-15-1C.
(1) The volume and quality of groundwater recharge shall be
maintained at predevelopment levels.
(2) Stormwater management and containment facilities shall not
increase the level of contaminants entering the groundwater.
(3) In areas which are not served by public sewer, no more than one
dwelling unit may be connected to a subsurface waste disposal
system.
E. Prohibited uses.
(1) The following uses shall be prohibited within Zones A and B of
Public Water Supply Protection Districts 1, 2 and 3:
(a) The disposal of solid waste, sludge, and ash.
(b) The discharge of commercial or industrial wastewater or wash
water to an on-site sewage disposal system.
(c) Sand and gravel excavation within five feet of the seasonal
high-water table.
(d) The land application of sludge and the spray application of
industrial wastewater or sewage.
(2) The following uses shall be prohibited within Zones A and B of
District 2:
(a) The commercial use, storage, or manufacture of hazardous
materials or wastes.
(b) The commercial use, storage, or manufacture of petroleum
products.
§ 280-15-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-1
252:715
(c) The bulk storage of leachable materials, including concrete,
asphalt, tar, coal, and salt.
(d) The commercial storage and application of pesticides.
(3) The following uses shall be prohibited within Zone A of Districts 1,
2 and 3:
(a) On-site sewage disposal systems for any new use. Replacement
septic systems for existing uses are permitted subject to
review by the Water District. Notwithstanding this provision,
the local Plumbing Inspector may issue a permit for a septic
system for a new single-family residential use if all of the
following conditions are met:
[1] The lot existed at the time of adoption of this provision;
[2] The lot is located entirely within Zone A;
[3] There is no reasonable alternative for sewage disposal;
[4] The Water District has reviewed the proposed location of
the system; and
[5] The location of the system maximizes the protection of the
public water supply.
(b) Manure spreading between November 1 and April 1 and at any
other time when the ground is frozen.
F. Water supply protection permit required. Any use of the land,
construction or alteration of a building or structure, change in the
occupancy of a building, or modification of existing industrial
processing or storage facilities which increases the volume or changes
the type of hazardous materials present on a site shall be permitted
within the Public Water Supply Protection Districts only after the
issuance of a water supply protection permit in accordance with
§ 280-15-1G.
G. Water supply protection permit procedures. The Code Enforcement
Officer is authorized to review applications for and issue water supply
protection permits for any activities covered by this section that do not
trigger site plan review under this chapter. Prior to issuing a permit, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the abutters of the property and
their right to review and provide written comments on the application.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall not issue the permit until at least
five business days after the mailing of notices to the abutters. For
activities requiring a water supply protection permit and/or site plan
review, the water supply protection permit shall be considered as part
of the site plan review process described in Article XVI.
H. Compliance with the requirements of § 275-42.
§ 280-15-1 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-1
252:716
§ 280-15-2. Watershed performance standards.
In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, any use of land or
development activity within the Mousam River watershed or the Great
Works River watershed that is subject to site plan review shall conform to
the following standards:
I. Review criteria. When reviewing an application, the Code Enforcement
Officer, Site Plan Review Committee, or Planning Board shall approve
the application only if it finds that the applicant has adhered to all
performance standards contained in § 280-15-1C and D.
J. Notification requirement. Within 60 days of the adoption of this section,
the Planning Director shall notify the owners of all parcels within a
Public Water Supply Protection District of the adoption of these
provisions and the importance of compliance with the requirements and
shall provide them with a copy of the performance standards and other
requirements.
A. The area of the site stripped of existing vegetation at any given time
shall be minimized. Stripping of the site shall be phased where practical
so that areas are revegetated and permanently stabilized before
additional areas are stripped of existing vegetation.
B. Not more than 35% of the total vegetated area of a lot may be covered
by impervious surfaces, including buildings, structures, and paved or
gravel surfaces, unless the owner of the parcel demonstrates that such
development will be carried out in accordance with the best
management practices as set forth in "Stormwater Management for
Maine: Best Management Practices," published by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection, as may be amended from
time to time.
C. Any area of disturbed ground resulting from construction or similar
activities shall be either temporarily or permanently stabilized by use of
riprap, seed, mulch, or other ground cover within one week from the
time it was actively worked.
D. Vegetated buffer strips at least 25 feet wide shall be maintained
adjacent to waterways, drainage ditches, and swales. Waterways,
ditches, and swales shall be revegetated prior to September 15.
E. Stormwater collection systems shall be designed to use overland flow
into vegetated buffer strips whenever possible. When enclosed storm
drainage systems are used, provisions for managing nutrient export
shall be incorporated consistent with best management practices.
F. Silt fencing and hay bale barriers in accordance with the York County
Soil and Water Conservation District's erosion and sedimentation
control standards shall be used during all phases of construction.
§ 280-15-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-2
252:717
§ 280-15-3. Industrial performance standards.
All uses involving the manufacturing or processing of materials or products
shall conform to the following standards:
G. The Planning Board may require that projects classified as major
developments under this chapter conduct an analysis of nutrient export
levels and incorporate nutrient loading control devices such as
sedimentation/retention ponds, infiltration systems, wet ponds, swales,
or flow strips if necessary to reduce the level of nutrient export to
acceptable levels. This analysis shall be carried out in accordance with
"Phosphorous Control in Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide for
Evaluating New Developments," published by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection, as may be amended from time to time. If the
phosphorous method requires removal of more than 75% of the
increase in phosphorous load to meet the phosphorous export limit, the
Planning Board may increase the limit to a level obtainable through onsite
use of best management practices as identified in the Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual.
H. If the project is classified as a major site plan and is in the watershed of
a great pond phosphorus impacts will be managed in compliance with
the relevant requirements of §§ 275-47 and 275-60.
A. Storage of derelict vehicles or equipment. No derelict vehicles or
equipment shall be stored on the site unless they are enclosed within a
secure area and screened from view from public streets and adjacent
properties.
B. Vibration. Equipment and other activities shall not produce vibration
measured at the lot line which is perceptible without instruments. In no
case shall vibration at the lot line exceed 0.003 of one inch.
C. Odors and air quality. No offensive, harmful, or noxious odors shall be
emitted that create a public nuisance or hazard beyond the lot line of
the parcel, an adjoining unit, building, or property, documented by
multiple complaints. All facilities shall have a properly designed and
maintained ventilation and air filtration system which takes into
consideration the square footage and number of elements in the
industrial process. Smoke, debris, dust, fluids, and other substances
shall be managed in compliance with Maine Department of
Environmental Protection Regulations Chapter 110, Ambient Air
Quality Standards. Filters shall be checked every six months and shall
be replaced as needed or based on the manufacturer's recommended
schedule, whichever is more recent.
D. Electromagnetic interference. No electromagnetic interference shall be
permitted that does not conform to State and federal standards.
E. Lights. No lights used in the industrial process or on the site of the
industrial process shall produce pollution, glare, or brightness that
§ 280-15-2 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-3
252:718
§ 280-15-4. Residential cluster development standards.
would create a public nuisance or hazard. All lights shall be shielded
and oriented such that they shall not extend beyond the property lines.
All power sources, electrical fixtures, and electrical conveyances shall
be installed, connected, and maintained in conformance with the City's
building, electrical, fire, and other health safety and technical codes,
including but not limited to Chapter 90, Building Construction, and
Chapter 128, Fire Prevention.
F. Noise. Noise from an exhaust fan or other aspects of the operation shall
not exceed the maximum permissible noise level established by the City
in Chapter 178, Noise.
G. Carbon dioxide and/or other gases. If carbon dioxide and/or other gases
are used in the industrial process, carbon dioxide alarms and/or alarms
for other gases shall be provided and maintained in good operating
condition.
H. Security. The facility shall be secured so as to render it inaccessible to
any unauthorized persons during all hours. Security measures shall be
reviewed and approved to manage nuisance activity, unauthorized entry
into a facility, and/or thefts. The Planning Board may require that a
Knox-Box® of an approved type listed in accordance with UL 1037 shall
be installed in an accessible location to provide access in the event of an
emergency.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to allow for contemporary
concepts of housing development where variations of design may be
allowed. The Planning Board may approve residential cluster
developments as an alternative to conventional subdivisions. The
Planning Board may approve subdivisions as residential cluster
developments in which the size of individual lots is less than that
normally required by this chapter, provided that a sufficient area of the
total parcel being developed is reserved as permanent open space.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter relating to
dimensional requirements, the Planning Board, in reviewing and
approving proposed residential cluster developments, may modify
provisions related to dimensional requirements to permit innovative
approaches to housing and environmental design in accordance with
the following standards. This section is not to be construed as granting
variances to relieve hardship.
B. Basic requirements for cluster developments.
(1) Cluster development shall meet all requirements for subdivision
approval and shall be in conformance with a site plan for its overall
development.
(2) Each lot or building shall be an element of an overall plan for site
development. When the development consists of the creation of
§ 280-15-3 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-4
252:719
lots, the plan shall establish a building envelope for each lot that
identifies the area within which the buildings will be located. When
the development involves the construction of buildings on a single
parcel, the plan shall show the location of each building.
(3) The total residential density may be no greater in a cluster
development than is normally permitted in the zone in which the
development is proposed.
(4) Residential cluster developments in accordance with this section
are allowed in all residential zones.
(5) Only those residential uses allowed in a zone are allowed in a
residential cluster development. In addition, in the Rural
Residential and Rural Mixed Use Zones, newer mobile homes, as
defined in this chapter, may be allowed on a slab-type foundation,
provided that the individual mobile home sites or lots are rented
and not sold.
(6) A cluster development may have no fewer than five dwelling units.
C. Dimensional requirements.
(1) Individual lot sizes may be less than that required in the zone in
which the cluster development is located, provided that the amount
of land by which the lot is reduced is reserved as open space.
Within the Rural Residential and Rural Mixed Use Zones, individual
lots may be as small as 20,000 square feet, provided that the soils
are adequate to support a lot of that size. In other zones, the area of
individual lots may be reduced by up to 50%.
(2) Other lot dimensional requirements may be reduced as follows:
(a) Lot frontage: 50% of that required in the zone.
(b) Side lot line setback: 50% of that required in the zone.
(c) Front lot line setback: 10 feet.
(d) Rear lot line setback: 10 feet.
(e) Lot depth: 50% of that required in the zone.
D. Open space.
(1) At least 40% of the total area of the cluster development must be in
open space, and not more than 20% of the required open space
area may be wetland and/or slopes greater than 15%.
(2) The open space shall be dedicated to the recreational amenity and
environmental enhancement of the development, shall protect
natural resources, and shall be recorded as such. For the purpose
of these provisions, open space means an area that is:
§ 280-15-4 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-4
252:720
(a) Not encumbered in any way by a principal structure;
(b) Not devoted to use as a roadway, road right-of-way, parking lot,
or sidewalk;
(c) Left in its natural or undisturbed state, if wooded, except for
cutting of trails for walking or jogging, or, if not wooded at the
time of development, is landscaped for ball fields, play fields,
picnic areas, or similar activities;
(d) Capable of being used and enjoyed for the purpose of informal
and unstructured recreation and relaxation; and
(e) Legally and practicably accessible to all residents of lots in the
cluster development out of which the open space is taken.
(3) The common open space shall be controlled by one or more of the
following methods:
(a) Common ownership by the owners of units within the project;
(b) Common ownership by the owners of the units within the
project with a conservation easement granted to the City,
subject to acceptance by the City Council or recognized
conservation organization;
(c) Dedication to the City as public open space subject to
acceptance by the City Council;
(d) Transfer, with permanent restrictions, to a land trust or other
recognized conservation organization; and/or
(e) Ownership by a private party for agricultural or other natural
resource use, provided that permanent restrictions are in place
to provide for its continued use for this purpose.
(4) Any subdivision proposed under this section shall specify the
ownership, use, management, and person responsible for
maintenance of all common areas and facilities. The Planning
Board shall approve the arrangements for the ownership, control,
and maintenance of the common open space as part of the approval
of a final subdivision plan. No changes in the use or management of
the common open space shall be made without Planning Board
approval.
(5) Any common open space or facility not retained by a private owner
shall be maintained by a homeowners' association unless and until
it is transferred in its entirety to the City or a recognized
conservation organization, and until the transfer actually is
completed. The formation and incorporation by the developer of a
homeowners' association shall be accomplished prior to final
subdivision approval. Covenants for mandatory membership in the
association shall be approved by the Planning Board and included
§ 280-15-4 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-4
252:721
in the deed for each lot or unit. The association's documents shall
specify that:
(a) The association shall have the responsibility of maintaining the
common open space and other private facilities dedicated to
the use in common by the development's residents.
(b) The association shall levy annual charges against all property
owners to defray the expenses, if any, connected with
maintenance of the common open spaces and facilities.
(c) The developer shall maintain control of common open spaces
and facilities and be responsible for their maintenance until at
least 51% of the development's lots or units have been
completed and sold, with evidence of such completion and
sales submitted to and approved by the Planning Board.
E. Design standards. In addition to other standards of this chapter and of
Chapter 275, Subdivision of Land, the following design standards shall
apply to cluster developments:
(1) Priorities for layout of lots and open space. The Planning Board
shall find that individual building lots/sites are laid out and open
space preserved to achieve the following objectives, as applicable.
Where the Planning Board finds that objectives conflict, the
objectives shall be achieved in the order listed:
(a) Where on-site wastewater disposal is to be used, it will be
located on suitable soils for subsurface wastewater disposal.
(b) The layout preserves, as part of the required open space,
environmentally sensitive areas, such as wetlands, steep
slopes, floodplains, wildlife habitat rated by the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as high value, and
unique natural features.
(c) The design maximizes, as part of the required open space, the
amount of contiguous, usable area for agriculture or woodlot
production.
(d) The layout preserves cultural features of the rural landscape,
such as stone walls, tree lines, and important or unique
structures.
(e) The layout maximizes, as part of the required open space, the
amount of undisturbed, contiguous wildlife habitat, including
habitat that may not be rated as high by the Maine Department
of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.
(f) Where the development abuts a body of water, the design
includes, as part of the required open space, a minimum of
25% of the shoreline.
§ 280-15-4 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-4
252:722
(g) The layout encourages buildings to be located within
woodlands or along the edges of open fields adjacent to
woodlands.
(h) The layout provides for buildings in locations least likely to
block or interrupt scenic vistas, as seen from the public
roadway.
(i) The design maximizes open space that is usable for outdoor
recreation.
(j) Each house lot has direct access to the open space, which
means that the owner of one house lot does not have to cross
another's house lot to reach the open space.
(k) The layout minimizes the length of roadways, public utility
lines, and other infrastructure within the proposed
development.
(l) The design provides planting, landscaping, fencing, and
screening to buffer the development from, and integrate it
with, the character of any surrounding development.
(2) Vehicular access, street layout and construction.
(a) All vehicular access to buildings and lots shall be from a street
within the development and not from an existing public road.
(b) All streets, roads, access drives, and parking areas shall be
designed to harmonize with the topographic and natural
features of the site. The road network shall provide for
vehicular and pedestrian safety, all-season emergency access,
snow storage, delivery and collection services, and potential
connections to abutting land.
(c) Streets shall be designed and constructed in conformance with
Chapter 275, Subdivision of Land.
(3) Buffering. A cluster development shall be buffered from a street or
road, other than the street or road serving individual lots in the
development, or from any abutting single-family dwelling lot, by a
distance equal to two times the normal minimum setbacks required
for the zone. This buffer shall be established and maintained with a
screen to provide an effective visual barrier from the ground to a
height of at least 10 feet. This screen may be composed of a
landscaped earth berm, planted evergreen bushes and trees, or
existing evergreen bushes and trees, or a combination of such
features.
(4) Utilities. Utilities shall be installed underground wherever
possible. Transformer boxes, pumping stations, and meters shall be
located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public.
§ 280-15-4 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-5
252:723
§ 280-15-5. Manufactured housing.
A. Modular homes. Modular homes shall be allowed in any zone in which a
residential structure is allowed and subject to the requirements of that
zone.
B. Newer mobile homes. Newer mobile homes shall be treated as singlefamily
homes allowable in the Rural Residential, Rural Mixed Use, and
Residential Development Zones but may not be located on a lot or
parcel of land which fronts on Route 109, 202, 99, 11A, 224 or 4.
C. Nonconforming homes. All other mobile homes and trailers, and
modular homes which fail to meet the definition of modular home as
defined in this chapter, which were lawfully located in the City as a
residential unit prior to November 20, 1984, and all other mobile homes
which are lawfully located within the City subsequent to that date
pursuant to § 280-15-5D, shall be considered nonconforming structures
and may continue and may be maintained, repaired, improved,
enlarged, or replaced with a like home the same size or larger. Such a
nonconforming structure may be moved to another lot or parcel in the
Rural Residential, Rural Mixed Use, or Residential Development Zones
but may not be relocated to a lot or parcel of land which fronts on Route
109, 202, 99, 11A, 224 or 4.
D. Additional older homes prohibited. No person, firm, corporation, or
other legal entity may locate a factory-built home that is included within
the term "all other mobile homes" as defined in this chapter on a lot or
parcel of land in the City if such factory-built home was not lawfully
located in the City as a residential unit prior to November 20, 1984;
provided, however, that:
(1) Any manufactured home or factory-built home that is included
within the term "all other mobile homes," regardless of its date of
manufacture, that is legally sited within the City as of August 4,
1988, may be relocated to another lot or parcel of land within the
City where newer mobile homes are allowed under § 280-15-5B so
long as it complies with all design criteria applicable to newer
mobile homes, including but not limited to a pitched, shingled roof,
exterior siding which is residential in appearance and located on a
permanent foundation; provided, however, that the Zoning Board of
Appeals may, upon written request by the owner of said home,
grant a waiver from said design standards upon the owner's
showing of economic circumstances that would cause compliance
with said design standards to have the practical effect of
preventing said home's relocation within the City; and
(2) No manufactured home shall be prohibited solely on the basis of its
date of manufacture or failure to comply with the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974.
§ 280-15-5 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-5
252:724
E. Homes in mobile home parks. A mobile home being located on a lot
approved prior to the effective date of this amendment in an existing
mobile home park licensed by the Maine Department of Business
Regulation shall not be required to be located on a permanent
foundation.
F. Mobile home parks.
(1) Mobile home parks shall be allowed in the Rural Mixed Use Zone.
The use and dimensional requirements of the Rural Mixed Use
Zone shall govern, except to the extent otherwise provided by this
subsection or state law.
(2) Existing mobile home parks not located within the Rural Mixed Use
Zone shall be allowed to expand on contiguous property to 130% of
the number of lots which existed in said mobile home park on
September 7, 1989, subject to all of the provisions set forth in this
section.
(3) Lots in mobile home parks shall comply with the following:
(a) The minimum lot width for any mobile home park lot shall be
50 feet.
(b) A mobile home shall not be located less than 10 feet from any
boundary lines of an individual lot.
(c) Any mobile home park lot which is located wholly or partly
within a shoreland district shall meet the minimum lot area and
shore frontage requirements of that district.
(4) No mobile home park lot shall be located with road frontage on any
existing public way. Frontage and access to individual mobile home
park lots shall be solely from interior roadways constructed within
the mobile home park.
(5) Privately owned roads within a mobile home park shall:
(a) Be built according to acceptable engineering standards and
with a professional engineer's seal as required by the
Manufactured Housing Board;
(b) Have a minimum right-of-way width of 23 feet;
(c) Have a minimum paved width of 20 feet; and
(d) Conform to reasonable safety standards applicable to
intersections with public ways adjacent to the mobile home
park.
(6) Any person proposing to develop or expand a mobile home park
shall prove to the Code Enforcement Officer and the Planning
Board that the development will not pollute a public water supply
§ 280-15-5 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-5
252:725
§ 280-15-6. Mineral extraction standards.
or an aquifer or violate any provision of State law relating to land
development, subdivision or use.
(7) Requirement for buffer strips.
(a) None of the provisions of this subsection shall apply unless the
per-acre density of the mobile home park is at least two times
greater than the density of residential development on
immediately adjacent parcels of land.
(b) In addition to the setback requirements set forth in
§ 280-15-5F(3)(b), a buffer strip of at least 40 feet in width
shall be required along the boundary of any mobile home park
where the abutting property is zoned for residential use.
(c) Within the first 25 feet of the buffer strip, as measured from
the exterior boundaries of the mobile home park, the buffer
shall be established and maintained with a screen to provide an
effective visual barrier from the ground to a height of at least
10 feet. This screen shall be composed of a landscaped earth
berm, planted evergreen bushes and trees, or existing
evergreen bushes and trees, or a combination of such features.
(d) No structures, streets, or utilities may be placed in the buffer
strip, except that utilities may cross a buffer strip to provide
services to the mobile home park.
(8) No individual lot within a mobile home park may be separately
conveyed unless it meets all of the dimensional requirements of the
zoning district, including sufficient frontage on an accepted public
way.
(9) Only newer mobile homes, as defined in this chapter, shall be
permitted in mobile home parks.
(10) This section shall be effective as of January 1, 1990.
A. General. The following provisions shall apply to filling, grading,
lagooning, dredging, excavation, processing and storage of soil, earth,
loam, sand, gravel, rock and other mineral deposits. Filling, grading,
lagooning, dredging, and other earthmoving activity which would result
in erosion, sedimentation, or impairment of water quality or fish and
aquatic life is prohibited.
B. Mineral extraction not requiring site plan review.
(1) The following mineral extraction activities shall be allowed without
site plan approval:
§ 280-15-5 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-6
252:726
(a) The removal or filling of material incidental to construction,
alteration or repair of a building or in the grading and
landscaping incidental thereto; and
(b) The removal, filling, or transfer of material incidental to
construction, alteration or repair of a public or private way or
essential services.
(2) All other commercial mineral extraction, processing and storage
shall require site plan approval in accordance with Article XVI.
C. Standards. An application for site plan approval for mineral extraction
shall be approved if the following standards are met:
(1) Excavations below the high-water table shall not be permitted
unless a suitable plan for such is approved.
(2) Diversions, silting basins, terraces and other methods to trap
sediment shall be used.
(3) Lagooning shall be conducted in such a manner as to avoid creation
of fish trap conditions.
(4) The extent and type of fill shall be appropriate to the use intended.
The applicant shall specify the type and amount of fill to be used.
(5) Fill shall not restrict a floodway, channel or natural drainageway.
(6) The sides of cuts, fill, channels, or artificial watercourses shall be
constructed and stabilized to prevent slumping and erosion.
(7) No below-grade excavation, except for drainageways, shall be
allowed within 100 feet of any public road.
(8) No below-grade excavation, except for drainageways, shall be
allowed within 50 feet of any lot line, except that excavations within
five feet of a property line may be permitted on condition that a
written report from a licensed soil scientist is provided to the
Planning Board stating the suitability of the soils to hold a slope of
two to one.
(9) The sides of cuts, fill or channels along public roads or lot lines
shall not exceed a slope of two feet horizontal for every one foot
vertical.
(10) Adjacent lot lines of one or more owners shall be exempt from
§ 280-15-6C(8) and (9) if they agree in writing.
(11) Permanent ground cover shall be required within 100 feet of all
property lines, including all boundary slopes. Said ground cover
shall comply with soil and conservation standards and
recommendations.
§ 280-15-6 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-6
252:727
§ 280-15-7. Archaeological and historic resources.
(12) Upon expiration of any permit or termination of operations, the
applicant agrees to implement a suitable plan for reclamation of
said site as approved at the time of approval.
D. Optional conditions of approval. The Planning Board may impose other
reasonable conditions to safeguard the neighborhood and the
municipality which may include those relating to:
(1) Methods of removal or processing;
(2) Hours of operation;
(3) Type and location of temporary structures;
(4) Routes for transporting material;
(5) Area and depth of excavations;
(6) Provision of temporary or permanent drainage;
(7) Disposition of brush and slash; and
(8) Cleaning, repair and/or resurfacing of streets used in removal
activity which have been adversely affected by said activity.
E. Surety and terms of approval. No approval shall be granted without a
bond or other security to insure compliance with such conditions as the
Planning Board may impose. No approval shall be issued for a period to
exceed five years, although such approval may be renewed for
additional periods in the same manner.
F. Existing operations. Any commercial operation involving the
excavation, processing or storage of soil, earth, loam, sand, gravel, rock
or other mineral deposits in lawful operation at the time this chapter
becomes effective may operate for a period of two years from the
effective date, July 1, 1977. Discontinuance of any existing operation for
a period of more than one year shall require application for a new
approval. Continuation of any existing operation beyond July 1, 1979,
shall require site plan approval from the Planning Board.
A. Archaeological resources. The following provisions are intended to
prevent the disturbance of sites with identified archaeological
significance until their importance is documented.
(1) No municipal approval shall be issued within any identified
archaeological resource potential areas until the Maine Historic
Preservation Commission (MHPC) has been notified of the nature
of the proposed activity in writing by the owner of the property, a
copy of the notice provided to the Code Enforcement Officer, and
the MHPC provided with the opportunity to conduct a
reconnaissance level archaeological survey. The survey
§ 280-15-6 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-7
252:728
§ 280-15-8. Adult business establishment standards.
Any business that meets the definition of an adult business establishment
regardless of its use category shall conform to the following additional
requirements:
requirement will be deemed satisfied if the MHPC has not carried
out a survey or responded to the owner in writing within six
months.
(2) The archaeological resource potential areas as identified in the
Comprehensive Plan are limited to abandoned mill sites along the
Mousam River.
B. Historic resources.
(1) The following provisions are intended to preserve the architectural
character of historic buildings in designated areas of the City.
(2) Designated areas. The provisions of this subsection shall apply only
within the following areas:
(a) The triangle, which is the area from Central Park down Main
Street to the Goodall Library along Elm Street, up School
Street to its intersection with Washington Street. This area is
located in the City center and is generally residential in nature.
It includes the Goodall Mansion, one of the City's most
significant historic structures, in addition to several other
older residences.
(b) The area starting at the City Hall and continuing along the
westerly side of Main Street to the Lebanon Street/Main Street
intersection and down both sides of Lebanon Street to the
Edison School. The district contains a variety of commercial
and residential buildings constructed from 1880, including but
not limited to Shaw's Hardware Store and Congregational
Church, through the early 1900s.
(c) The area on Main Street in Springvale from the demolished
railroad overpass up to the Nichols House on the east side of
the street and all of the structures on the west side of the
street, ending at the Tripp House across from Holdsworth
Park. This area contains numerous older residences.
C. Modification of existing historic buildings. The owner of an historic
building within the designated areas is encouraged to carry out any
modifications in a manner that preserves the architectural and historic
character of the structure. The owner is also encouraged to consult
with the Historical Committee or Planning Department about the
building and proposed modifications.
A. Location.
§ 280-15-7 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-8
252:729
§ 280-15-9. Transmitter and alternative communication tower
standards.
The location and installation of new transmitter towers and alternative
communication towers, including the replacement of existing towers, shall
conform to the following standards:
(1) An adult business establishment shall not be sited within 1,000 feet
of the lot lines of any of the following:
(a) A public or private elementary or secondary school.
(b) A public park or public or private recreational facility or site.
(c) A lot on which another adult business establishment is sited.
(2) The distance cited in this subsection shall be measured in a straight
line between the lot line of the proposed site for the adult business
establishment and the lot line of the site of the use listed in this
subsection at their closest points.
B. Prohibited activities.
(1) Dancers, performers, employees, owners or officers of an adult
business establishment shall not fondle or caress any patron or
client, and patrons and clients shall not fondle or caress dancers,
performers, employees, owners or officers of the adult business
establishment;
(2) Patrons or clients shall not directly pay or give any gratuity or
object of value to any dancer, performer, employee, owner or officer
of the adult business establishment, and dancers, performers,
employees, owners or officers shall not solicit any pay, gratuity or
object of value from any patron or client; and
(3) Dancers, performers, employees, owners or officers of an adult
business establishment shall not:
(a) Perform, offer to perform or agree to perform sexual
intercourse with each other or any patron or client; or
(b) Commit, offer to commit or agree to commit any sexual act
with each other or any patron or client; or
(c) Make, offer to make or agree to make sexual contact with each
other or any patron or client.
C. Nudity restricted. Dancers, performers, employees, owners or officers
of an adult business establishment shall not expose their genitals to
clients, whether or not there is any compensation for this activity.
A. Design and color. The Planning Board, at its discretion, may require
that a proposed tower be camouflaged or designed to blend with its
surroundings, except where dictated by federal or State requirements.
§ 280-15-8 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-9
252:730
This may include, but is not limited to, having a galvanized finish, being
painted gray or in a sky tone above the top of surrounding trees and
earth tone below treetop level, or being designed to resemble a tree
species similar to those in the area.
B. Landscaped buffer for transmitter tower sites.
(1) Unless existing vegetation provides a buffer strip at least the width
of the minimum setback for the zoning district, all property lines
along roadways or visible to existing abutting or nearby buildings
shall be landscaped as follows:
(a) Six- to eight-foot-high evergreen shrubs shall be planted in an
alternating pattern, averaging five feet on center, within 15
feet of the property boundary.
(b) At least one row of deciduous trees, not less than 2 1/2 to three
inches caliper diameter at breast height (DBH) and spaced an
average of 20 feet apart and within 25 feet of the property
boundary.
(2) In lieu of the foregoing planting requirements, the Planning Board
may determine that the existing vegetation may be supplemented
to achieve an equivalent means of minimizing the visual impact.
C. Requirements of other entities. Proposals for towers submitted after
the effective date of this amendment shall meet all applicable
requirements of federal and State regulations before local approval is
given. The Planning Board may waive this requirement if the applicant
demonstrates that application has been made for any relevant federal
and State approvals or, if no approvals are required, that the project
conforms to all federal and State standards or that there are no such
standards that apply. If the Planning Board approves an application
prior to the applicant receiving all federal and/or State approvals, the
Planning Board shall condition its approval on the receipt of those other
approvals.
D. Structural requirements.
(1) Towers shall be designed and installed in accordance with the
standards of the Electronic Industries Association Structural
Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting
Structures.
(2) The applicant's engineer shall provide documentation showing that
the proposed tower meets or exceeds the current standards of the
American National Standards Institute, ANSI/EIA/TIA-222-"E," for
York County relative to wind and 1/2 inch ice loads.
(3) For towers placed on buildings or other structures, the applicant
shall also provide written certification that the building itself is
§ 280-15-9 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-9
252:731
structurally capable of safely supporting the tower and its
accompanying equipment.
E. Abandonment.
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a tower to notify the
Code Enforcement Officer of the date of abandonment or cessation
of use of the tower within one month from the date of such
abandonment or cessation. If the owner shall fail to give the notice
required by this subsection, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
make a determination of such date, which determination shall be
conclusive as to such date.
(2) In the case of an abandoned tower, it shall be removed by the
owner of the tower within one year of its abandonment or cessation
of use. Abandoned structures associated with abandoned towers
shall also be removed. If the owner of the abandoned tower fails to
remove the tower, the owner of the property on which the tower is
located shall be responsible for its removal.
F. Collocation.
(1) Tower applicants shall send written notice by prepaid first class
United States mail to all other telecommunication tower owners
and licensed telecommunication providers in the proposed
coverage area stating their siting needs and/or collocation
capabilities in an effort to encourage tower collocation. An
application for a new tower shall provide evidence that existing or
previously approved towers cannot accommodate the
telecommunications equipment, including but not limited to
antennas and cables, planned for the proposed tower. Such
evidence would be:
(a) Planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of
existing and approved towers, considering the existing and
planned use of those towers, and existing and approved towers
cannot be reinforced to accommodate planned or equivalent
equipment at a reasonable cost, as defined below;
(b) Planned equipment will cause radio wave frequency
interference with other existing or planned equipment for that
tower, and the interference cannot be prevented at a
reasonable cost, as defined below;
(c) Existing or approved towers do not have space on which
planned equipment can be placed so it can function effectively
and at least in parity with other similar equipment in place or
approved; or
(d) Other reasons that make it impracticable to place the
equipment planned by the applicant on existing and approved
towers.
§ 280-15-9 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-9
252:732
(2) Shared use shall be conditioned on the applicant's agreement to
pay a reasonable fee and costs of adapting existing facilities to the
proposed use.
(a) Such costs shall be pertinent to the southern Maine market
area.
(b) These may include but not be limited to reasonable costs for
reinforcing the tower or structure, for preventing radio wave
frequency interference, and other changes reasonably
required to accommodate shared use.
(c) The fee and costs for shared use are unreasonable, among
other reasons, if they exceed the cost of the proposed tower.
(3) If the Planning Board determines that telecommunications
equipment proposed by the applicant cannot be accommodated on
an existing or approved tower, each tower so found is presumed
unable to accommodate similar equipment that may be proposed in
the future.
(4) A proposal to construct a new tower taller than 100 feet shall
include evidence that it can structurally support a minimum of
three antenna arrays.
(5) The Planning Board may require evidence of structural support to
accommodate additional arrays for non-monopole towers.
G. Interest of telecommunication entity. A proposal to construct a tower
shall include evidence that a telecommunication or other entity
proposes to locate on or use the tower.
H. Lighting. A tower shall be lighted only if it is required by a federal or
State agency or if the Planning Board finds that lighting of the tower is
needed due to its location with respect to the Airport, its height or other
safety considerations with respect to airport operations.
I. Security. The base of the tower shall be made nonaccessible to
unauthorized persons by the installation of a fence designed to deter
such access.
J. Nonconformance. Towers existing before the effective date of this
chapter which do not comply with these performance standards or with
the use or dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which they
are located may continue to be used. The addition, removal, or
relocation of telecommunication antennas on such towers shall not
constitute the expansion or enlargement of the nonconforming use and
does not require review by the Planning Board, provided that the total
height of the tower, including attached devices, is not increased.
K. Inspection.
§ 280-15-9 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-9
252:733
§ 280-15-10. Marijuana standards. [Amended 12-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-158.07; 2-20-2018 by Order No. 17-188-01]
All uses involving the growing, cultivation, processing, storage, and/or
distribution of marijuana shall conform to the following standards:
(1) Inspection of communication towers by a licensed structural
engineer shall be required to ensure structural integrity. Such
inspections shall be required as follows:
(a) All towers: upon completion of construction.
(b) Monopole towers: at least once every 10 years.
(c) Self-support towers: at least once every five years.
(d) Guyed towers: at least once every three years.
(2) The inspection report shall be provided to the Public Works
Director and Code Enforcement Officer within 30 days of its receipt
by the tower owner. Based upon results of the inspection, the City
may require the repair or removal of the communication tower.
L. Floodplain management: compliance with the requirements of
§ 275-43.
M. Identification of freshwater wetlands: compliance with the
requirements of § 275-44.
N. Stormwater management: compliance with the requirements of
§§ 275-45 and 275-53.
O. Traffic conditions: if the project is classified as a major site plan,
compliance with the requirements of § 275-51.
P. Wildlife habitat, rare natural areas or public access to shoreline: if the
project is classified as a major site plan, compliance with the
requirements of § 275-52.
A. Home cultivation standards.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings. In single-family detached
dwellings, marijuana may be grown or cultivated inside and/or
outside of the home, outbuilding, and/or garage if growing is
conducted in conformance with § 280-15-10.
(2) Other residential dwellings. In other residential dwellings,
marijuana may be grown, cultivated, processed, and/or stored
inside a dwelling unit if cultivation is conducted in conformance
with § 280-15-10B.
(3) Gases. The use of gas products, including but not limited to carbon
dioxide, sulfur dioxide and butane, and ozone generators is
prohibited. [Added 5-15-2018 by Order No. 18-244-01]
§ 280-15-9 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-10
252:734
B. General standards.
(1) Residency. Home cultivation shall only be conducted by a resident
for whom the dwelling unit is his or her primary residence in
conformance with the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act and
Rules or the Marijuana Legalization Act, as appropriate.
(2) Ownership. A resident who does not own his or her primary
residence and who wants to cultivate marijuana shall obtain
written permission from the property owner prior to cultivating
marijuana and shall make the written permission available to the
City, upon request.
(3) Enclosed, locked facility. Home cultivation, whether inside or
outside of the primary residence, shall only be conducted in an
enclosed, locked facility or outdoor area which is accessible only by
the individual who is authorized to cultivate the marijuana in
conformance with the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act and
Rules or the Marijuana Legalization Act, as appropriate.
(4) Limited area dedicated to cultivation. Cultivation shall only be
conducted in a contiguous area of not more than 1/4 of the total
square footage of the dwelling unit or 120 square feet, whichever is
less. No marijuana shall be grown, cultivated, processed, and/or
stored within a common area or limited common area of the
property that is devoted to residential use.
(5) Screening of outdoor cultivation. No exterior evidence of
cultivation, including signs, shall be visible from a public way or
area. Plants shall be entirely screened from common visual
observation from a public way or area by natural objects, plantings,
or a solid fence at least six feet or taller in height, density, and
depth sufficient to accomplish complete screening of plants from
ordinary view. Should the plants grow higher than the screening
such that they are visible from a public way or area, either the
plants shall be cut to not extend higher than the screening or the
individual who is authorized to cultivate the marijuana shall install
additional screening sufficient to conceal the plants from public
view within 10 days of notification of the violation by the Code
Enforcement Department.
(6) Commercial sale of marijuana grown, cultivated, processed, and/or
stored on a residential property, except for members of the
household and family members who are qualifying patients that do
not reside in the household or as otherwise allowed under the
Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act and Rules or the Marijuana
Legalization Act, as appropriate, and the sale of marijuana
paraphernalia is prohibited.
(7) Compliance with health and safety codes. The primary residence,
outbuilding, garage, or other structure where marijuana is grown,
cultivated, processed, and/or stored shall meet all applicable
§ 280-15-10 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-10
252:735
requirements of the City's building, electrical, fire, and other health
safety and technical codes, including but not limited to Chapter 90,
Building Construction, and Chapter 128, Fire Prevention.
(8) Chemicals. Cultivation that uses any chemical in the growing,
cultivation, production, storage, and/or distribution of marijuana
shall do so in conformance with the Maine Medical Use of
Marijuana Act and Rules or the Marijuana Legalization Act, as
appropriate.
(9) (Reserved)108
(10) Ventilation and odor management. Any primary residence,
outbuilding, garage, or other structure used for cultivation shall
have proper ventilation to prevent mold damage and to prevent
odors or particles from becoming a nuisance to surrounding
properties or the public.
(11)Waste disposal. All marijuana waste and/or residue from the
growth, cultivation, processing, and/or storage of marijuana shall
be disposed of in conformance with the Maine Medical Use of
Marijuana Act and Rules or the Marijuana Legalization Act, as
appropriate, as well as Chapter 220, Solid Waste. Waste and/or
residue shall not be placed in exterior refuse containers without
first being made unusable and unrecognizable through grinding
and incorporating it with nonconsumable, solid wastes, such as
paper, plastic, cardboard, food, grease, Bokashi or other compost
activators, and/or soil, such that the resulting mixture is at least
50% nonmarijuana waste. Composting, fermenting, and/or
incineration on-site is allowed if undertaken in accordance with
State and local regulations.
C. Medical marijuana production standards. In addition to the
requirements of § 280-15-10B, a medical marijuana production facility
shall meet the following additional standards:
(1) No medical marijuana production facilities shall be allowed within
500 feet of any existing public or private school, child-care
provider, park, playground, and/or church, with the distance
between the properties calculated by direct measurement in a
straight line between the nearest property lines of the land used for
public or private school, child-care provider, park, playground and/
or church to the nearest portion of the structure in which the
medical marijuana production facility is located. Applicants for
public or private schools, child-care providers, parks, playgrounds,
and/or churches which are proposed within 500 feet of an existing
medical marijuana production facility shall be required to sign a
form, which may be obtained from the Code Enforcement
Department, which indicates that they are aware that an existing
108. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(9), Gases, was repealed 5-15-2018 by Order No.
18-244-01. See now Subsection A(3).
§ 280-15-10 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-10
252:736
medical marijuana production facility is located within 500 feet of
their proposed site.
(2) The operator of the medical marijuana production facility shall
obtain an annual license from the City Council to operate the
facility in conformance with Chapter 149, Licensing.
(3) The medical marijuana production facility shall grow, cultivate,
process, store, and/or distribute plants and prepared marijuana in
a fully enclosed, locked facility which is accessible only by the
individual or his/her employees who are authorized to cultivate the
marijuana in conformance with the Maine Medical Use of
Marijuana Act and Rules.
(4) The structure where medical marijuana is grown, cultivated, and/or
processed shall be constructed of building materials approved by
the Code Enforcement Department and Fire Chief, or their
designees. If the structure is 6,000 square feet or larger, it shall be
required to include an internal sprinkler and/or fire suppressant
system approved by the Fire Chief.
(5) An operator of a medical marijuana production facility shall
prepare an Operations Manual and Safety Plan. The Operations
Manual and Safety Plan shall describe, at a minimum, policies and
procedures for employee safety, product and building security,
hours of operation, provision and maintenance of ventilation and
odor controls unless the operator prepares an Odor Control Plan
that meets the requirements of §§ 280-15-10C(6) through
280-15-10C(8)(c)[8], storage and use of hazardous materials,
including but not limited to, chemicals and gases, waste
management, contamination protocols, and methods of distribution
to qualifying patients. The Operations Manual and Security Plan
shall be maintained at the facility and made available for inspection
upon request. [Amended 2-20-2018 by Order No. 18-115-01]
(6) An operator of a medical marijuana production facility shall
prepare an Odor Control Plan specifying the engineering and
administrative controls the facility will use to prevent odors from
being detected offsite, unless a mechanical engineer, or other
qualified professional, registered in the State of Maine, certifies the
adequacy of the proposed ventilation and odor control system to
prevent odors from being detected beyond the boundaries of the
property. [Added 2-20-2018 by Order No. 18-115-01]
(7) All facilities shall be equipped with and maintain sufficient
ventilation and odor controls to ensure that air leaving the building
through an exhaust vent shall prevent odors from leaving the
property. Doors and windows in odor-producing areas shall remain
closed, except for the minimum length of time needed to allow
people to ingress or egress the facility. [Added 2-20-2018 by
Order No. 18-115-01]
§ 280-15-10 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-10
252:737
(8) The Odor Control Plan shall be prepared using industry-specific
best control technologies and management practices for each odor
source in the facility and shall include, at a minimum: [Added
2-20-2018 by Order No. 18-115-01]
(a) A facility floor plan, with locations of odor-producing activities
specified. Relevant information shall include, but is not limited
to, the location of doors, windows, ventilation systems, odor
control systems, and odor sources.
(b) Specific odor-producing activities, describing the processes
that will take place at the facility and the sources of the odors
associated with, but not limited to, vegetative flowering,
processing, and storage.
(c) For each odor source, specify the administrative processes and
technologies the facility will use, including:
[1] Description of the proposed actions or technologies for
each odor-producing activity, including the number of
products proposed to be used and product names,
provided by the manufacturer or supplier of the
technology;
[2] Description of the formulas, provided by the manufacturer
or supplier of the technology, to size the proposed odor
control technologies for the specific space and odor
sources to be controlled within the facility;
[3] Maintenance and replacement schedule for key system
components, provided by the manufacturer or supplier of
the technology;
[4] Building management activities intended to isolate odorproducing
activities from other areas of the buildings;
[5] Staff training procedures, including organizational
responsibilities and the roles/titles of staff members who
shall be trained about odor control;
[6] Recordkeeping systems and forms describing what
records will be maintained by the facility operator;
[7] Description of daily standard operating procedures to
verify that the odor control systems are operational;
[8] Evidence that ventilation and odor controls are
operational, sufficient to effectively mitigate odors for all
sources and consistent with accepted and available
industry-specific best control technologies designed to
effectively mitigate odors.
§ 280-15-10 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-10
252:738
§ 280-15-11. Design standards. [Amended 10-2-2018 by Order No.
18-426-01]
Any development on a parcel that is located in a Design District Overlay
Zone, except for a single-family home or demolition of an existing structure,
shall require review and recommendation to the Planning Board, Site Plan
Review Committee, Planning Director, and/or Code Enforcement Officer by
the Design Review Committee.
(9) The City may use contracted staff and peer review escrow fees to
review an Odor Control Plan under § 280-3-4. [Added 2-20-2018
by Order No. 18-115-01]
(10)No medical marijuana shall be grown, cultivated, processed, and/or
stored within a common area or limited common area of the
property.
(11)No medical marijuana qualifying patients shall obtain medical
marijuana directly from the medical marijuana production facility,
except as otherwise allowed under the Maine Medical Use of
Marijuana Act and Rules. The medical marijuana production facility
may include an office space within the same structure for the
purposes of consulting with and distributing medical marijuana to
qualifying patients if offices are allowed in the zoning district and if
the facility meets all public safety, public access, parking, and other
requirements of City codes. This office space shall not qualify as a
medical marijuana dispensary as defined in the Maine Medical Use
of Marijuana Act and Rules. This limitation is not intended to limit
production operations in one unit with potential retail sales of
marijuana paraphernalia in another separate unit, as long as retail
sales are allowed in the zone in which the property is located and
the two facilities operate as separate legal entities.
(12) A medical marijuana production facility shall comply with the
industrial performance standards in this chapter.
(13) A medical marijuana production facility shall not dispose of
marijuana waste and/or residue from the growth, cultivation,
processing, and storage of medical marijuana in an unsecured
waste receptacle not in its possession and control.
(14) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in 1 M.R.S.A. § 302, this
chapter applies to any application relating to the establishment or
operation of a medical marijuana production facility, whether or not
such application had become a pending proceeding as defined in 1
M.R.S.A. § 302 prior to the enactment of this chapter.
A. Intent. This section provides design standards which, if followed, will be
considered evidence of meeting the appropriate performance standards
of Article XVI, Site Plan Review, and Chapter 275, Subdivision of Land.
Proposed site plans, subdivisions, and exterior improvements and/or
§ 280-15-10 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-11
252:739
changes not in compliance with the design standards of this section
may be considered, but the applicant shall have the burden of proof
to provide clear and convincing evidence that demonstrates it is not
possible to comply with the standards, the proposed design shall meet
the intent of the standards to the greatest extent practicable, and all
other zoning, subdivision, and building standard codes, and statutory
criteria shall be met.
B. Design districts defined.
(1) In the Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone and the
Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone, design standards
apply to new development, redevelopment, and change of use. The
two Design Districts are defined on a map in the Planning Office.
These areas are on well-traveled routes most often seen by the
public, where it is crucial to ensure that nonresidential
development is in keeping with the character of the District
Overlay Zones.
C. Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone.
(1) Background. The focus of Sanford Downtown has shifted over time,
toward an increased emphasis on serving a wider range of
commercial activities and an increasing residential population.
Sanford Downtown is evolving into a year-round destination. The
success of much of Sanford's Downtown business district depends
on the success of the visitor experience. That is why all aspects of
development in Sanford Downtown shall be designed for both
function and aesthetics. These design standards are intended to
help the owner, developer, architect, and other consultants
understand the basic design goals set for development in the
Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone and provide the
City with a yardstick against which new projects can be measured.
Applicants are invited to submit creative and imaginative projects
which build on these standards and contribute to the overall form
and character of Sanford's Downtown.
(2) Objectives.
(a) Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone offers visitors
a focal point for services aimed at both visitors, residents and
workers of the surrounding area. Sanford Downtown design
standards are intended to promote the characteristic qualities
of its historic setting. The following objectives shall be
considered in all new development:
[1] Insist on a high standard of urban design, architecture and
landscape architecture for the downtown area, in order to
make it attractive to visitors, residents and workers alike.
§ 280-15-11 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-11
252:740
[2] Respond to the existing and future needs and interests of a
broad range of visitors, residents and workers through the
four seasons.
[3] Preserve, where possible, and supplement the existing
natural landscape. Abundant landscaping and floral
displays are particularly important in the summer and fall
months.
[4] Use design elements that are cohesive with the City's
natural setting and desired architectural character yet still
express individuality.
[5] Create an atmosphere in the Sanford Downtown Design
District Overlay Zone that is open and friendly, that caters
to pedestrians by providing open space amenities,
including but not limited to outdoor seating areas, activity
areas, site features.
[6] Accommodate New England climatic conditions.
[7] Encourage building design and orientations that maximize
views and sunlight.
[8] Make preserving the historic character of the Sanford
Downtown Design District Overlay Zone a priority.
[9] Encourage building design and site planning that ensures
logical and functional patterns for the three levels of
traffic: pedestrian, automobile, and service and delivery.
[10] Insist on building design that reflects the community's
desire for human scale, in terms of building placement,
height, proportion, site features, roof shapes and building
materials. The design standards are not intended as a
blueprint for design approval; rather they outline the
important elements and features which shall be
considered in designing or modifying the building, site or
subdivision.
(b) Note that these design standards do not negate or overrule the
City's building codes. Applicants shall review the design
standards and meet with the Planning Director at the outset of
the design process to discuss the design objectives/issues for
each property in Sanford's Downtown, if appropriate.
D. Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone.
(1) Introduction.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of these design standards is to provide a
tool to preserve the village character of Springvale and respect
its sense of history for generations to come. These standards
§ 280-15-11 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-11
252:741
are intended to ensure that new, expanded, and rehabilitated
development is designed and built in a manner compatible
with the character of Springvale Village in terms of scale,
aesthetic, and visual effect. They are meant to lead to the
construction and layout of buildings and site improvements
that are appropriate to their surroundings and to the
Springvale Village, by helping property owners, developers,
contractors and other professionals understand the community
values which their designs shall satisfy to be acceptable to the
City.
(b) The focus of these design standards is to maintain and
improve, where appropriate, the visual and aesthetic character
of the Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone, as
related to site layout, and improvement, architecture, and
design of properties. Design review does not encompass all
elements of zoning, subdivision, or building code review. The
City's zoning, subdivision and building code review processes
cover other performance standards, including but not limited
to traffic, utilities, and environmental impacts, pertaining to
nonresidential development.
(2) Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone general standards.
(a) Character. These design standards are a tool to help ensure
future development and alterations to existing development
are in keeping with the character of the Springvale Village
Design District Overlay Zone. Development shall maintain or
improve the visual and aesthetic character of the Springvale
Village Design District Overlay Zone.
(b) Context. A building's or site's context is important to gauging
appropriate design. A building or site shall conform to the
Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone design
standards and shall not appear out of place compared to
abutting properties, buildings or the surrounding
neighborhood. This is an important standard to consider, even
though it may be difficult to quantify.
(c) Existing structures.
[1] These standards also apply to the renovation or
construction of existing buildings and/or sites within the
Springvale Village Design District Overlay District.
[2] For existing structures:
[a] Historic or original architectural elements, including
but not limited to doors, windows, dormers, porches,
balconies, and decorative features, such as cornices,
columns, pediments, and railings, shall be retained to
the extent possible. Alterations shall be carried out in
§ 280-15-11 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-11
252:742
a way that does not damage or hide these elements.
New architectural elements shall match the old in
design, color, texture, and, where possible, material;
and
[b] Architectural elements that falsify or confuse the
history of a building shall be avoided. Replacement of
original elements shall be substantiated by
documentary and physical evidence. Building owners
should find early photographs of their building to best
identify its true historic style. These photographs can
provide visual evidence of existing or preexisting
architectural elements. Property owners are
encouraged to consult with the Historical Society or
Planning Department about the building and proposed
modifications.
(d) Additions.
[1] Historically, a house was expanded incrementally as a
family's space requirements grew. Over several
generations, additions were added in a manner that was
consistent with what had come before but reflective of its
own period. Additions shall be designed so that the
character of the existing building is not radically changed,
obscured, damaged, destroyed, or rendered subordinate to
the addition.
[2] Additions shall:
[a] Be differentiated from the existing building with
techniques, including but not limited to set backs or
offsets from the existing wall plane;
[b] Not obstruct the visual integrity of the original
structure;
[c] Be in harmony with the original in size, scale, style
and materials; and
[d] Be located where least visible from public view.
E. Sanford Downtown and Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone
standards.
(1) Site planning.
(a) General standards.
[1] Building siting, building placement, and setbacks.
§ 280-15-11 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-11
252:743
[a] Preservation of natural features and vegetation is
encouraged. Retain existing stands of trees and
terrain where possible.
[b] Building siting shall consider adjacent development.
[2] Orientation to the street. In nearly all circumstances, the
building and primary entrance shall be oriented parallel to
and close to the street to encourage the creation and/or
maintenance of an interesting streetscape and pedestrian
activity.
[3] Front yard setbacks.
[a] The front setback of new buildings shall be consistent
with neighboring buildings along the street and in the
neighborhood; a new building shall not appear out of
place because it is placed much closer to or further
from the street than other buildings.
[b] If the appropriate front setback is uncertain, the
general standard is to keep buildings close to the
road, as is typical of traditional village and downtown
development.
(b) Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone site planning
standards:
[1] Topography.
[2] Geology/soils conditions.
[3] Hydrology, drainage, and floodplain considerations.
[4] Vegetation.
[5] Solar orientation and microclimatic considerations.
[6] Access and circulation: pedestrian and vehicular.
[7] Seasonal differences.
[8] Snow management. (See § 280-15-11F.)
(2) Site design.
(a) Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone general
preferences.
[1] Ground-level interest. Variety at ground level contributes
interest and vitality. Consideration of walkway and
landscape detail, scale, and entries is especially important.
[2] Street furnishings standards.
§ 280-15-11 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-11
252:744
[a] Street furnishings shall be placed in areas that do not
impede pedestrian movement or building
maintenance. Public seating and trash receptacles are
encouraged.
[b] Bike racks shall be highly visible and accommodate
locking mechanisms to reduce the risk of theft.
[3] Landscaping and other materials standards.
[a] Landscaping shall use indigenous or similar hardy
plants. Native shade trees shall be the preferred
planting along Main Street and major side streets,
supplemented with ornamental trees, shrubs,
perennials, and annuals to accent pedestrian spaces,
building, and site design and to provide visual interest
and seasonal color.
[b] Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone
additional landscaping and other materials standards.
[i] Design review may require up to 10% of gross site
area in landscaped open space in mixed use or
commercial zones, up to 20% for residential uses.
[ii] Coordinate landscape treatment with adjacent
areas.
[A] Coordinate the designs of arcades, steps,
railings, streetlights, and plantings to achieve
continuity on Main Street.
[c] Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone
additional landscape elements.
[i] All landscape elements adjacent to areas which
require snow clearing by machinery shall be
designed to resist damage by incorporating
durable materials and rounded edges and
eliminating unnecessary protrusions.
[ii] Site features, such as water, public art, flags,
banners, and graphics, are strongly encouraged,
provided that they conform to the requirements of
this chapter and Life and Safety Codes.
[iii] Planters consistent with the building design are
encouraged. All post-construction disturbed areas
shall be revegetated per landscape standards.
[iv] Trees and plantings shall be protected from snow
clearing operations.
§ 280-15-11 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-11
252:745
[v] Plant material located in snow dump areas shall
be sufficiently durable to survive the effects of
snow storage.
[vi] Summer floral displays shall be strongly
encouraged.
[vii] Grass shall be a uniform turf of species hardy to
the City.
[d] Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone
additional irrigation standards.
[i] All irrigation systems shall provide for on-site
drainage.
[ii] Underground, automatic watering systems shall
be encouraged.
(3) Servicing standards. Truck access, deliveries, utilities, storage and
garbage concealment shall be considered in the design.
(a) Provide adequate space for garbage storage and recycling.
Garbage and recycling storage areas shall be enclosed and
hidden from public view and/or screened by fences and plants
compatible with the architecture of structures on and in the
vicinity of the site. Containers shall be made of durable
materials and shall be easily accessible to garbage trucks.
Adequate ventilation shall be provided.
(b) Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone additional
servicing standards.
[1] Service bays and loading docks shall be unobtrusive.
[2] Locate service bays within the building or parking
structure. If exterior service bays are necessary, locations
visible to front entries or commercial businesses shall be
avoided. Provide permanent visual screening where
exterior service bays are located.
(c) Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone additional
servicing standards.
[1] Service bay design shall be durable. Consider wear and
tear on these areas. In order to allow winter garbage
pickup, design service bay areas to prevent ice and snow
buildup.
[2] If applicable, projects shall include an area for utility
services, including but not limited to meters and propane
tanks. The area shall be fully screened from the view of the
public and adjacent property owners. Incorporate fire hose
§ 280-15-11 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-11
252:746
connections and utility meters in the building design to
avoid damage during snow plowing. Confirm transformer
location at an early stage of design process in order to
minimize visual impact, especially with reference to
adjacent properties.
[3] Sufficient truck storage shall be maintained on site to
allow efficient delivery service without conflicts while that
service is being performed.
[4] Delivery trucks shall be able to operate without blocking
public rights-of-way. Pedestrians shall be able to access the
development from existing pedestrian walkways with little
or no traffic conflict.
(4) Access, parking, and loading standards.
(a) The number of parking spaces shall conform with, but not
exceed, the requirements of this chapter.
(b) Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone driveway
standards. Design driveways to a maximum of eight-percentand
ideally less than six-percent-slope. The slope on driveway
approaches to City streets may be increased above 8% with the
use of heat-tracing or a roof covering.
(c) Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone service
parking standards.
[1] Provide adequate areas for snow storage and drainage.
These may be combined with islands of planting,
sufficiently durable to survive the effects of snow storage,
to break up large areas of paving.
[2] On-site parking areas located to the rear of buildings shall
be strongly encouraged.
[3] Screen surface parking areas by a combination of walls,
fences, landscaping, and berms at least four feet in height.
[4] Where possible, provide separate pedestrian circulation
routes within parking areas.
[5] Where possible, provide separate parking areas for buses
and recreational vehicles.
[6] On-site parking shall be designed to allow vehicles forward
entry and exit from the site, except as otherwise
authorized under this chapter.
(d) Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone additional offstreet
parking standards.
§ 280-15-11 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-11
252:747
[1] On a building lot, parking shall be an accessory use to the
principal structure, not a dominating feature of the site.
Therefore, off-street parking lots shall be sited behind or to
the side of buildings. Parking, whether formal or informal,
in the front yard of a residential or nonresidential building
is not appropriate and is visually detracting.
[2] Off-street parking that is located to the rear of buildings
shall be identified with appropriate signage. The
provisions of exterior lighting and landscaping, in
accordance with this chapter, shall be encouraged.
(5) Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone site features and
landscaped pedestrian walkways standards.
(a) Walkways shall provide a safe, handicap-accessible pedestrian
connection between the building, parking, and the street.
Connections to adjacent sites or developments shall be
provided where appropriate.
(b) Asphalt surfaces shall predominant for sidewalks in the
Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone, but brick,
pavers, stamped concrete, stone, and other materials shall be
considered to add character or to prevent cracks or shifting
bricks/blocks from becoming eyesores or safety hazards.
(6) Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone additional fence
standards.
(a) Traditional materials, including but not limited to wood, castor
wrought-iron, or stone, shall be recommended. Metal or
vinyl fencing that looks like traditional wood or iron fencing
may be an acceptable alternative. Chain-link fencing is not
appropriate and detracts from the character of the Springvale
Village Design District Overlay Zone.
(b) When a fence is proposed in front of a building, it shall be open
and low, not exceeding 42 inches in height, so as not to block
views. Fences shall be compatible with the building and
neighborhood in style and proportion and shall enhance the
streetscape.
(c) More-solid, taller fences are appropriate to provide privacy or
safety but should be located where they have minimal visual
impact appropriate to the structure and surrounding area. Five
to six feet shall be the recommended maximum height.
(d) Wherever fences are located, care shall be taken to modulate
the length so as not to create a visual or pedestrian barrier.
Landscaping shall be considered in combination with fencing
to relieve the visual monotony of a long fence.
§ 280-15-11 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-11
252:748
(7) Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone additional
screening and landscaping standards.
(a) The setback area between a building and the street shall be
appropriately landscaped so as to contribute positively to the
character and image of the Springvale Village Design District
Overlay Zone. Lawn, planting beds, and/or plant containers
shall be strongly encouraged. Native shade trees shall be the
preferred planting along Main Street and major side streets,
supplemented with ornamental trees, shrubs, perennials, and
annuals to accent pedestrian spaces, building, and site design
and to provide visual interest and seasonal color.
(b) Paved or gravel surfaces, even if not for parking, are not
appropriate for the front yard/setback area.
(c) In addition to fences, stone walls and hedges shall be
appropriate site amenities. Examples of walls or hedges found
in Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone provide
visual guidance for appropriate design.
(d) Landscaping and fencing shall not block a vehicle's sight
distance for a driveway or other service/access drive and shall
allow for pedestrian access from the street to the building and
access to off-street parking.
(e) Dumpsters and other trash bins shall be sited to the rear of the
primary building, unless this area is environmentally sensitive.
Regardless of the location, dumpsters and other trash bins
shall be adequately screened with fencing and/or landscaping,
if not enclosed in a shed. Other unsightly site features,
including utility equipment, shall be screened to the extent
possible, without compromising necessary access for
maintenance.
(8) Lighting standards.
(a) Illumination levels shall be of sufficient intensity to provide
security but not overpower the nightscape. Illumination shall
be low level, low glare, shielded, directed downward, and
contained on the property. Warm shades of LED lights are
encouraged.
(b) Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone additional
lighting standards.
[1] Provide exterior lighting to highlight landscaped areas,
feature walls, and provide visual interest.
[2] Provide security lighting where appropriate.
§ 280-15-11 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-11
252:749
[3] No flashing, blinking, or colored lighting, except for
Christmas lighting, shall be permitted. Incandescent or
other warm-colored lighting is preferred.
(c) Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone additional
lighting standards.
[1] These lighting standards shall apply to architectural and
exterior light fixtures on a building, porch, deck, pathway,
driveway, or on a post.
[2] The intensity and distribution of light shall be taken into
account in applying these standards, particularly as it
affects neighboring properties and the ambience of the
neighborhood or district.
[3] Lamps and light bulbs, in general, shall be fully shielded
inside the fixture so that the lamp/bulb itself is not visible
from adjacent buildings, or by pedestrians, and/or
motorists. A carriage-lamp-style light shall have glass
translucent enough to reduce glare.
[4] Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone uplighting
and facade lighting standards.
[a] Uplighting to highlight facades, signs, fountains,
waterfalls, and landscaping shall be minimized to
reduce glare and light pollution. Lighting of building
facades and significant natural features shall be done
judiciously, perhaps limited to special buildings or
features that have architectural or cultural
significance or character.
[b] For signage, lighting from the ground shall be
adequately shielded such as with landscaping.
[c] Landscape lighting, such as wash lighting of trees, is
not appropriate within the Springvale Village Design
District Overlay Zone.
(9) Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone outdoor activity
standards.
(a) Outdoor activity areas are vital if the Sanford Downtown
Design District Overlay Zone is to project a vibrant
atmosphere.
(b) Outdoor activity areas should be created.
[1] Consider providing outdoor activity areas to accommodate
a range of ages and activity levels.
§ 280-15-11 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-11
252:750
[2] Seating areas and restaurants overlooking pedestrian,
landscaped and/or natural areas and other prominent
viewpoints shall be encouraged.
[3] Outdoor seating areas are encouraged where appropriate
and shall conform to the pedestrian right-of-way
requirements in § 280-15-11F(2)(c)[2].
(10) Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone solar access
standards.
(a) Design shall preserve sunlight on neighboring outdoor or
indoor spaces for uses intended for outdoor use/activities,
particularly late afternoon sun.
(b) The building design and placement should create sheltered
sunny pockets in public spaces and on neighboring properties
to encourage use in winter months.
(11) Signage standards.
(a) Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone additional
signage standards.
[1] Comprehensive signage plans shall be required as part of
the permit application on all new structures.
[2] Signage shall be low-key and coordinated with the
architectural features and finishes of each building.
[3] Front-lighting of signs is encouraged, although some
limited backlighting is permitted.
[4] Exterior neon is subject to close scrutiny for its
relationship to building design. Neon shall be subject to
strict maintenance requirements.
[5] Signage shall conform with requirements of this chapter.
(b) Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone signage
standards.
[1] Sign material, style and color shall complement the
building facade.
[2] Window signs or signs painted/etched onto a window shall
not cover more than 25% of the window.
[3] Font style shall be encouraged to be an historic/traditional
lettering style; fonts and lettering that are overly ornate or
otherwise unreadable shall be strongly discouraged.
[4] The following sign styles or features are not allowed in the
Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone:
§ 280-15-11 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-11
252:751
[a] Internally illuminated or translucent plastic signs,
flashing elements, or elements that move or change its
brightness.
[b] Use of fluorescent or neon colors.
[c] Signs attached to or projecting from the roof.
[d] Signs that mask the architectural details of a building
or whose design dominates the building facade.
[5] The following sign styles or features are appropriate for
the Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone:
[a] Wooden signs, or a sign material that has the look of
traditional wood signage, including but not limited to
vinyl, as well as traditional wrought-iron signposts or
brackets may be appropriate.
[b] Hanging signs, such as from a post or projecting from
the building.
[c] Freestanding signs with two posts.
[d] Wall signs on building facades, placed just above the
storefront and appropriately proportioned to the front
facade.
F. Architecture standards.
(1) Building mass, scale and height standards.
(a) New buildings or additions to existing buildings shall not be
visibly out of scale with neighboring buildings or otherwise out
of scale with Sanford Downtown or Springvale Village Design
District Overlay Zones, respectively.
(b) Building heights shall be compatible with adjacent structures.
(c) The size or bulk of the building shall conform to those nearby;
larger buildings shall be broken down architecturally to match
the scale, rhythm and proportion of adjacent structures.
(d) The following features, among others, shall be considered as
potential elements to help break down building scale:
projecting bays, projecting or recessed balconies, and gables
and dormers, judiciously utilized to provide interest,
individuality, and appropriate scale to new structures; distinct
and multiple architectural roof forms, clearly pronounced
eaves, distinct parapet designs and cornice treatments;
porches, covered walkways, trellises or architectural awnings
that provide varying degrees of shade and sun at ground level.
§ 280-15-11 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-11
252:752
(e) Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone additional
building mass, scale, and height standards. Two- to three-story
buildings are more traditional in and shall be encouraged in
the Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone.
(2) Architectural style/character standards.
(a) Building designs and treatments that express corporate,
franchise, or trademark identity shall not take precedence over
these design standards; such development shall conform to the
historic, site design, and architectural considerations in these
standards. Corporate or franchise developments shall be
compatible with the visual character of the Sanford Downtown
or Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zones.
(b) Variation in design.
[1] Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone. Although
there is some variation in architectural styles in the
Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone, new
development shall be compatible with the general area.
[2] Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone. Although
there is some variation in architectural styles in the
Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone, new
development should be done in a traditional New England
Village architectural style. See examples in the Planning
Department.
(c) Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone building
design standards.
[1] Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone building
character and scale standards.
[a] Facade design shall display consideration of all sides
of the building.
[b] The scale of a building shall be visually compatible
with its site and neighborhood.
[2] Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone
walkways, entries, and overhangs standards.
[a] Width of covered walkways shall span the sidewalk, if
applicable, or be a minimum of six feet wide and nine
feet high.
[b] The weight of snow on top of and shed from covered
walkways shall be planned for.
[c] All building access shall be designed to provide
convenient and safe access for disabled persons, the
§ 280-15-11 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-11
252:753
elderly, baby carriages, and others. Sidewalks and
walkways shall be free of barriers.
[d] All walkways shall be designed to maintain visual
continuity of eave lines, materials at base, soffits,
fasciae, and grade at entry locations. New walkways
shall be fully coordinated with adjoining walkways.
[e] Shop facades shall be designed as individual entities,
to strengthen their character and interest to
pedestrians. Continuous linear shop fronts are
discouraged.
[f] Outdoor display areas shall be identified as part of
applications. Such areas shall not interfere with
pedestrian circulation.
[g] Upper-floor design. Decks, balconies, and porches are
strongly encouraged as they provide sunny, usable
outdoor space and add life and interest to the street.
(d) Architectural details.
[1] Craftsmanship, ornamentation, and architectural details
shall be strongly encouraged. Architectural details shall
include the design features of elements including but not
limited to doors, windows, dormers, porches, balconies,
and decorative details such as cornices, columns,
pediments, railings, and similar features. Large or small,
these details play a key role in defining the style and
character of a building and deserve particular attention
and respect.
[2] Detailing that relates to and reflects the character of the
area shall be encouraged. Vernacular architectural
features help tie together the character of the Sanford
Downtown and Springvale Village Design District Overlay
Zones.
[3] Roof design standards. Roof design is important for snow
management and is a major contributor to design
character. Roofscapes are important design elements that
are viewed by pedestrians. Sloped roofs shed accumulated
snow in avalanche fashion and can be dangerous to
pedestrians below. The design of roofs and pedestrian
areas below them is referred to as snow management and
is discussed in this subsection.
[a] The angle of a sloped roof should be typical of
traditional New England architecture, approximating
a 12:12 pitch. A sloped roof with a flattened pitch is
§ 280-15-11 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-11
252:754
generally not appropriate for the Springvale Village
Design District Overlay Zones.
[b] Sanford Downtown Design District Overlay Zone
additional roof standards.
[i] Roof form shall be modulated and broken up with
the use of dormers or other architectural features.
The ridgeline shall not be continuous but shall be
varied in height or broken with chimneys,
cupolas, towers, or other features.
[ii] Roofs of connected buildings shall be fully
coordinated with adjoining eaves, peaks, gables,
and slopes. Consider the color of neighboring
roofs to create a complementary roof palette:
avoid selecting strongly contrasting colors.
[iii] Roof materials. Consider the effects of climate
and snow management in selecting roofing
materials.
[iv] Roof-mounted equipment shall be concealed.
Satellite dishes, communications antennas and
mechanical equipment shall be planned as part of
the roof so they are concealed from all pedestrian
viewpoints and overlooking development.
[v] Where appropriate in Sanford's Downtown, a flat
roof may be permissible if the building is
multistory and of traditional downtown
architecture and use, including but not limited to
a retail/pedestrian-oriented first floor, office/
residential upper floors, differentiated upper
facade, articulated parapet, and decorative
cornice. Existing buildings of this style shall be
maintained for architectural and/or historic
integrity.
[c] Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone
additional roof standards.
[i] Sloped gable or hip roofs are most appropriate for
the Springvale Village Design District Overlay
Zone. Gambrel, shed, mansard, false mansard, or
flat roofs are not allowed.
[ii] Dormers are an effective way to break up the
mass of a sloped roof and add architectural
interest and are a typical feature of New England
architecture. Dormers shall be of an appropriate
proportion and size relative to the building.
§ 280-15-11 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-11
252:755
[4] Street facade standards.
[a] The front facade of both residential and nonresidential
buildings, particularly the main entrance, shall be
oriented to Main Street, or another primary street
frontage if it does not front on Main Street. If an
existing main entrance is not located along the
primary street frontage, the front facade shall be
appropriately designed to contribute to the
pedestrian-friendly character.
[b] For buildings that are sited on a corner lot which
fronts on more than one street, the front facade shall
be oriented toward the primary street frontage, while
a secondary entrance or other appropriate facade
treatment is strongly encouraged for the side street.
[5] Entrance standards.
[a] Principal building entrances shall be accented, and
easily visible from the street to contribute to the
pedestrian-friendly character. This may be achieved
through the design of the doorway and doorway
architectural treatments, by recessing the entry, by
adding a porch or pediment for the front door
providing shelter or by other means to enhance the
entrance.
[b] Service entrances and loading facilities should be
located at the rear or side of structures and screened
from public view. Where buildings face more than one
public street, service and loading circulation shall be
located along secondary streets where appropriate.
Where no off-street options are available, loading and
service entrances located along public streets shall
occupy the minimum space necessary and be
compatible with the other uses of the street, including
pedestrian activities and retail development.
[6] Proportion and spacing of openings, including but not
limited to windows and doors.
[a] Blank exterior walls without doors, windows, or other
architectural features to break up a building's mass
shall be avoided. Street facades in particular shall not
be blank but have an appropriate rhythm of windows
and doors.
[b] Windows and doors shall be appropriately scaled,
vertically oriented, and placed in a regularly spaced
pattern. Symmetry of openings on the street facade is
traditional, though not essential.
§ 280-15-11 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-11
252:756
[c] False windows are discouraged; however, where the
interior layout or function of a building does not
accommodate windows, the judicious use of false
windows may be acceptable. The use of other
architectural or natural elements, including but not
limited to, murals or plantings, which offer vertical
contrast, may be an acceptable alternative, however,
the quality, subject, and maintenance of murals should
be carefully considered.
[7] Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone windows
and window treatment standards.
[a] Avoid modern window styles that are not compatible
with traditional New England architecture.
[b] Square or vertical windows, with divided panes to add
scale to large window openings, are preferred.
[c] The style of window shall be consistent throughout the
building or addition. Visual unity and harmony are
usually achieved when the same window style and
scale is used consistently on all visible facades.
[d] Shutters shall reflect their original use. That is, their
size shall be such that they will cover the entire
window if closed; arched windows shall have arched
shutters. Shutters shall be hung so as to appear
operable, and shutter dimensions shall be based on
window dimensions. The slats shall point up when
shutters are open, and down when closed over the
window.
[e] Awnings shall not detract from the form of the
building or obscure its details. Traditional canvas
awnings shall be encouraged; plastic or metal awnings
shall be discouraged.
[8] Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone porch
standards.
[a] Size, proportions, style, detailing, decorations, and
features such as columns and railings are important
elements of a porch design. Whether on a residential
or nonresidential building, the design shall be
consistent with the architecture and scale of the rest
of the building. Other porches found in the Springvale
Village Design District Overlay Zone should provide
visual guidance for appropriate architectural design
and features.
§ 280-15-11 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-11
252:757
[b] Decks and patios shall be located at the rear or side of
a building and, if visible from a public way, shall be
compatible visually with the design of the structure.
Appropriate vegetative screening shall be provided.
[9] Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone exterior
building materials.
[a] Traditional exterior building materials, including
wood clapboard, native stone, or brick, are most
appropriate and strongly encouraged.
[b] Concrete block and metal siding are not allowed; the
use of concrete should be restricted to foundations.
Stucco is not traditional for the Springvale Village
Design District Overlay Zone and is not allowed.
[c] Synthetic or imitation materials, including but not
limited to vinyl siding, may be acceptable if they
replicate traditional materials. As other new materials
are developed that are indistinguishable from natural
or traditional products, they may be considered
favorably.
[10] Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone paint and
exterior color standards.
[a] Traditional New England building colors shall be
strongly encouraged. Bright or electric colors shall
not suitable for siding or trim. Softer or muted colors,
light or dark, tend to be more traditional. Matching
colors with neighboring buildings is not necessarily
encouraged, but choosing a color palate that does not
clash with adjacent buildings is.
[b] A well-selected color palate can greatly enhance a
building's character, in addition to architectural
details. Appropriate accent colors shall be chosen for
the trim, doors, and other architectural elements.
[11] Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone accessory
structure standards.
[a] Accessory structures, including but not limited to a
garage or shed, shall be set back from the street
further than the front facade of the principal structure
so that the principal structure is more prominent.
[b] Adding trim, windows and other architectural details
to accessory structures shall be strongly encouraged
to bring them into scale and visual harmony with the
principal structure. For example, a garage might
§ 280-15-11 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-11
252:758
§ 280-15-12. Solar energy systems. [Added 3-7-2017 by Order No.
17-31.07]
feature the same siding, color scheme and trim, even
window style, as the principal structure.
[12] Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zone gas
station canopy and drive-through standards.
[a] New or replaced canopies over gas pumps shall be
visually sensitive to the neighborhood in color and
design. Use of bright colors shall be discouraged.
Canpony design shall be encouraged to be
architecturally compatible with the principal
structure, if appropriate, and the preferred Springvale
Village Design District Overlay Zone architectural
character described in these standards.
[b] Canopies and drive-throughs shall be aligned to the
building and sited to conform to all other setback and
traffic circulation requirements.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to regulate solar energy
systems, allow the City to be informed of the placement of solar energy
systems, preserve and protect public health and safety, allow for orderly
development of land, and protect property values.
B. Standards.
(1) A residential solar system (RSS) shall:
(a) Comply with the setback and height requirements of the
zoning district in which the system is to be installed.
(b) Comply with the provisions of all applicable requirements of
the City's building, electrical, fire, and other health safety and
technical codes, including but not limited to Chapter 90,
Building Construction, and Chapter 128, Fire Prevention.
(c) Be installed so as not to cause any wire or wireless
communication signal disturbance.
(d) Be sited to prevent glare onto abutting properties, structures,
and roadways.
(e) Be removed if it has not produced power for a period of 12
consecutive months.
(2) A commercial solar system (CSS) and utility solar system (USS)
shall:
(a) Comply with the requirements of Article XVI, Site Plan Review.
§ 280-15-11 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-12
252:759
(b) Comply with the setback and height requirements of the
zoning district in which the system is to be installed.
(c) Comply with the provisions of all applicable requirements of
the City's building, electrical, fire, and other health safety and
technical codes, including but not limited to Chapter 90,
Building Construction, and Chapter 128, Fire Prevention.
(d) Comply with the industrial performance standards specified in
§ 280-15-3.
(e) Secure all ground-mounted electrical and control equipment to
prevent unauthorized access. The ground-mounted facility
shall be enclosed within a minimum seven-foot-tall fence with
locking gate and Knox-Box® to provide emergency access. The
type of fence shall be appropriate for security, screening, and/
or other purposes and shall be similar to and/or compatible
with the style of fences used within 1,000 feet of the property
boundary.
(f) Install all electrical wires and utility connections, except for
transformers and controls, underground to the greatest
practical extent. The Planning Board shall consider prohibitive
costs and site limitations if asked to waive this standard.
(g) Limit exterior lighting to that required for safety and
operational purposes.
(h) All signs shall meet the specifications of § 280-14-13.
(i) Be appropriate to the surroundings and minimize
environmental and visual impacts on adjoining properties,
including:
[1] Screening ground-mounted installations from view by
abutting residential properties using vegetation,
topography, and/or fencing.
[2] Using a manufactured finish appropriate to and
compatible with the surroundings, with reflective
characteristics that minimize negative visual impacts to
the greatest practical extent.
(j) Be removed if it has not produced power for a period of 12
consecutive months. In the event of a natural disaster, act of
violence, or other event which results in the absence of
electrical generation for 12 months, by the end of the 12th
month of nonoperation the applicant shall demonstrate to the
City that the project shall be substantially operational and
producing electricity within 24 months of the event. If such a
demonstration is not made to the City's satisfaction, the
decommissioning shall be initiated 18 months after the event.
§ 280-15-12 SANFORD CODE § 280-15-12
252:760
(k) A performance guarantee in compliance with Article XVII shall
be provided prior to initiating construction. The performance
guarantee shall provide adequate funds to cover the total cost
of decommissioning. Every five years after the start of
construction, updated proof of the cost of decommissioning
shall be submitted to the City Engineer. If the amount of the
current performance guarantee is inadequate to cover the total
cost of decommissioning, the applicant shall provide a new
performance guarantee in an amount which is adequate to
cover the total cost of decommissioning.
§ 280-15-12 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-15-12
252:761

ARTICLE XVI
Site Plan Review
§ 280-16-1. Planning Director.
This article shall be administered by the Planning Director, except that the
Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for enforcement.
§ 280-16-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures and standards to
enable the City to review applications for the development of nonresidential
and multifamily residential uses.
§ 280-16-3. Site plan approval required.
A. Site plan approval shall be required for any of the following:
(1) The construction of any new building or structure, or the expansion
of an existing building or structure for any use identified in this
chapter as permitted with site plan review or conditional use.
(2) The establishment of a use identified as permitted with site plan
review or conditional use that does not involve a building or
structure.
(3) The construction or expansion of a ground-mounted commercial or
utility solar system. [Added 3-7-2017 by Order No. 17-31.07]
(4) Existing buildings:
(a) The change in use of an existing building from one use that is
permitted with site plan review or conditional to another use
that is permitted with site plan review or conditional, but only
if one or both of the following are met:
[1] The new use requires more off-street parking in
accordance with this chapter than the previous use; or
[2] Changes in site development are proposed, including but
not limited to traffic movement into and through the site,
the amount, layout, and location of parking, or provisions
for stormwater drainage, lighting, or buffering of adjacent
uses.
(b) A change in occupancy of an existing building or use that
replaces one use that is permitted with site plan review or
conditional with another use that is permitted with site plan
review or conditional that does not increase the parking
requirement or result in changes to site development shall not
require site plan review.
§ 280-16-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-16-3
252:763
§ 280-16-4. Classification of projects.
Projects subject to site plan review shall be divided into two classes: major
developments and minor developments.
(5) The change in use of an existing building or structure from
permitted to permitted with site plan review or conditional.
(6) The construction or expansion of parking areas to serve a
permitted with site plan review or conditional use involving an area
of more than 2,000 square feet in any three-year period.
(7) The creation of a private way.
B. This section does not apply to the construction or modification of singlefamily
or two-family homes, the placement of manufactured housing on
individual lots, agriculture, forest management and timber harvesting
activities, or any permitted use that is identified in this chapter.
C. No land, building or structure shall be used or occupied and no building
permit, sign permit, plumbing permit, or certificate of occupancy shall
be issued for a development within the scope of this chapter unless and
until a final plan of the development has been approved in accordance
with the procedures set forth below.
A. Major development. A major development shall be any project which
requires site plan approval and which meets any one of the following
criteria. In addition, the Site Plan Review Committee may, by formal
vote, reclassify a minor development to a major development if it finds,
because of the scale or complexity of the proposal, that it has
implications similar to projects defined as major developments.
(1) Involves the construction of 30,000 square feet or more of gross
floor area.
(2) Involves the creation of 10 or more dwelling units.
(3) Is designated as a conditional use in this chapter.
(4) Involves the establishment or the construction or expansion of a
building or structure for any of the following categories of uses as
set forth in the Table of Land Uses.109 An expansion of a building or
structure for any of these uses involving the creation of 2,000
square feet or more of gross floor area shall be classified as a major
development. Projects involving an expansion of less than 2,000
square feet shall be classified as a minor development, except that
the establishment of a child-care center or nursery school for 13 or
more children and/or an adult day services center for 13 or more
clients shall be classified as a major development. [Amended
8-21-2018 by Order No. 18-348-01]
109. Editor's Note: The Table of Land Uses is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 280-16-3 SANFORD CODE § 280-16-4
252:764
(a) The keeping of pigs, chickens, and fowl for commercial
purposes, except in the Rural Residential or Rural Mixed Use
Zones.
(b) Mineral extraction.
(c) The reuse of existing agricultural buildings for nonagricultural
purposes.
(d) Mobile home parks.
(e) Expansions of existing mobile home parks.
(f) Convalescent, rest, or nursing homes.
(g) Boarding or congregate care facilities.
(h) Child-care centers or nursery schools for 13 or more children
and/or adult day services center for 13 or more clients.
(i) Private schools and colleges.
(j) Nonprofit clubs and lodges.
(k) Fully enclosed places of recreation.
(l) Campgrounds.
(m) Drinking places.
(n) Drive-through eating places.
(o) Unenclosed storage of unregistered cars, junk cars, or junked
car parts.
(p) Petroleum product storage.
(q) Churches.
(r) Nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary.
(5) An amendment to a previously approved site plan for a major
development involving the construction of 5,000 square feet or
more of gross floor area.
(6) Involves the construction or expansion of 30,000 square feet or
more of a ground-mounted commercial or utility solar system.
[Added 3-7-2017 by Order No. 17-31.07]
B. Minor development. Any project which requires site plan approval and
is not classified as a major development shall be a minor development.
[Amended 3-7-2017 by Order No. 17-31.07]
(1) Developmental review.
§ 280-16-4 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-16-4
252:765
§ 280-16-5. Review and approval authority.
(2) Uses designated as permitted with site plan review in the Table of
Land Uses.
(3) Private way.
(4) Staff review.
C. Design standards. Any development on a parcel that is located in the
Sanford Downtown or Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zones
shall require review by and a recommendation to the Planning Board by
the Design Review Committee.
A. Major developments. The Planning Board is authorized to review and
act, after recommendation by the Site Plan Review Committee, on all
site plans for major developments. In considering site plans under this
article, the Planning Board may act to approve, disapprove or approve
the project with such conditions as are authorized by this article.
B. Minor developments. The Site Plan Review Committee is authorized to
review all site plans for minor developments, except as authorized
under § 280-16-4B(4), and may approve, disapprove, or approve the
project with such conditions authorized by this article. In addition, the
Site Plan Review Committee may reclassify a minor development to a
major development set forth in this article and forward it to the
Planning Board with recommendations for Planning Board action.
C. Site Plan Review Committee.
(1) Composition and quorum.
(a) The Site Plan Review Committee shall be comprised of the
following nine members. A member of each member's
respective organization may serve as an alternate in the event
that a member is unable to attend a scheduled Site Plan
Review Committee meeting. A quorum shall be defined as a
minimum of five members.
[1] A representative of the City Council;
[2] The Fire Chief or designee;
[3] The Police Chief or designee;
[4] The City Engineer or the Public Works Director; and
[5] The Planning Director.
[6] The Superintendent of the Water District;
[7] The Superintendent of the Sewerage District;
[8] A representative of the Planning Board;
§ 280-16-4 SANFORD CODE § 280-16-5
252:766
[9] The Code Enforcement Officer; and
(b) The Planning Director shall serve as Chair of the Site Plan
Review Committee and shall be responsible for scheduling its
meetings.
(2) Powers and duties. The Site Plan Review Committee shall:
(a) Review and approve applications for minor developments; and
(b) Advise the Planning Board on applications for major
developments.
(3) Procedures. The Site Plan Review Committee may, after advance
notice and hearing, adopt reasonable written regulations to govern
the conduct of its meetings, provided that such regulations are not
inconsistent with any applicable statute or ordinance.
(4) Appeals. Any action of the Site Plan Review Committee may be
appealed to the Planning Board by the applicant, any abutter to the
project and the owners of any parcel abutting within 250 feet of the
subject parcel, and any other party who participated in the
consideration of the application. The appeal shall be made in
writing to the Planning Department within 15 days of final action
by the Site Plan Review Committee.
D. Design Review Committee.
(1) Creation, officers, and purpose.
(a) Creation. The Design Review Committee shall consist of a
minimum of five and a maximum of seven members. Members
shall serve alternating two-year terms. Up to three members of
the Planning Board shall serve on the Design Review
Committee. The remaining four members shall be nominated
by the City Manager and approved by majority vote of the
Planning Board. Design Review Committee members shall live
or work in the City. In the nomination and appointment of
members, the goal shall be to include members with a
combination of educational, professional, and life experiences
with design and development related issues. In the event of a
vacancy the Chair shall notify the City Manager. [Amended
10-2-2018 by Order No. 18-426-01]
(b) Officers. The Design Review Committee shall elect a Chair and
Secretary. The Planning Director shall notify the Chair when
there is a proposed development which requires review and
comment by the Design Review Committee. The Chair shall call
meetings as required, chair all meetings, maintain
communications and report the status of all projects to the
Planning Director and Planning Board in a timely manner. The
Secretary shall maintain meeting minutes for all meetings with
§ 280-16-5 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-16-5
252:767
applicants, distribute meeting minutes to the Planning
Director and other parties, as appropriate, and handle written
communication of the Design Review Committee.
(c) Purpose. To help the owner, developer, architect, and other
consultants understand the basic design goals that have been
adopted for development of Sanford Downtown and Springvale
Village Design District Overlay Zones and provide the Planning
Board and Code Enforcement Officer with a yardstick against
which proposed development can be measured. Applicants are
invited to submit creative and imaginative projects which build
on the Design Review Standards and contribute to the overall
form and character of Sanford Downtown and Springvale
Village Design District Overlay Zones. [Amended 10-2-2018
by Order No. 18-426-01]
(2) Powers and duties. [Amended 10-2-2018 by Order No.
18-426-01]
(a) Responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of the Design
Review Committee to encourage new development and
renovation within the designated Sanford Downtown and
Springvale Village Design District Overlay Zones to achieve the
purpose, objectives, and standards of the Design Review
Standards. The Design Review Committee shall advise the
Planning Director, the Planning Board, the Code Enforcement
Officer, and the applicant and, in that capacity, may make
recommendations concerning project design proposals as it
deems appropriate.
(b) Review and recommendation to the Planning Director,
Planning Board, and/or Code Enforcement Officer.
[1] All applicants are encouraged to meet with the Design
Review Committee early in the design process but prior to
submitting an application for site plan review or building,
sign, or other permits for exterior improvements and/or
modification. There is no formal submission requirement
for this preliminary discussion, though general site plans,
building sketches, photographs, and other illustrations,
sufficient to convey the general intent and approach to
conforming with the basic design standards, are
encouraged. The Design Review Committee may make
general comments and suggestions to help meet the
standards. The applicant may request additional meetings
with the Design Review Committee as the proposed design
is developed or revised.
[2] When the applicant is prepared for formal review by the
Design Review Committee, s/he shall submit a cover letter
describing proposed improvements and/or changes and
§ 280-16-5 SANFORD CODE § 280-16-5
252:768
§ 280-16-6. Scheduling, submission, fee, and review procedures.
one copy of proposed design plans, drawings, and other
illustrations to the Planning Department for review by the
Design Review Committee. The Planning Director shall
work with the Chair of the Design Review Committee to
schedule a meeting to review the plans, drawings, and
other illustrations and notify the Design Review
Committee, applicant, and public of the scheduled
meeting. Following its review, the Planning Director shall
prepare a written summary and recommendations and
forward it to the applicant and/or Code Enforcement
Officer prior to Planning Board review of the site plan
application or building, sign, or other permit.
[3] If further revisions to a project plan are made during
Planning Board or Code Enforcement review, the Design
Review Committee may, at its discretion or the request of
the Planning Board, Code Enforcement Officer, or
Planning Director, review the revised plans and modify its
recommendations accordingly.
E. Staff review. The Planning Director, with concurrence from the Code
Enforcement Officer and City Engineer, is authorized to review,
approve, disapprove or approve with conditions the following minor site
plans:
(1) The reconstruction of any conforming structures;
(2) The construction/reconstruction of preexisting nonconforming
structures that are within the same footprint;
(3) Construction which does not increase any of the following: the
building footprint by more than 500 square feet; impervious
coverage by more than 500 square feet; parking demand; or any
conditions of a previous approval.
(4) Any project when directed by the Planning Board.
A. Preapplication meeting.
(1) The applicant shall initiate the application process by either
requesting a building permit from the Code Enforcement Officer
and being instructed to obtain a site plan permit from the Planning
Director or by directly scheduling a preapplication meeting with
the Planning Director. The purpose of this meeting is to familiarize
the applicant with the review procedures and submission
requirements, review the approval criteria and standards, and
familiarize the Planning Director with the nature of the project. No
decisions relative to the plan may be made at this meeting. The
Planning Director may ask representatives of other departments
§ 280-16-5 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-16-6
252:769
and agencies to participate in the conference. In this meeting, the
Planning Director will confirm the classification of the application.
(2) If the application is classified as a minor site plan, the Planning
Director may determine that an on-site inspection is needed to
familiarize the Site Plan Review Committee with the project site.
The on-site inspection shall be scheduled by the Planning Director
and shall be attended by the applicant and/or the applicant's
representative and members of the Site Plan Review Committee.
B. Application preparation.
(1) Using the most current application form, which is available from
the Planning Department, the applicant shall submit a formal
application for review and approval to the Planning Department,
consistent with the requirements of § 280-16-6G and the
classification assigned under this article.
(2) Upon receipt of an application, the Planning Department shall
provide the applicant with a dated receipt showing the nature of
the application and the fees paid.
C. Review for completeness. Within seven days of receipt of an application
the Planning Director shall review and determine if it is complete. The
Planning Director shall review any request for waivers from the
submission requirements and shall act on these requests prior to
determining the completeness of the application; provided, however,
that if the Planning Board determines that such submission is
necessary, the information shall be required to be submitted. If the
application is lacking required information, the Planning Director shall
notify the applicant in writing of this determination and the action on
any waivers and shall provide copies of the application to all official and
ex officio members of the Site Plan Review Committee. If the
application is incomplete, the Planning Director shall notify the
applicant in writing of this determination, specify what additional
materials or information is required to complete the application, and
advise the applicant that the revised application package will be rereviewed
for completeness when it is resubmitted. Once the application
has been found complete, the Planning Director shall provide copies of
the application information to all members of the Site Plan Review
Committee and schedule it for the next available Committee meeting
which will be at least two weeks from the date the application is
determined to be complete.
D. Notice to abutters.
(1) Once an application is determined to be complete and at least
seven days prior to the date of its scheduled review, the Planning
Director shall provide written notice to all abutters within 250 feet
of the property boundaries, including those in neighboring towns, if
applicable, that an application has been filed. This notice shall
contain a brief description of the proposed activity, the name of the
§ 280-16-6 SANFORD CODE § 280-16-6
252:770
applicant, the location where the application is available for
inspection, how written comments on the application may be
submitted and will be considered by the reviewing committee,
and the date, time, and location at which the application will be
considered. Failure of any abutter to receive such notice shall
not be grounds for delay of consideration of the application and
approval or denial of the project.
(2) No notification of abutters is required for an amendment of a
previously reviewed and permitted site plan which is classified for
staff review under this article.
E. Public hearing.
(1) A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Board on a major site
plan application prior to its taking action. The Planning
Department shall publish notice of the public hearing in a
newspaper having general distribution in the City at least seven
days prior to the hearing.
(2) Following the public hearing, the Planning Board shall consider the
application and its conformance with site plan approval criteria and
standards. Within 60 days of the public hearing, the Planning Board
shall complete its review of and take action on the application. The
Planning Board may extend this review period with the consent of
the applicant.
F. Waivers. The applicant may request a waiver of any submission
requirement in its site plan application. The request shall be in writing
at the time of submission of the application and shall specify why the
waiver is being sought. The Planning Director shall review any requests
for waivers and may grant requested waivers for the purpose of
presenting the application to the reviewing committee. The reviewing
committee may approve, deny, or approve the requested waivers with
conditions.
G. Submission requirements. The application for site plan review shall
contain the following exhibits and information:
(1) Application elements. The application shall consist of:
(a) Three hard copies of all required written materials, plans,
maps, and drawings and one CD of digital pdf files of all the
information submitted as hard copies. The application shall
contain the information listed below. The written materials
shall be contained in a single report. The plans, maps, and
drawings shall be at an accurate scale sufficient to allow
review of the items listed under approval criteria, but in no
case shall it be more than 50 feet to the inch for that portion of
the land being proposed for development.
§ 280-16-6 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-16-6
252:771
(b) A fully executed and signed copy of the application for site plan
review.
(c) The required application and development review fees.
(d) A complete list of abutters within 250 feet of property
boundaries of the site, together with a set of mailing envelopes,
stamped with first class postage, that are addressed to each
abutter on the list and includes the Planning Department's
return address. Two sets of stamped and addressed mailing
envelopes will be required for major developments.
(2) Required information.
(a) General information.
[1] Record owner's name, address, and phone number and
applicant's name, address and phone number, if different.
[2] Location of all building setbacks, yards and buffers
required by this chapter.
[3] Names and addresses of all abutting property owners and
the owners of any parcel abutting an abutter if it is located
within 250 feet of the subject parcel, including those in
neighboring towns, if applicable.
[4] Reduction of the City Tax Map showing the general
location of the site.
[5] Boundaries of all contiguous property under the control of
the owner or applicant, regardless of whether all or part is
being developed at this time.
[6] Assessing Tax Map and lot number of the parcel or parcels.
[7] Copy of the deed to the property, option to purchase the
property or other documentation to demonstrate right,
title or interest in the property on the part of the applicant.
[8] General description of the proposed activity or use.
(b) Existing conditions.
[1] Zoning classifications of the property, including shoreland,
floodplain, and overlay zones, if applicable, and the
location of zoning boundaries if the property is located in
two or more zones or abuts a different zone.
[2] Location and size of existing sewer and water mains,
culverts and drains, on-site sewage disposal systems,
wells, and power and telephone lines and poles on the
property to be developed and of any that will serve the
development from abutting streets or land.
§ 280-16-6 SANFORD CODE § 280-16-6
252:772
[3] Location, names, and widths of existing streets and rightsof-
way within or adjacent to the proposed development.
[4] Location, dimensions and ground floor elevations of all
existing buildings on the site.
[5] Location and dimensions of existing driveways, streets,
parking and loading areas and walkways on the site.
[6] Location of intersecting roads or driveways within 200 feet
of the site.
[7] Location of open drainagecourses, floodplains, wetland
boundaries, stands of trees, major trees, and other
important natural features, with a description of features
to be retained.
[8] Direction of existing surface water drainage across the
site.
[9] Location, front view and dimensions of existing signs.
[10] Location and dimensions of any existing easements and
copies of existing covenants or deed restrictions.
[11] Location of the nearest fire hydrant, dry hydrant or other
water supply for fire protection and description of any
existing fire protection systems.
(c) Proposed development activity.
[1] Location and dimensions of provisions for water supply
and wastewater disposal and evidence of their adequacy
for the proposed use or expansion of use, including test pit
data if on-site sewage disposal is proposed. If the project
will be served by the Sewerage District and/or Water
District, provide letters from the respective districts
indicating approval of the provisions and the adequacy of
systems to accommodate the proposed use.
[2] Direction of proposed surface water drainage across the
site and provisions for drainage handling, including the
size, location, and pertinent elevations of culverts.
[3] Provisions for handling solid wastes, including the location
and proposed treatment of any on-site collection or
storage facilities.
[4] Location, dimensions, and ground floor elevations of all
proposed buildings or expansion on the site.
[5] Location and dimensions of proposed driveways, parking
and loading areas, and walkways.
§ 280-16-6 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-16-6
252:773
[6] Location, front view, materials, and dimensions of
proposed signs, together with methods for securing the
sign.
[7] Location and type of exterior lighting.
[8] Landscaping plan showing the type, size, and location of
shrubs, trees, and other plants to be installed at the site.
[9] Location and nature of all electrical, telephone, and other
utilities, including fire protection systems, to be installed
at the site.
[10] Evidence that the Federal Aviation Administration has
been notified of the proposed development if the building
or structure is taller than existing surrounding structures
or the natural terrain and encroaches on the imaginary
surface of the Airport as specified in Section 77.13 of Part
77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations.
(d) Supplemental information.
[1] If the Planning Director determines that the project has
potentially significant adverse impact on traffic flow, safety
or the environment, s/he shall recommend that the project
be classified as a major development.
[2] The Planning Director may require the applicant to
provide a boundary survey of the parcel if the property
lines are not clearly and easily determined on the ground.
[3] Supplemental information for major developments. If the
application is for a major development, it shall also include
the following information:
[a] The bearings and distances of all property lines tied to
the Maine State Coordinant System, and the sources
of this information. The Planning Director may waive
the requirement for a formal boundary survey when
sufficient information is available to establish, on the
ground, all property boundaries.
[b] The name, registration number and seal of the
architect, landscape architect, engineer and/or similar
professional who prepared the plan.
[c] The location of all buildings within 50 feet and the
location of intersecting roads or driveways within 200
feet of the site.
[d] The existing topography of the site shown with twofoot
contour intervals. A greater contour interval may
§ 280-16-6 SANFORD CODE § 280-16-6
252:774
be used if it is determined that the plan is adequate to
evaluate site conditions.
[e] A grading plan showing the proposed changes in the
topography of the site at a two-foot contour interval or
such other interval as determined by the Planning
Board. This plan may be combined with the site plan.
[f] A stormwater drainage and erosion control program
showing:
[i] The existing and proposed method of handling
stormwater runoff.
[ii] The direction of flow of the runoff through the use
of arrows.
[iii] The location, elevation, and size of all catch
basins, dry wells, drainage ditches, swales,
retention basins, and storm sewers.
[iv] Engineering calculations prepared by a
professional engineer registered in the State of
Maine showing the drainage requirements based
upon a storm frequency established by the City
Engineer if the project will significantly alter the
existing drainage pattern due to such factors as
the amount of new impervious surfaces being
proposed, including but not limited to pavement
and building area, and the pre- and postdevelopment
rates of runoff.
[v] Methods and locations of devices proposed to be
used to control erosion and sedimentation during
and after construction.
[g] Building plans showing, at a minimum, the first floor
plan and front elevation of all proposed principal and
accessory buildings and structures.
[h] Assessments of the impact of the project. A traffic
impact analysis demonstrating the impact of the
proposed project on the capacity, level of service, and
safety of adjacent streets, if the project or expansion
will provide parking for 50 or more vehicles or
generate more than 100 trips during the a.m. or p.m.
peak hour based upon the latest edition of the Trip
Generation Manual of the Institute of Traffic
Engineers.
[4] Supplemental information for development in the Airport
Development Zone.
§ 280-16-6 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-16-6
252:775
[a] An emergency management plan that has been
reviewed and approved by the Emergency
Management Director;
[b] A fire protection plan that has been reviewed and
approved by the Fire Chief;
[c] A public safety plan, which shall include any
requirements the Police Chief determines are
necessary to address airport security and homeland
security issues;
[d] A traffic control plan showing the location and
dimensions of proposed driveways, parking areas,
loading areas and walkways; describing on-site
vehicular activity and its impact on the surrounding
traffic patterns; and showing access to and from the
Airport, if proposed; and
[e] A narrative report indicating how the proposed land
use and development activity is consistent with the
Airport Clear Zone and Airport Protection Overlay
Zone standards.
[5] Supplemental information for private ways.
[a] A plan showing the private way prepared by a
registered land surveyor. The plan shall be drawn in
permanent ink or permanent transparency material
and shall be sealed by the surveyor preparing the
plan. The plan shall be labeled "A Plan of a Private
Way" and shall provide an approval block for
signatures of a legal majority of the Planning Board,
the date of approval, and the words "Private Way,
Approved by the City of Sanford Planning Board." The
plan shall show information sufficient to establish on
the ground the exact location, width, and length of the
private way.
[b] Plan notes. The plan shall contain the following notes:
[i] A note which shall read "The City of Sanford shall
not be responsible for the maintenance, repair,
plowing, or similar services for the private way
shown on this plan."
[ii] A note which shall read "The private way shown
on this plan shall not be accepted as a public
street by the City of Sanford unless the way
complies with the standards for public streets,
including but not limited to, width of right-of-way,
existing at the time acceptance is requested."
§ 280-16-6 SANFORD CODE § 280-16-6
252:776
[6] Supplemental information for transmitter towers and
alternative communication towers. If the project involves
an alternative communication tower, the application shall
include the following supplemental information:
[a] A report from a professional engineer, registered in
the State of Maine, that describes the tower and the
technical reasons for the tower design and describes
the capacity of the tower, including the number and
types of antennas that it can accommodate and the
basis for the calculations of capacity.
[b] Written approval or a statement that no approval is
required from the Federal Aviation Administration and
written approval from any other applicable federal or
State agencies.
[c] A letter of intent that commits the tower owner and
his or her successors in interest to:
[i] Respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a
request for information from a potential
collocation applicant, in exchange for a
reasonable fee not in excess of the actual cost of
preparing a response.
[ii] Negotiate in good faith for shared use by third
parties that have received a Federal
Communication Commission license or permit.
[iii] Allow shared use if an applicant agrees in writing
to pay reasonable charges.
[iv] Make no more than a reasonable charge for
shared use, based on generally accepted
accounting principles. This charge may include
but is not limited to a pro rata share of the cost of
site selection, planning, project administration,
land costs, site design, construction and
maintenance, financing, return on equity,
depreciation, and all of the costs of adapting the
tower or equipment to accommodate a shared
user without causing electromagnetic
interference, all being pertinent to the southern
Maine market area.
[v] Notify the City if use of the tower is discontinued.
[vi] Remove the tower within one year after its use is
discontinued.
§ 280-16-6 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-16-6
252:777
[d] Evidence that collocation on existing or approved
towers is not possible. If the proposed tower cannot be
accommodated on each existing or approved tower
site, assess whether such tower site could be changed
to accommodate the proposed tower, and generally
describe the means and projected cost of shared use
of the existing or approved tower site.
[e] Proof of financial capacity to build, maintain, and
remove the proposed tower.
[7] Supplemental information for a water supply protection
permit shall contain the following information:
[a] The location of Public Water Supply Protection District
boundaries based upon the official map if they cross
the parcel.
[b] Location and size of interior and exterior areas and
structures to be used for storage, use, loading/
unloading, recycling, or disposal of hazardous
materials.
[c] Location of all new or modified underground and
aboveground storage tanks for such uses as fuel
storage, waste oil holding tanks, chemical storage,
hazardous waste storage, collection of contaminated
stormwater or wash water, and all similar facilities.
[d] Location of new or modified exterior drains, dry wells,
catch basins, retention/detention areas, sumps and
other facilities designed to collect, store, or transport
stormwater; the point of discharge for all drains and
pipes shall be specified on the site plan;
[e] Delineation of areas on the site which are known or
suspected to be contaminated, together with a report
of the status of cleanup.
[f] Location of new or modified subsurface waste disposal
systems, sewage lift stations, force mains, and grease
traps.
[g] Location and distance to existing and planned wells of
the Water District.
[h] A description of the manner in which the applicant
shall meet all applicable performance standards.
[i] In cases where the Code Enforcement Officer, Site
Plan Review Committee, or Planning Board finds that
the land use poses a serious threat to groundwater
quality, an applicant shall be required to submit:
§ 280-16-6 SANFORD CODE § 280-16-6
252:778
[i] A complete list of all pesticides, fuels and other
potentially toxic or hazardous materials which are
used, manufactured or stored on the premises in
quantities greater than those associated with
normal household use and a description of
measures to provide for the control of leaks or
spills.
[ii] A completed list of products proposed for
application to the land, quantities to be applied,
schedule of application, and a detailed description
of the application program.
[iii] A conservation plan, reviewed by the York County
Soil and Water Conservation District, for animal
husbandry operations.
[j] The Site Plan Review Committee or Planning Board
may also require the following additional information
if the Sanford or Kennebunk, Kennebunkport, and
Wells Water District expresses concerns, in writing,
about the impact of the proposed activities on a public
water supply.
[i] A hydrogeological study of the proposed use's or
activity's impact on groundwater.
[ii] Water quality data from on-site monitoring wells.
[iii] Any other information necessary to prove that the
activity or use will not adversely impact the
groundwater quality.
[8] Supplemental information for mineral extraction for
commercial excavation, processing and storage of soil,
loam, sand, gravel, rock and other mineral. The
development plan shall be prepared by a land surveyor or
professional engineer, registered in the State of Maine,
except as otherwise specified, showing:
[a] The existing contours of the land within and extending
beyond the boundaries of the site for 200 feet at
intervals not to exceed five feet, referred to mean sea
level.
[b] The contours as proposed following completion of the
operation at intervals not to exceed five feet, referred
to mean sea level.
[c] The location of all proposed access roads and
temporary structures.
§ 280-16-6 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-16-6
252:779
[d] The proposed provisions for drainage and erosion
control, including drainage calculations.
[e] Other information necessary to indicate the physical
characteristics of the proposed operation.
[f] A closure plan showing how the site will be reclaimed
in accordance with the performance standards of this
chapter.
[g] Written evidence that the York County Soil and Water
Conservation District has reviewed the plans and finds
them in conformance with its standards.
[h] If fewer than 500 cubic yards of material is involved, if
all slopes affected have less than a ten-percent grade,
and if the area under consideration is not subject to
erosion or excessive stormwater runoff, a written plan
prepared by an agent of a qualified professional
agency, including by way of example only, the United
States Natural Resource Conservation Service, may
be submitted as the required plan.
[i] The Planning Board shall require the submission of a
hydrogeologic study to determine the effects of the
proposed activity on groundwater movement and
quality and water supply wells within the general area
if excavation within five feet of the observed seasonal
high-water table is proposed.
[j] Submission requirements for renewal of a five-year
site plan permit for commercial excavation,
processing, and storage of soil, loam, sand, gravel,
rock and other minerals. All submission requirements
shall be described and located on site plans and in
written analyses and assessments submitted as part of
the application and shall include: [Added
10-18-2016 by Order No. 16-133.09]
[i] Description of past excavation and reclamation
activity on the site, including areas modified over
the previous five-year permit, and areas proposed
to be excavated and reclaimed over the proposed
new five-year permit.
[ii] Current conditions plan, prepared by a land
surveyor or other qualified professional, licensed
in the State of Maine, which identifies excavated
and reclaimed areas over the previous five years,
natural features and wetlands, including locations
which may have changed since the previous
submission, and one or more benchmarks on the
§ 280-16-6 SANFORD CODE § 280-16-6
252:780
site which may be identified by the City Engineer.
The Planning Board may allow, at a minimum,
spot grade elevations at the top and bottom of
embankments.
[iii] General description of and location where
crushing, screening, and processing activity
operated over the previous five-year permit and
where they are proposed for the new five-year
permit.
[iv] General description and location where imported
materials and/or materials relocated from other
portions of the site have been or are proposed to
be used to rebuild slopes or reclaim areas.
[v] Certification by a qualified geologist, with
specialization in hydrogeology, who is licensed in
the State of Maine, that the previously submitted
hydrogeologic analysis reflects current conditions
and remains valid. The Planning Director may
require an updated hydrogeologic analysis if the
original analysis requires updating or an update
was recommended in the original analysis, or if
there are changes in conditions onsite, within the
aquifer, in municipal regulation, or in professional
knowledge about extraction operations or
hydrogeology. Furthermore, if the Planning
Director determines that the elevation of the
seasonal high water table, identified in the
previously submitted analysis, has changed or is
contradicted by evidence obtained during
inspection and/or observation, additional
hydrogeologic information including, but not
limited to, test pit data, may be required to verify
existing high and seasonal groundwater
elevations.
[vi] Updated groundwater monitoring plan, prepared
by a qualified geologist, with specialization in
hydrogeology, who is licensed in the State of
Maine, including all required components of the
monitoring system.
[vii] General description, location, and/or dimensions
of proposed stockpiled materials. The Planning
Director may require a general description and
location of proposed methods to minimize
leaching or transport of materials into surface
and/or ground water for materials which are
relocated from elsewhere onsite or are imported
§ 280-16-6 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-16-6
252:781
from offsite if there are changes in proposed
operations, conditions onsite, within the aquifer,
in municipal regulation, and/or in professional
knowledge about extraction operations or
hydrogeology.
[viii] Updated operations manual, with changes from
the previously approved manual highlighted. If
the Planning Board finds that the updated
operations manual is incomplete or inadequate, it
may require a subsequent revision to be prepared
by a qualified professional, licensed in the State of
Maine.
[ix] Updated performance guarantee for reclamation.
The amount shall be set by the Planning Board,
based on the recommendation of the City
Engineer, at a rate of $4,000 per acre or another
amount which reflects unique characteristics of
the operation, for the area anticipated to be open
to excavation and/or reclamation over the
proposed new five-year permit. In addition to
these areas, the performance guarantee shall
include stockpile areas and areas outside of active
excavation which have not been reclaimed. The
City recognizes that the organization which issues
a performance guarantee may annually review
and renew the guarantee; however, the City shall
require the applicant to provide the City with an
acceptable guarantee until the City Engineer
finds that the reclaimed landscape meets required
cover standards through at least one full growing
season. This obligation may require the guarantee
to extend beyond the expiration of the five-year
permit.
[x] Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in 1
M.R.S.A. § 302, this amendment of
§ 280-16-6G(2)(d)[8][j] applies to any application
relating to the establishment or operation of a
mineral extraction operation, whether or not such
application had become a pending proceeding as
defined in 1 M.R.S.A. § 302 prior to the enactment
of this amendment of the chapter.
[9] Supplemental information. A site plan application for a
medical marijuana production facility or other projects
that:
[a] Have the potential for generating adverse odors, as
determined by the Planning Director, shall indicate
§ 280-16-6 SANFORD CODE § 280-16-6
252:782
whether the proposed facility is designed with a
closed or open ventilation system. If an open system is
proposed, the application shall describe the pathway
of outdoor air through the facility and include an
Operations Plan and Odor Control Plan that conforms
with §§ 280-15-10C(5) and 280-15-10C(6), unless the
applicant provides a plan and report, prepared and
sealed by a mechanical engineer or other qualified
professional, registered in the State of Maine, for a
properly designed, installed, and maintained
ventilation and air filtration system to prevent odors
from being detected beyond the boundaries of the
property. The City may use contracted staff and peer
review escrow fees to review an Odor Control Plan
under § 280-3-4. [Amended 2-20-2018 by Order
No. 18-115-01]
[b] Involves the use and/or storage of chemicals or gases
shall include a floor plan showing the type and
location of the storage of any chemicals or gases used
in the facility and shall be subject to review and
approval by the Fire Chief.
[10] Supplemental information for conditional uses. The
Planning Board may waive any of the submission
requirements in accordance with Article XVIII, upon
written request of the applicant at its initial consideration
of the application. In waiving any submission requirement,
the Planning Board shall find that the waived information
is not needed to allow it to determine conformance with
the standards of approval due to the scale or nature of the
proposed activity.
[a] A description of the exact nature of the proposed use,
including but not limited to the type of use, square
footage involved, hours of operation, types and
amount of any pollutants to be generated, and types
and amount of traffic expected to be generated.
[b] A scale drawing, including existing and proposed
buildings, important natural features, driveways,
parking areas, pedestrianways, streets and other
rights-of-way, and location of signs and outdoor
lighting.
[c] The Planning Board may also request, at the initial
consideration of the application, that additional
information be provided to allow it to determine
compliance with the standards of approval. The
burden of providing the information upon which the
Planning Board will base its findings and decision
§ 280-16-6 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-16-6
252:783
shall be the applicant's. The applicant may submit
additional information, including narrative materials
which demonstrate how the application complies with
the standards of approval of §§ 280-13-5 and 280-16-7.
[11] Supplemental information for a solar energy system.
[Added 3-7-2017 by Order No. 17-31.07]
[a] A site location map which shows scenic resources,
historic sites, and/or significant wildlife habitat,
identified by State regulatory agencies, within one
mile of the proposed development.
[b] Description of proposed and associated facilities,
including manufacturer and model and all
nonproprietary manufacturer's specifications for solar
panels, key components, controls, and other
equipment, sound emission levels, normal and
emergency operational shutdown procedures, number
and individual ratings of panels in the array and/or
modules, and aggregate generating capacity of the
total system.
[c] Array/module design.
[d] Written evidence that all applicable State regulatory
agencies with jurisdiction over the project have been
notified of the pending application.
[e] Certification that the facility shall comply with utility
notification requirements, required by Maine law and
accompanying regulations, unless the applicant
indicates it will not be connected to the electricity
grid.
[f] Site line, photographic and, if applicable, screening
information to help evaluate environmental and visual
impact of construction and operation of the facility.
[g] A plan which describes how decommissioning will be
undertaken, the work required, how solid waste shall
be disposed of in compliance with State and local
regulations, a cost estimate for decommissioning and
a schedule of contributions to its decommissioning
fund, and demonstration of the applicant's financial
capacity to complete the decommissioning as
proposed. The applicant shall also provide examples of
other projects of similar size and describe the amount
of surety which was required.
H. Fees. [Amended 12-20-2016 by Order No. 16-158.07]
§ 280-16-6 SANFORD CODE § 280-16-6
252:784
(1) Any request for site plan review shall be accompanied by a filing
fee established by the City Council and shall be administered in
conformance with § 280-3-4.
(2) Review and construction compliance fees. An applicant shall
deposit a review fee with the Planning Department at the time of
the submission of an application. The Planning Department shall
maintain a project account for each application showing the
amounts of the deposits and the charges incurred for review of the
application in compliance with § 280-3-4. The applicant shall also
be required to post additional amounts to cover the cost of
construction compliance review.
I. Review procedures.
(1) Once an application is determined to be complete and at least 14
days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the reviewing
committee, the Planning Director shall schedule the application for
review.
(2) The Planning Director will schedule review by the Site Plan Review
Committee and the Planning Board and provide appropriate notice
of public hearing as required in this chapter.
(3) Within 60 days of any required public hearing, the Planning Board
shall complete its review of and take action on the application. The
Planning Board may extend this review period with the consent of
the applicant.
(4) The reviewing committee shall determine whether the application
complies with the standards and criteria of § 280-16-7. If the
reviewing committee finds that the application conforms to these
standards and criteria, committee members shall vote to approve
the application. Approval by the reviewing committee shall require
the vote of a majority of committee members. A binding vote shall
include a minimum of three members. The applicant may request a
continuation of the reviewing committee's consideration of the
application if only three voting members. The applicant shall be
notified in writing of the committee's action.
(5) The reviewing committee may impose conditions on the approval of
a site plan. Any conditions imposed by the reviewing committee
shall be related directly to the approval standards and criteria.
J. Inspections.
(1) General. The applicant shall be responsible for demonstrating that
the construction of the project meets the standards of this chapter.
(2) Private ways. The private way shall be inspected under the
direction of a professional engineer, registered in the State of
Maine. Prior to the issuance of any certificates of occupancy for lots
§ 280-16-6 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-16-6
252:785
§ 280-16-7. Approval criteria and standards.
The following criteria shall be used by the Site Plan Review Committee
and the Planning Board in reviewing applications for site plan review and
shall serve as minimum requirements for approval of the application. The
application shall be approved unless the Site Plan Review Committee or
the Planning Board determines that the applicant has failed to meet one or
more of these standards. In all instances, the burden of proof shall be on the
applicant, and such burden of proof shall include the production of evidence
sufficient to warrant a finding that all applicable criteria have been met.
served by a private way, the engineer shall certify to the Code
Enforcement Officer that the private way has been constructed in
accordance with this section.
K. Signing, recording, and providing copies of recorded approved plans.
(1) General requirement. Upon approval by the reviewing committee,
the applicant shall provide five copies of the site plan which
includes any required changes or conditions of approval prior to
the issuance of a building permit.
(2) Private ways. The original plan shall be recorded in the York
County Registry of Deeds within 30 days of approval by the
Planning Board and prior to the issuance of building permits for
any lots served by the private way. If the plan is not recorded within
this period, the approval of the Planning Board shall be null and
void.
A. Utilization of the site. The plan for the development shall reflect the
natural capabilities of the site to support development. Buildings, lots,
and support facilities shall be clustered in those portions of the site that
have the most suitable conditions for development. Environmentally
sensitive areas, such as wetlands, steep slopes, floodplains and unique
natural features, shall be maintained and preserved to the maximum
extent. Natural drainage areas shall be preserved to the maximum
extent.
B. Access to the site. Vehicular access to the site shall be on roads which
have adequate capacity to accommodate the additional traffic
generated by the development. For developments which generate 100
or more peak-hour trips based on the latest edition of the Trip
Generation Manual of the Institute of Traffic Engineers, intersections
on major access routes to the site within one mile of any entrance road
which are functioning at a Level of Service of C or better prior to the
development shall function at a minimum of Level of Service C after
development. If any intersection is functioning at a Level of Service D or
lower prior to the development, the project shall not reduce the current
level of service. The Planning Board or Site Plan Review Committee
may approve a development not meeting this requirement if the
applicant demonstrates that:
§ 280-16-6 SANFORD CODE § 280-16-7
252:786
(1) A public agency has committed funds to construct the
improvements necessary to bring the level of access to this
standard; or
(2) The applicant shall assume financial responsibility for the
improvements necessary to bring the level of service to this
standard and shall assure the completion of the improvements with
a financial guaranty acceptable to the City.
C. Access into the site. Vehicular access into the development shall
provide for safe and convenient access.
(1) Any exit driveway or proposed street shall be designed so as to
provide minimum sight distance to meet the Maine Department of
Transportation standards.
(2) Points of access shall be located to avoid hazardous conflicts with
existing turning movements and traffic flows.
(3) The grade of any proposed drive or street shall be not more than
3% for a minimum of two car lengths or 40 feet from the
intersection.
(4) The intersection of any access drive or proposed street shall
function at a Level of Service C following development if the project
will generate 1,000 or more vehicle trips per twenty-four-hour
period or at a level which shall allow safe access into and out of the
project if fewer than 1,000 trips are generated.
D. Internal vehicular circulation. The layout of the site shall provide for the
safe movement of passenger, service and emergency vehicles through
the site.
(1) Nonresidential projects shall provide a clear route for delivery
vehicles with appropriate geometric design to allow turning and
backing for a minimum of WB-50 vehicles.
(2) Clear routes of access shall be provided and maintained for
emergency vehicles to and around all buildings and will be posted
with appropriate signage marked "fire lane - no parking."
(3) The layout and design of parking areas shall provide for safe and
convenient circulation of vehicles throughout the lot and will
prohibit vehicles from backing out onto a street.
(4) All roadways shall be designed to harmonize with the topographic
and natural features of the site. The road network shall provide for
vehicular and pedestrian safety, all-season emergency access, snow
storage, and delivery and collection services.
E. Pedestrian circulation. The development plan shall provide for
pedestrian circulation within the development. If the project is located
in an area where sidewalks exist or are located within 1,000 feet of the
§ 280-16-7 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-16-7
252:787
site, provisions shall be made for connection to the existing sidewalk
system.
F. Stormwater management. Adequate provisions shall be made for the
disposal of all stormwater collected from proposed streets, parking
areas, roofs and other surfaces through a stormwater drainage system
and maintenance plan which shall not have adverse impacts on abutting
or downstream properties.
(1) To the extent possible, the plan shall detain stormwater on the land
at the site of development and do so through the use of the natural
features of the site.
(2) For major developments, stormwater runoff systems shall detain or
retain water falling from the site such that the rate of flow from the
site does not exceed the predevelopment rate.
(3) The applicant shall demonstrate that downstream channel or
system capacity is sufficient to carry the flow without adverse
effects or shall be responsible for the improvements to provide the
required increase in capacity.
(4) All natural drainageways shall be preserved at their natural
gradients and shall not be filled or converted to a closed system
except as approved by the Site Plan Review Committee or Planning
Board and appropriate state agencies, if required.
(5) The design of stormwater drainage systems shall provide for the
disposal of stormwater without damage to streets, adjacent
properties, or downstream properties.
(6) The design of the storm drainage systems shall be fully cognizant of
upstream runoff which shall pass over or through the site to be
developed.
(7) The biological and chemical properties of the receiving waters shall
not be degraded by the stormwater runoff from the development
site. The use of oil and grease traps in manholes, the use of on-site
vegetated waterways, and the reduction in use of deicing salts and
fertilizers may be required, especially where the development
stormwater discharges into a gravel aquifer area or other water
supply source.
G. Erosion control.
(1) For all projects, building and site designs and roadway layouts shall
fit and utilize existing topography and desirable natural
surroundings to the fullest extent possible. Filling, excavation and
earthmoving activity shall be kept to a minimum. Parking lots on
sloped areas shall be terraced to avoid undue cuts and fills and the
need for retaining walls. Natural vegetation shall be preserved and
protected wherever possible.
§ 280-16-7 SANFORD CODE § 280-16-7
252:788
(2) During construction of major developments, soil erosion and
sedimentation of watercourses and water bodies shall be
minimized by an active program meeting the requirements of the
York County Soil and Water Conservation District's best
management practices.
H. Water supply.
(1) The development shall be provided with a system of water supply
that provides each use with an adequate supply of drinking water.
(2) If the project will be served by the Water District, the applicant has
secured, in writing, a statement from the Water District that the
proposed water supply system conforms to its design and
construction standards, will not result in an undue burden on the
source or distribution system, and will be installed in a manner
adequate to serve domestic water and fire protection needs.
I. Sewage disposal.
(1) A sanitary sewer system shall be installed at the expense of the
developer if the project is located within a sewer service area as
defined by the Sewerage District. The Site Plan Review Committee
or Planning Board may allow individual subsurface waste disposal
systems to be used where service is not available.
(a) Upstream sewage flows shall be accommodated by an
adequately sized system through the proposed development
for existing conditions and potential development in the
upstream area or areas tributary to the proposed development.
(b) All components of sanitary sewerage facilities that connect to
the Sewerage District's system shall be designed by a
professional engineer, registered in the State of Maine, and
shall be tested in full compliance with the design specifications
and construction practices as established by the District. The
construction of sewer lines shall include the construction of
laterals to the property line of each lot where individual lots
are created.
(c) All individual and community on-site systems shall be designed
in full compliance with the Maine State Plumbing Code (May 1,
1995, edition), as amended. Upon the recommendation of the
Local Plumbing Inspector, the Site Plan Review Committee or
Planning Board may require the location of reserve areas for
replacement systems.
(2) If the project will be served by the Sewerage District, the applicant
shall secure, in writing, a statement from the Sewerage District
that the proposed sewerage system conforms to its design
specifications and construction practices and that the project will
not result in an undue burden on the system.
§ 280-16-7 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-16-7
252:789
J. Utilities. The development shall be provided with electrical and
telephone service adequate to meet the anticipated use of the project.
K. Natural features. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state
insofar as practical by minimizing tree removal, disturbance and
compaction of soil, and by retaining existing vegetation insofar as
practical during construction. Extensive grading and filling shall be
avoided as far as possible.
L. Groundwater protection. The proposed site development and use shall
not adversely impact either the quality or quantity of groundwater
available to abutting properties or public water supply systems.
M. Exterior lighting. The proposed development shall provide for adequate
exterior lighting to provide for the safe use of the development in
nighttime hours. All exterior lighting shall be designed and shielded to
direct light downward and avoid spillage beyond the boundaries of the
applicant's property.
N. Solid and hazardous waste disposal. The proposed development shall
provide for adequate disposal of solid wastes and hazardous wastes.
(1) All solid waste shall be disposed of at a licensed disposal facility
having adequate capacity to accept the project's wastes.
(2) All hazardous wastes shall be disposed of at a licensed hazardous
waste disposal facility, and evidence of a contractual arrangement
with the facility shall be submitted.
O. Landscaping. The development plan shall provide for landscaping to
define street edges, break up parking areas, soften the appearance of
the development and protect abutting properties from adverse impacts
of the development.
P. Shoreland relationship. The development shall not adversely affect the
water quality or shoreline of any adjacent water body. The development
shall demonstrate that the cutting or removal of vegetation along water
bodies shall not increase water temperature or result in shoreline
erosion or sedimentation of water bodies. The development plan shall
provide for access to abutting navigable water bodies for the use of
occupants of the development.
Q. Technical and financial capacity. The applicant has demonstrated that s/
he has the financial and technical capacity to carry out the project in
accordance with this Code and the approved plan. In determining the
applicant's technical ability, the Board shall consider the applicant's
previous experience, the experience and training of the applicant's
consultants and contractors, the history of performance on past
applications, and the existence of violations of previous approvals
involving the applicant, consultants, contractors, or other agents of the
applicant. If necessary to satisfy this criteria, the Planning Board may
require the applicant to retain qualified contractors and consultants to
§ 280-16-7 SANFORD CODE § 280-16-7
252:790
prepare plans and applications and to supervise, construct, and inspect
required improvements in the proposed development.
R. Buffering. The development shall provide for the buffering of adjacent
uses where there is a transition from one type of use to another use and
to screen service and storage areas. The buffer areas required by the
zoning regulations shall be provided and maintained.
S. Airport encroachment. The development shall not encroach above the
imaginary surface of the Airport as specified in Section 77.13 of Part 77
of the Federal Aviation Regulations unless such encroachment shall not
have a detrimental impact on the instrument landing approach
minimums currently in use or likely to be in use in the future.
T. Supplemental criteria and standards for private ways. The Planning
Board shall approve the use of private ways which meet the standards
of this chapter, including but not limited to those described below to
provide access to and frontage for individual lots of land.
(1) Each lot having access from an approved private way shall be
improved with no more than one dwelling unit and related
accessory buildings and uses.
(2) If the private way provides access to two or more lots, a
maintenance agreement shall be prepared. This agreement shall
specify the rights and responsibilities of each lot owner with
respect to the maintenance, repair, and plowing of the private way.
This agreement shall be approved by the Planning Board and shall
be recorded in the York County Registry of Deeds within 30 days of
approval by the Planning Board.
(3) Private ways shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 33 feet
and a paved apron 20 feet in length commencing at the existing
edge of pavement where it intersects with the private way. The
paved apron shall be constructed to the following standards:
(a) Fifteen inches of base gravel, Maine Department of
Transportation (MDOT) Spec. 703.06 Type D.
(b) Three inches of three-fourths-inch crushed gravel.
(c) Minimum of two inches of paved surface or greater as specified
by the Public Works Director.
(d) Negative two-percent grade from the existing edge of
pavement to an appropriate drainageway but in no case less
than five feet from the travel surface of the public way it
intersects.
(e) The construction of private ways shall meet the following
minimum standards.
§ 280-16-7 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-16-7
252:791
Number of Lots Served
Standard 1 to 3 4 or More
Minimum roadway
width
16 feet Same as local
residential streets
Minimum subbase
(heavy road gravel)
15 inches
Wearing surface
(fine gravel)
2 inches
Maximum length None
Maximum grade 8%
Minimum grade 0.5%
Turnaround at
dead end
Hammerhead or T
subject to approval
by the Fire
Department
Stormwater
drainage
Approval of
Director of Public
Works
(f) Notwithstanding other provisions of the Code to the contrary,
no private way shall provide access to or serve in any way to
provide compliance with the requirements of the Code for
more than three individual lots unless construction of the way
complies with the local residential street standards as set forth
in Chapter 275, Subdivision of Land.
(g) The land within the right-of-way of an approved private way
shall not be used to meet the frontage or lot area requirements
of any lot. The creation of a private way shall not reduce the
frontage or lot area of an existing conforming lot below that
required by the zone in which it is located nor reduce the
frontage or lot area of an existing nonconforming lot.
U. Supplemental criteria and standards for developmental review.
(1) If the average net residential density of abutting residential lots is
greater than four units per acre, the maximum net residential
density of the subject parcel shall be the average of the abutting
properties to a maximum of six units per net acre, provided that the
project receives site plan approval and the Planning Board finds
that it conforms to the following standards:
(a) The size of the proposed building is comparable to the size of
residential structures on abutting lots; and
(b) The building's placement on the lot with respect to front and
side lot lines is similar to the pattern of existing developed lots.
§ 280-16-7 SANFORD CODE § 280-16-7
252:792
§ 280-16-8. Amendments to approved plans.
Approvals under this article are dependent upon and limited to the
proposals and plans contained in the application and supporting documents
submitted and affirmed to by the applicant. Any variation from the plans,
proposals, and supporting documents, except minor changes that do not
affect approval standards, is subject to review and approval as provided
herein. Minor changes that do not alter the essential nature of the proposal
or affect approval criteria may be approved by the Planning Director by
written endorsement of the changes on the approved plan. The procedure
for obtaining review and approval of other amendments shall be determined
by the Planning Director based on the classification of the amendment itself.
§ 280-16-9. Appeal of Planning Board actions.
Appeal of any actions taken by the Planning Board with respect to this
article shall be to the Superior Court in accordance with the Maine Rules of
Civil Procedure, Rule 80B.
§ 280-16-10. Duration of site plan approval.
Construction, or occupancy if no construction is involved, shall commence
within one year of the approval of the site plan and a certificate of
occupancy issued within three years of approval. If construction or
occupancy is not commenced or a certificate of occupancy issued within
these limits, the site plan approval shall be null and void. The Planning
Board or Site Plan Review Committee may extend these time limits upon
written request of the applicant and a finding that such extension is
consistent with current zoning requirements.
(2) In addition, the minimum lot size may be reduced to the average of
abutting residential lots but to not less than 6,500 square feet, and
the minimum street frontage may be reduced to not less than 65
feet.
§ 280-16-7 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-16-10
252:793

ARTICLE XVII
Performance Guarantees
§ 280-17-1. Types of guarantees.
§ 280-17-2. Contents of guarantee.
The performance guarantee shall contain a construction schedule, cost
estimates for each major phase of construction, taking into account
inflation, provisions for inspections of each phase of construction,
provisions for the release of part or all of the performance guarantee to the
developer, and a date after which the applicant will be in default, and the
City shall have access to the funds to finish construction.
§ 280-17-3. Escrow account.
A cash contribution for the establishment of an escrow account shall be
made by either a certified check made out to the City, the direct deposit, or a
functional equivalent, into a savings account, or the purchase of a certificate
of deposit in such form as permitted by law and approved as to form by the
City Manager. For any account opened by the applicant, the consent of the
City Manager shall be required for a withdrawal.
§ 280-17-4. Letter of credit.
An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other lending institution
shall indicate that funds have been set aside for the construction of the
A. With submittal of the application for final development approval, the
applicant shall provide one of the following performance guarantees for
an amount adequate to cover the total construction costs of all required
improvements, taking into account the time span of the construction
schedule and the inflation rate for construction costs:
(1) Either a certified check payable to the City or a savings account or
certificate of deposit for the establishment of an escrow account in
such form as permitted by law and approved as to form by the City
Manager;
(2) An irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution
establishing funding for the construction of the development, from
which the City may draw if construction is inadequate, approved by
the City Manager; or
(3) Any other performance guarantee approved by the City Manager,
provided that, in his or her opinion, such performance guarantees
provide substantially similar financial protection for the City as
§ 280-17-1A(1) or (2).
B. The conditions and amount of the performance guarantee shall be
determined by the Planning Board with the advice of the City Engineer
or Public Works Director.
§ 280-17-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-17-4
252:795
development and may not be used for any other project or loan and may be
released only upon written authorization of the City Manager.
§ 280-17-5. Duration of guarantee.
The performance guarantee shall remain in force for the entire period
during which development occurs or, in the case of default, while the
City pursues its remedies for default, until the guarantee is released by
the City in accordance with § 280-17-6. If the time frame for constructing
the improvements covered by the guarantee is extended, the performance
guarantee shall also be extended.
§ 280-17-6. Release of guarantee.
Prior to the release of any part of the performance guarantee, the Planning
Director and City Engineer shall determine to their satisfaction that the
proposed improvements meet or exceed the design and construction
requirements for that portion of the development for which the release is
requested.
§ 280-17-7. Default.
If, upon inspection, the City Engineer, or other engineer retained by the
Director of Public Works, finds that any of the required improvements have
not been constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications filed
as part of the application, s/he shall so report in writing to the Director of
Public Works, Planning Director, City Manager, and the applicant. The City
Manager shall take any steps necessary to preserve the City's rights.
§ 280-17-8. Improvements guaranteed.
Performance guarantees shall be tendered for all improvements required
to meet the standards of these regulations and for construction, including
but not limited to streets, stormwater management facilities, public sewage
collection or disposal facilities, public water systems, and erosion and
sedimentation control measures.
§ 280-17-4 SANFORD CODE § 280-17-8
252:796
ARTICLE XVIII
Waivers
§ 280-18-1. Waiver of submission requirements authorized.
When the Planning Board makes written findings of fact that there are
special circumstances relating to a particular parcel proposed to be
developed, it may waive portions of the submission requirements, unless
this chapter specifically prohibits waivers. For a waiver to be granted, the
applicant shall demonstrate that:
§ 280-18-2. Waiver of standards authorized.
When the Planning Board makes written findings of fact that, due to special
circumstances of a particular property, the provision of certain required
improvements is not required to provide for the public health, safety or
welfare or is inappropriate because of inadequate or lacking connecting
facilities adjacent to or in proximity of the proposed development, the
Planning Board may waive the requirement for such improvements, subject
to appropriate conditions, provided that:
§ 280-18-3. Conditions.
Waivers may only be granted in accordance with this article. When granting
waivers, the Planning Board shall set conditions, as appropriate, so that the
purposes of these regulations are met.
§ 280-18-4. Waivers to be shown on final plan.
When the Planning Board grants a waiver to any of the improvements
required by these regulations, the final plan provided to the Planning
Department shall indicate the waivers granted and the date on which they
were granted.
A. The performance standards of this chapter have been or will be met;
B. The public health, safety, and welfare are protected; and
C. The waivers do not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose
of the Comprehensive Plan, this chapter, or these requirements.
A. The waivers do not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose
of the Comprehensive Plan, this chapter, or these regulations; and
B. The performance standards of this chapter have been or will be met by
the proposed development.
§ 280-18-1 WOOD, SALE OF § 280-18-4
252:797
Appendix
Chapter 290
PRIVATE AND SPECIAL LAWS RELATING TO SANFORD

Chapter A290
PRIVATE AND SPECIAL LAWS RELATING TO SANFORD
Note: What follows is the original incorporation law for the Town of Sanford and
subsequent private and special laws of the State Legislature relating to Sanford.
AN ACT FOR ERECTING A TRACT OF LAND EIGHT MILES SQUARE
CALLED PHILLIPSTOWN, JOINING UPON THE NORTH-WEST END OF THE
TOWN OF WELLS IN THE COUNTY OF YORK, INTO A TOWN BY THE
NAME OF SANFORD
WHEREAS the erecting of that tract of land called Phillipstown, into a town, will greatly
contribute to the growth thereof, and remedy many inconveniences to which the
inhabitants and proprietors may be otherwise subject,-
Be it enacted by the Governor, Council and House of Representatives,
[SECT. 1.] That the tract aforesaid, bounded as followeth; vis., lying on the north-west
end of the town of Wells, west of Kennebunk River, east of the town of Berwick; and
north, by province grants, in part, and in part by unappropriated lands,—be and hereby is
erected into a town by the name of Sanford; and that the inhabitants thereof be and
hereby are invested with all powers, privileges and immunities which the inhabitants of
the towns within this province do enjoy.
And be it further enacted,
[SECT. 2.] That Benjamin Chadburne, Esq., be and hereby is empowered to issue his
warrant, directed to some principal inhabitant of said town, requiring him to warn the
inhabitants of said town who have an estate of freehold according to charter, to meet at such
time and place as shall be therein set forth, to choose all such officers as are or shall be
required, by law, to manage the affairs of said town.
[Passed February, 27, 1768 by the Legislature of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. See
Ch. 21 of Vol. 4 of the Acts and Resolves of Massachusetts]
Note: The boundaries outlined in section one of the Act have been changed several times over the
years. Any attempt to accurately define the current boundaries should include an examination of the
following:
Ch. 64 of the Acts and Resolves of Massachusetts (1787)
Ch. 31 of the Acts and Resolves of Massachusetts (1794)
Ch. 234 of the Acts and Resolves of Massachusetts (1820)
Ch. 565 of the Private and Special Laws of Maine (1828)
Ch. 26 of the Private and Special Laws of Maine (1953)
A290:1 11 - 15 - 2007
SANFORD CODE
AN ACT ESTABLISHING IN THE TOWN OF SANFORD A REPRESENTATIVE
TOWN GOVERNMENT
(Private and Special Laws of 1935, Chapter 72)
Emergency preamble. Whereas, the town of Sanford has a population of approximately
13,000 inhabitants and has approximately 8,000 registered voters on its check list; and
Whereas, the town hall of said town, in which town meetings are held, will admit
approximately 1,000 people at the limit of its capacity; and
Whereas, there is no other public hall in the town of Sanford that will admit a greater
number; and
Whereas, but a small percentage of the voting population can be accommodated at a town
meeting; and
Whereas, the inevitable crowding of the town hall is detrimental to the public health and
safety; and
Whereas, a great many citizens having knowledge of the above conditions refrain from
attending annual town meeting; and
Whereas, a great many citizens are thereby prevented from exercising their legal rights of
attending two meetings and voting therein; and
Whereas, this bill is designed to eliminate the above objectionable condition; and
Whereas, in order for said town to elect town meeting members thereunder at the next
annual town meeting, it is necessary that immediate steps be taken to perform the
requirements of this act; and
Whereas, in the judgment of the legislature, these facts create an emergency within the
meaning of section 16 of Article XXXI of the constitution of the state of Maine, and
requiring the following legislation as immediately necessary for the preservation of the
public peace, health and safety; now, therefore
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine, as follows:
Sec. 1. Representative town government, established. There is hereby established in
the town of Sanford the form of representative town government as hereinafter set forth.
Sec. 2. Districts; report of selectmen; meetings; voting. (a) On or before October 15,
1935, the selectmen shall divide the territory of the town into not less than 5 nor more
than 10 districts, each of which shall be plainly designated. All districts shall contain
approximately an equal number of registered voters. The districts shall be so established
as to consist of compact and contiguous territory to be bounded so far as possible by the
center line of known streets and ways or by other well defined limits. Their boundaries
shall be reviewed and, if need be, wholly or partially revised, or the number of districts
changed, within the aforesaid limit, by the selectmen, in August 5 years after the next
August following the acceptance of this act, and in August every 5 years thereafter, and in
August of any year when so directed by vote of a representative town meeting held no
later than December 31st of the previous year.
A290:3 11 - 15 - 2007
SANFORD CODE
(b) The selectmen shall, on or before October 15, 1935, file a report of their doings with
the town clerk, with a map or maps and descriptions of the districts. They shall also, on or
before October 15, 1935, cause a copy of such map or maps and descriptions of the
districts to be posted at the town hall, and in at least one public and conspicuous place in
each district a map or descriptions of the district. Thereafter, upon any revision of
boundaries or change in the number of districts, as provided in paragraph (a), the
selectmen shall, on or before September 15 following such revision or change, file a
report of their doings with the town clerk, with a map or maps and descriptions of the
districts, and cause a copy of such map or maps and descriptions to be posted at the town
hall, and cause to be posted in at least one public and conspicuous place in each district a
map or description of that district. The division of the town into districts, and any
revision of such districts shall take effect upon the date of the filing of the report thereof
by the selectmen with the town clerk.
(c) Meetings of the registered voters of the several districts for all town elections, and for
voting upon any question to be submitted by the town to all the registered voters, shall be
held on the same day and at the same hour and at such place or places within the town as
the selectmen shall in the warrant for such meetings direct, and it shall not be necessary
for the selectmen to take any proceedings to designate the respective polling places, other
than to set forth the polling place of each district in the warrant. The provisions of
sections 12 to 14, inclusive, of chapter 8 of the revised statues of 1930, and amendments
thereto, relating to precinct voting at elections, insofar as they apply to the appointment
and duties of election officials and so far as the same are not inconsistent with this act,
shall apply to all town elections.
(d) It shall not be necessary that the polling place for district voting be within the district;
and 2 or more districts may vote at the same polling place, but the voting of each district
shall be conducted independently of that of any other district and under separate election
officials. The selectmen, during the month of November, 1935, shall appoint the election
officials provided for in precinct voting under the provisions of the revised statutes above
set forth, to act until December 1, 1936; and thereafter the selectmen shall annually, in the
month of November, appoint election officials to act for 1 year from the first day of
December following their appointment.
Sec. 3. Annual town election; certification of registered voters; town meeting
Membership; notice; qualifications to vote; registration. (a) At the first annual
election held after the acceptance of this act, each district shall elect 1 town meeting
member for every 30 registered voters or fraction thereof, subject to the provisions of
paragraph (c) of this section In the event that the number of town meeting members to
which any district is so entitled is not divisible by 3, then such district shall be entitled to
the largest number divisible by 3. The first third in each district in order of votes received
shall be elected to serve for 3 years; the second third in such order shall be elected to
serve for 2 years; the remaining third in such order shall be elected to serve for 1 year, all
to serve from the first day of January following the annual town meeting. Thereafter, at
each annual town election the registered voters of each district shall in like manner elect
A290:4 11 - 15 - 2007
SANFORD CODE
for the term of 3 years one town meeting member for every 90 registered voters or
fraction thereof, subject to the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section.
(b) The selectmen shall, on or before the 15th day of October, 1935, certify to the town
clerk the total number of registered voters in each district on September 1. 1935, and the
total number of town meeting members each district is entitled to elect at the said
election; and thereafter the selectmen shall annually, in the month of August, revise the
list of voters in each district and shall, on or before the 15th day of September, certify to
the town clerk the total number of registered voters in each district as of the 20th day of
August next preceding, and the number of town meeting members which each district is
entitled to elect at the next annual town meeting, and such certification shall be final.
(c) The elective town meeting membership shall in no event exceed 200; if the elective
membership on the basis set forth above would exceed 200, then the selectmen shall
revise the proportion to such an extent that the number of town meeting members shall be
not less than 175 nor more than 200. The elective town meeting membership shall in no
event be less than 150; if the elective town meeting membership on the basis above set
forth would be less than 150, then the selectmen shall revise the proportion of
representation so that the elective town meeting membership shall be not less than 150
nor more than 175; and the selectmen shall set forth such proportion in their certification
to the town clerk provided for in paragraph (b) of this section, which proportion shall
continue until the town meeting membership would exceed or fall below the above
mentioned limits, at which time the selectmen shall revise the proportion in the manner
set forth above.
(d) The town clerk shall after every election of town meeting members forthwith mail to
each member a notice of his election.
(e) No person shall be entitled to vote for any town officer or upon any questions
submitted to the entire vote of the town unless he is a registered voter as hereinafter
provided.
(f) Every town meeting member shall be a resident and a registered voter in the district
from which he is chosen at the time of the election.
(g) Any person claiming a right to vote in said town shall after the acceptance of this act
register as a voter with the selectmen of said town, and the selectmen shall, on or before
October 15, 1935, prepare a list of registered voters of each district as of September 1,
1935, and shall post in a public and conspicuous place in each district on or before
October 15, 1935, a copy of such list, and shall annually thereafter, on or before the 15th
day of September, prepare a list of registered voters in each district as of August 20
preceding, and shall, on or before the 15th day of September, post in a public and
conspicuous place in each district a copy of such list. The selectmen may on or before
September 1, 1935, place on such registration list the names of any voters registered at
the time of the acceptance of this act and identified as such through the means of the
A290:5 11 - 15 - 2007
PRIVATE AND SPECIAL LAWS RELATING TO SANFORD
annual poll tax census. The selectmen shall have authority to hire whatever clerical
assistance they deem necessary for the purpose of preparing such list.
(h) Any voter duly registered at the time of the acceptance of this act and who has
continued his residence in the town of Sanford to the date of his registration shall be
entitled as a matter of right within 2 years of the acceptance of this act to register at any
time, including the day of election, by filing his registration with the selectmen, and no
proof of qualification shall be required except proof of the fact that he was a duly
registered voter at the time of the acceptance of this act and has continued his residence
in the town since that time. After a period of 2 years from the acceptance of this act,
however, all voters shall qualify for registration according to law, and such registration
shall be made in all cases at the latest on the secular day preceding the election. If any
voter is registered on the day of election, as above provided, the selectmen shall issue to
him a certificate of his registration which, upon presentment to the warden or presiding
election officer to enter the name of such person on the voting lists of such district. Such
certificates shall be retained by be1
 presiding election officer or warden and filed with the
check lists in the office of the town clerk within 24 hours after such election.
(i) The number of registered voters in each district on September 1, 1935 shall constitute
the basis for representation of said district as to town meeting members to be elected at
be2
 annual town meeting of 1935, and thereafter the number of registered voters in each
district on August 20 shall constitute the basis of representation.
(j) The selectmen may register voters at any time, but they shall be in open session on the
3 secular days next preceding the annual town meeting to receive evidence of the
qualifications of persons claiming a right to vote at such election, and they shall correct
the list of registered voters in each district and turn the same over, together with 2 copies
thereof for each polling district, to the town clerk, who shall cause to be delivered to the
presiding officer of each polling district before the opening of the polls on election day 2
copies of the list applicable to such district, and all provisions of law applicable to check
lists for towns and wards shall apply to check lists for such polling districts.
(k) The check lists used under this act at town meetings shall be used also at all other
elections held in said town, subject to the provisions of the general law. All voters whose
names are on the check lists now used in said town for all other elections and whose
names do not now appear on the check lists used for town meetings in said town may
have their names enrolled on the said check lists for town meetings at any time, including
the day of any election, within 1 year from the effective date of the provisions of this
paragraph. (P and SL 1937, Ch. 50).
Sec. 4. Nomination of candidates; preparation and delivery of ballots; return of
unused ballots. (a) Nomination of candidates for town meeting members to be elected
under this act shall be made by nomination papers which shall bear no political
designation, shall be signed by not less than 10 registered voters of the district in which
1Editor's Note: So in original.
2Editor's Note: So in original.
A290:6 11 - 15 - 2007
SANFORD CODE
the candidate resides, and shall be filed with the town clerk on or before the 14th day next
prior to the day of election, provided that any town meeting member may become a
candidate for re-election by giving written notice thereof to the town clerk at least 20
days next prior to the day of election. No nomination papers shall be valid in respect to
any candidate whose written acceptance is not thereon or attached thereto when filed.
Candidates for any elective municipal office under this act shall have their domiciles in
the town of Sanford. (P and SL 1959, Ch. 95).
(b) The town clerk shall prepare ballots in the manner provided in section 44 of chapter 5
of the revised statutes of 1930, except that he shall prepare a separate set of ballots for
each voting district. In addition to the names of all candidates for the several town
offices, each set of ballots shall contain the names of all candidates for town meeting
members from that district.
(c) The town clerk shall cause to be delivered to the presiding officer of each voting
district before the opening of the polls on the day of election the set of ballots to be used
in such voting district, sealed and marked for such voting district, and a receipt of such
delivery shall be returned to him from the presiding election officer, which receipt, with a
record of the number of ballots sent, shall be kept in the town clerk's office for 1 year. It
shall not be necessary that the town elect a moderator prior to the delivery of said ballots
at the annual town meeting in 1935. At the opening of the polls in each polling place the
seats of the packages shall be publicly broken and the packages shall be opened by the
presiding election officer or officers, and the unused ballots shall be returned to the town
clerk with the check lists and certificates of registration hereinbefore provided.
Sec. 5. Resignation of member, vacancy, how filled. (a) A town meeting member may
resign by filing a written resignation with the town clerk and such resignation shall take
effect on the date of such filing. A town meeting member who removes from the town
shall cease to be a town meeting member, and a town meeting member who removes
from the district from which he was elected to another district may serve only until the
1st January following, provided, however, that the vote of any town meeting member
who has been declared elected shall be valid until he shall have resigned or has been
declared ineligible to serve by the representative town meeting under the provisions of
paragraph (c) of section 6. No elected town meeting member whose official position
entitles him to be a town meeting member at large shall act as a town meeting member at
large during such time as he remains an elected town meeting member.
(b) Any vacancy in the full number of town meeting members from any district, whether
arising from a failure of the registered voters thereof to elect, or from any other cause,
shall be filled until the next annual election by the remaining members of the district
from among the registered voters thereof. Upon notification therefor, signed by not less
than 5 town meeting members from the district, notice of any such vacancy shall
promptly be given by the town clerk to the clerk of the district in which the vacancy or
vacancies exist, who shall call a meeting of such members for the purpose of filling such
vacancy or vacancies. The chairman and clerk shall make a certificate of the choice and
forthwith file the same with the town clerk, together with a written acceptance by the
A290:7 11 - 15 - 2007
PRIVATE AND SPECIAL LAWS RELATING TO SANFORD
member or members so chosen who shall thereupon be deemed elected and qualified as a
town meeting member or members, subject to the right of all the town meeting members
to judge of the election and qualifications according to the provisions of this act, of the
members as set forth in section 6.
Sec. 6. Eligible members; to receive no compensation; quorum; warrant. (a) Any
representative town meeting held under the provisions of this act, except as otherwise
provided herein, shall be limited to the elective town meeting members, together with the
following designated as town meeting members at large, to wit: moderator, secretary of
the warrant committee, and town clerk.
(b) The town meeting members as such shall receive no compensation.
(c) The town meeting members as aforesaid shall be the judges of the election and of the
qualifications, according to the provisions of this act, of their members.
(d) The majority of all town meeting members shall constitute a quorum for doing
business, but a less number may organize temporarily and may adjourn from time to time.
(e) The warrant for any town meeting shall be in manner and form provided by law and
an attested copy thereof shall be posted in a public and conspicuous place in each voting
district in manner provided by law. No town meeting shall adjourn over the date of an
election of town meeting members. All town meetings shall be public. Subject to such
conditions as may be determined by the members of the representative town meeting, any
registered voter or taxpayer of the town who is not a town meeting member may speak at
any representative town meeting, but shall not vote.
Sec. 7. Articles in warrant; action on. (a) The articles in the warrant for every town
meeting so far as they relate to the election of the moderator, town officers and town
meeting members, and as herein provided, to referenda and all matters to be acted upon
and determined by ballot, shall be so aced3
 upon and determined by the registered voters
of the town in their respective polling places. All other articles in the warrant for any
town meeting shall be acted upon exclusively by town meeting members at a meeting to
be held at such time and place as shall be set forth by the selectmen in the warrant for the
meeting, provided that the time of the annual town meeting shall be in accordance with
the provisions of chapter 45 of the private and special laws of 1933, and at the suspended
meeting the newly elected moderator shall announce the result of the election.
All articles intended by petition, for insertion in the warrant for holding the annual town
meeting shall be filed in the office of the selectmen on or before 5:00 P.M. of September
30th of each year, and no article shall be inserted in such warrant unless so filed. The
municipal officers may, after September 30th of each year, if in their judgment municipal
urgency or necessity requires, insert, or cause to be inserted, in the warrant for holding
the annual town meeting, any article or articles they deem necessary for adequate and
proper functioning of representative town government. (P and SL 1959, Ch. 95).
3Editor's Note: So in original.
A290:8 11 - 15 - 2007
SANFORD CODE
(b) The business of the annual town meeting or of any special town meeting held prior to
the beginning of the term of office of town meeting members on January 1, 1936 shall be
conducted by all of the voters of the town as heretofore, and at such meetings they shall
have the same authority as heretofore with reference to all matters, including authority to
pass upon appropriations and money affairs for the fiscal year 1936.
Sec. 8. Moderator, election. A moderator shall be elected by ballot at the annual town
meeting in 1935 and at each annual town meeting thereafter and shall serve as moderator
for the business session following his election and for all town meetings thereafter until
his successor is elected and has qualified. Nominations for the election of a moderator
shall be as in the case of nominations for selectmen, and any vacancy in the office shall
be filled by the town meeting members at a meeting held for that purpose. If the
moderator is absent at any meeting a moderator pro tempore shall be elected by the town
meeting members.
Sec. 9. Town warrant committee; organization; caucus; certification of names;
vacancy. (a) There shall be a town warrant committee which shall be an advisory
committee to pass upon all articles of the town warrant and make recommendations as to
the disposition of said articles. They may also recommend what action the town should
take upon all matters placed before the town in referendum.
(b) Two members of the warrant committee shall be chosen from the registered voters of
each district by the town meeting representatives of the district in the manner hereinafter
set forth, and 5 members at large of this committee shall be appointed by the selectmen.
The term of office of the warrant committee members shall be for 1 year, beginning on
the first day of February next following their election. Before the first town meeting
following January 31 of each year the town clerk shall call a meeting of the warrant
committee by notifying each member of the time and place of such meeting. At this
meeting the warrant committee shall organize by choosing a chairman. The town clerk
shall act as temporary chairman until a permanent chairman is chosen. The secretary of
the town warrant committee shall keep minutes of its proceedings which shall show the
vote of each member upon each question or article in the town warrant. The town clerk
shall be the secretary of the town warrant committee. All meetings of the town warrant
committee shall be open to the public (P and SL 1959, Ch. 95).
(c) A caucus a4
 the members of each district for the purpose of electing members of the
warrant committee shall be called by the district clerk on notification to him by mail by
the town clerk of the necessity and object of holding such a meeting. At this caucus there
shall be elected from the district representatives a chairman and a clerk who shall be
available to serve for the period of 1 year front5
 the date of their election. Such chairman
and clerk shall serve without compensation. The call for the holding of the first district
caucuses held after the acceptance of this act shall be issued by a representative member
of each district who shall have been notified by mail by the town clerk to do so. Such
4Editor's Note: So in original.
5Editor's Note: So in original.
A290:9 11 - 15 - 2007
PRIVATE AND SPECIAL LAWS RELATING TO SANFORD
district representative member shall act as district clerk until his successor has been
elected.
(d) The aforesaid district caucuses shall be held on or before the 20th day of January next
following the annual election, and within 48 hours after such caucus each district clerk
shall certify to the town clerk the names and addresses of the warrant committee
members elected from his district. The selectmen shall annually on or before the 27th day
of January certify to the town clerk the names and addresses of their appointees to the
warrant committee; and the town clerk shall forthwith notify all members of the said
committee of their election. The present finance or advisory committee shall serve as a
town warrant committee until a warrant committee shall have been chosen under the
provisions of this act.
(e) Any vacancy occurring in the membership at large of the warrant committee shall be
filled by the selectmen. Any vacancy occurring among the district delegations shall be
filled by the representative town meeting members of the district affected by the vacancy
at a meeting called by the district clerk for that purpose.
Sec. 10. Referendum provided for. A vote passed at any representative town meeting
authorizing the expenditure of $20,000 or more as a special appropriation, or establishing
a new board or office, or abolishing an old board or office, or merging 2 or more boards
or offices, or fixing the term of office of town officers where such term is optional, or
increasing or reducing the number of members of a board, or any change in the officers to
be chosen by ballot, or in the number of terms thereof, as provided by sections 38 to 53
inclusive of chapter 5 of the revised statutes of 1930, or adopting a new by-law, or
amending an existing by-law, shall not be operative until the expiration of 5 days,
exclusive of Sundays and holidays, from the date of the dissolution of the meeting. If,
within said 5 days, a petition, signed by not less than 5% of the registered voters of the
town, containing their names and addresses as they appear on the list of registered voters,
is filed with the selectmen, asking that the question or questions involved in such a vote
be submitted to the registered voters of the town at large, then the selectmen shall within
10 days after the filing of such petition call a special meeting for the sole purpose of
presenting to the registered voters at large the question or questions so involved. The
polls shall be opened at 9 o'clock in the forenoon and shall remain open until 7 o'clock in
the evening when they shall be closed; and all votes upon any questions so submitted
shall be taken by ballot, and the check list shall be used in the several district meetings in
the same manner as in the election of town officers. The questions so submitted shall be
determined by a majority vote of the registered voters of the town voting thereon, but no
action of the representative town meeting shall be reversed unless at least 20% of all the
registered voters of the town shall so vote. Each question so submitted shall be in the
form of the following question, which shall be placed upon the official ballot: "Shall the
town vote to approve the action of the representative town meeting whereby it was voted
(brief description of the substance of the vote)?" If such petition is not filed within said
period of 5 days, the vote of the representative town meeting shall become operative and
effective upon the expiration of said period.
A290:10 11 - 15 - 2007
SANFORD CODE
Sec. 11 Interpretation of town acts. The town, after the acceptance of this act, shall
continue to have the capacity to act through and to be bound by its town meeting
members, who shall, when convened from time to time as herein provided, constitute
representative town meetings; and the representative town meetings shall exercise
exclusively, so far as will conform to the provisions of this act, all powers vested in the
municipal corporation. Action in conformity with all provisions of law now or hereafter
applicable to the transaction of town affairs in town meeting, shall, when taken by any
representative town meeting in accordance with the provisions of this act, have the same
force and effect as if such action had been taken in a town meeting open to all the voters
of the town as organized and conducted before the establishment in town of
representative town meeting government.
Sec. 12. Limitation. This act shall not abridge the right of the inhabitants of the town to
hold general meetings, as secured to them by the constitution of this state; nor shall this
act confer upon any representative town meeting the power finally to commit the town to
any measure affecting its municipal existence without action thereon by the voters of the
town at large, using the ballot and the check list therefor.
Sec. 13. Applicability of present laws. The change in form of government provided
herein shall not affect the legal responsibilities and privileges of the town of Sanford, and
except as herein otherwise provided, the town and the town meetings held hereunder shall
be subject to the general statutes of the state of Maine and to all special acts applicable to
town meetings and town elections in the town of Sanford; and to the provisions of section
38 to 52, inclusive of chapter 5 of the revised statutes and amendments thereto, which
provisions have been accepted by the said town of Sanford.
Sec. 14. Act to be submitted for approval. This act shall be submitted for approval or
rejection to the qualified voters of the town of Sanford at a special meeting to be called
by the selectmen and held on or before July 1, 1935. The vote shall be taken by ballot in
answer to the question. "Shall an act passed by the legislature in the year 1935, entitled
'An Act Establishing in the Town of Sanford a Representative Town Government' be
accepted?" which shall be printed on the official ballot, and at said meeting the voters of
said town in favoring the acceptance of this act shall vote "Yes," and those opposed shall
vote "No." If a majority of the ballots deposited as aforesaid shall favor accepting the
same, this act shall immediately become effective.
Sec. 15. Emergency clause. In view of the emergency recited in the preamble, an act
shall take effect immediately, subject to the approval of the voters as provided in section
14.
Note: This Act became effective on April 6, 1935, for the purpose of having a local
referendum. It was accepted by the voters of Sanford on June 28, 1935 under Article 2.
A290:11 11 - 15 - 2007
PRIVATE AND SPECIAL LAWS RELATING TO SANFORD
Subsequent amendments have been incorporated and are as follows:
Sec. 3(k) – Added by P and S Law Ch. 56 (1937)
Secs. 4(a), 7(a) and 9(b) – Amended by P and S Law Ch. 95 (1959)
A290:12 11 - 15 - 2007
SANFORD CODE
AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF A BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS OF POLICE FOR THE TOWN OF SANFORD
(Private and Special Laws of 1935, Chapter 53)
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine, as follows:
Sec. 1. Organization. The police department of the town of Sanford shall consist of a
chief of police and patrolmen to the number determined by the voters of the town. In the
event that the town of Sanford shall adopt a representative town government, the number
of patrolmen fall6
 be determined by the town meeting members.
Sec. 2. Board of police commissioners. A board of commissioners of police, consisting
of 3 resident citizens of Sanford, shall be elected by the registered voters of said town of
Sanford at the 1st town meeting to be held after this act shall become effective. In the 1st
instance, the candidate polling the highest number of votes shall be elected for a term of 3
years, the candidate polling the 2nd highest number of votes shall be elected for a term of
2 years, and the candidate polling the 3rd highest number of votes shall be elected for a
term of 1 year; and every year thereafter, at each annual town meeting, there shall be 1
commissioner of police elected for a term of 3 years. In case of a vacancy in said board
caused by death, illness, resignation or other reason, the board of selectmen shall appoint
a member to serve until the next annual town meeting, whereupon a new member shall be
elected to serve out the unexpired balance of the term. (P and SL 1949, Ch. 28)
Sec. 3. Qualification. Each member of said board shall qualify after this appointment as
aforesaid by being sworn by the town clerk of said town, or by a justice of the peace, to
the faithful discharge of his duties. In the event that a member qualifies before a justice of
the peace, a certificate thereof shall be forthwith filed by said justice with said town
clerk.
Sec. 4. Appointing power. The board of commissioners of police hereby created shall
have full power and authority, subject to the provisions of this act, to select and appoint
the members of the police department of said town of Sanford, as hereinafter provided,
shall have full and complete power of administration of said police department, and shall
have such other powers as are given them by the terms of this act.
Sec. 5. Procedure. When said board of commissioners shall have qualified they shall
meet and elect a chairman and clerk of their number and shall forthwith select and
appoint, in the manner hereinafter provided, said patrolmen who, with the chief of police,
shall constitute the police department of said town of Sanford.
Sec. 6. Applications by candidates. Candidates for appointment as patrolmen shall make
application therefor to said board of commissioners of police upon blanks furnished by it.
All such candidates and all candidates to fill any vacancies occurring in said force or for
any new places on said force occasioned by an increase in the number thereof shall
6Editor's Note: So in original.
A290:13 11 - 15 - 2007
PRIVATE AND SPECIAL LAWS RELATING TO SANFORD
submit to such qualification was7
 as may be prescribed by said board. The board by such
qualification tests shall inquire into the physical, mental and moral fitness of each of the
applicants for appointments. The board shall fix and determine any and all residence
requirements for all applicants for appointment as patrolmen, except that all candidates
after appointment as permanent patrolmen shall establish their legal residence within the
town of Sanford and during a period of no more than 6 months from the date of such
permanent appointment. It shall place on the eligible list all applicants who shall
satisfactorily meet such tests and requirements, and every appointment shall be from
persons upon such eligible list. Each applicant shall remain upon said list for the period
of one year from the date of application. The physical examination prescribed by said
board shall be conducted by the town physician. (P and SL 1967, Ch. 113)
Sec. 7. Eligibility; term of service. Any male United States citizen between the ages of
21 and 30 shall be eligible to appointment, provided he shall have made application
therefor and shall satisfactorily meet the qualification tests and requirements prescribed
by said board. Each patrolman shall be appointed to serve until he shall arrive at the age
of 55, when he shall be retired unless previously removed by said board as hereinafter
provided. In the event of a reduction in said force, the latest to be appointed thereto shall
be first removed, and shall be given preference, if still upon said list, in filling the first
vacancy. (P and SL 1967, Ch. 113).
Sec. 8. Powers of patrolmen. All patrolmen shall have and exercise, within the limits of
said town, all the common law and statutory powers of constables, except service of civil
process, and Al8
 powers given to police officers by the ordinances of said town.
Sec. 9. Chief of police. The chief of police shall be chosen by the board of
commissioners for a term of 2 years from the date of his election or until his successor
shall be elected and qualified. He shall qualify by being sworn by the town clerk of the
town of Sanford or by a justice of the peace, and in the event that he qualifies before a
justice of the peace a certificate thereof shall be forthwith filed by said justice with the
town clerk. The oath shall be to the faithful performance of his duties. He shall have and
exercise all the powers and authority given to him by the statutes of the state and such
special powers and authority as may from time to time be delegated to him by the board
of police commissioners. The chief of police may be removed by the board of police
commissioners for cause. He shall upon request be furnished with a written copy of the
charges against him and shall, before action by the commissioners, be given a public
hearing. Such hearing may be held upon charges made by said commissioners or upon
written charges being filed with said commissioners by 5 or more citizens of Sanford.
Sec. 10. Special patrolmen. Special patrolmen shall be appointed by said commissioners
form9
 the eligible list of applicants for patrolmen, when necessary to make such
appointments, with the exception of those assigned for special duty in the institutions and
industries of the town who shall not have to qualify for the several examinations
7Editor's Note: So in original.
8Editor's Note: So in original.
9Editor's Note: So in original.
A290:14 11 - 15 - 2007
SANFORD CODE
prescribed by the commissioners. The special officers shall have the same authority as
vested in the members of the regular force of patrolmen.
Sec. 11. Discipline of patrolmen. When guilty of misconduct in line of duty, patrolmen
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100, or by suspension without pay for a
period of not more than 30 days, or by removal for cause, on complaint of the chief of
police to said board of commissioners, or upon written complain10 signed by 5 citizens of
said town, or upon charges filed by the board itself, except that the chief of police may
suspend any patrolman for misbehavior or neglect of duty for a period of not exceeding 1
week, without pay, without preferring charges to said board. In all cases, when notified of
such charges patrolmen shall be entitled to a copy thereof and to a public hearing thereon,
at such time and place as said board shall designate, and the findings of said board upon
such charges shall be final. Allen11 fines shall have been imposed such fines shall be paid
to the town treasurer. Or credit to police department account and the patrolmen so fined
shall stand suspended, without pay, until the order shall be complied with.
Sec. 12. Compensation. Each member of the board of commissioners of police shall be
compensated on the basis of $100 per year. The compensation of the chief of police and
of the patrolmen shall be fixed by the voters of said town in town meeting. In the event
that the town of Sanford shall adopt a representative town government, the compensation
of the chief of police and of the patrolmen shall be fixed by the town meeting members.
(P and SL 1949, Ch. 28).
Sec. 13. Policemen not to participate in politics. No policemen holding an office
authorized by this act shall hold any other public office, be it elective or appointive, nor
take any active part in politics. Any violation of this section shall be considered cause for
removal (P and SL 1949, Ch. 28).
Sec. 14. Fees. All fees paid to the chief of police or any patrolman shall be accounted for
by said Officers and turned over forthwith to the treasurer of said town, for credit to
police department account.
Sec. 15. Present officers continued. The chief of police and patrolmen of the police
department of the town of Sanford at the time of the taking effect of this act shall
continue in oft-ace12 with all the powers and duties with which they are by law vested,
until the selection and appointment of said chief of police and patrolmen as herein
provided, and the tenure of office of said officers shall terminate as of the date of said
election and appointment.
Sec. 16. Limit on age restriction. Any patrolman serving on the police force of the town
at the time of the taking effect of this Act shall be exempt from the qualifying age
restriction of this Act. Any patrolman serving on the police force of the town at the time
10Editor's Note: So in original.
11Editor's Note: So in original.
12Editor's Note: So in original.
A290:15 11 - 15 - 2007
PRIVATE AND SPECIAL LAWS RELATING TO SANFORD
of the taking effect of any amendment to this Act shall be exempt from the qualifying age
restriction of any amendment to this Act. (P and SL 1967, Ch. 113).
Note: This Act became effective on June 5, 1935. No Town vote was necessary
Subsequent amendments have been incorporated and are as follows:
Secs. 2, 12 and 13 – Changed by P and S Law Ch. 28 (1949).
Secs. 6, 7 and 16 – Changed by P and S Law Ch. 113 (1967).
Sec. 6 – An attempt was made to amend this section by use of the Town's home rule
powers on December 6, 1971, under Article 30. The editors feel that this attempt was not
in compliance with the legal procedure required by 30 M.R.S.A. Ch. 201-A and is
therefore invalid.
A290:16 11 - 15 - 2007
SANFORD CODE
AN ACT TO CHANGE THE TIME FOR HOLDING THE ANNUAL TOWN
MEETING OF THE TOWN OF SANFORD, YORK COUNTY, MAINE, AND FOR
OTHER PURPOSES
(Private and Special Laws of 1933. Chapter 45)
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine, as follows:
Sec. 1. Annual town meeting. The annual town meeting of the inhabitants of the town of
Sanford for the election of all municipal officers, members of committees, members of
boards, trustees and commissioners, required by the laws of said state or by vote of the
inhabitants of said town to be elected shall be held on the 1st Monday of December of the
year 1933 and the 1st Monday of each succeeding year thereafter; that the 1st Monday of
December of the year 1933 and the 1st Monday of December of each succeeding year
thereafter shall be designated as the date of the annual town meeting of said town of
Sanford, and that the voters thereof shall be warned according to the revised statutes
pertaining to towns and the calling and holding of town meetings therein.
Sec. 2. Opening of polls. That the polls for said election shall remain open until 7 p.m.
standard time, on the 1st Monday of each December, that upon the close of the polls at 7
p.m., standard time, further business of said annual town meeting shall stand suspended,
except for the sorting, counting of ballots and the announcement by the moderator of the
successful candidates in said election; that otherwise, said meeting shall stand suspended
until 7 p.m. on the Tuesday following the 1st Monday of December, to which time said
meeting shall stand suspended, and at which suspended meeting the remaining articles of
the annual town warrant shall be disposed of by action of the inhabitants of said town.
Sec. 3. Fiscal year. The municipal, financial or fiscal year shall commence January 1st
and terminate December 31st of each year.
Sec. 4. Election of water district trustee. A trustee for the Sanford water district shall be
elected annually at said annual meeting on said 1st Monday of December, the 1st election
of such trustee to be held id13 the December annual meeting, 1934; said water district
trustee elected at said 1934 annual meeting shall qualify and assume office January 1,
1935, and thereafter, annually, such water district trustee shall be elected at the annual
December meeting and qualify and assume office the following January 1st.
Sec. 5. Present terms of offices not affected. All officers, members of committees,
members of boards, trustees and commissioners, elected on the 1st Monday of December,
1933, shall not assume their respective offices until the expiration of the term of office of
their predecessors in such offices, namely, the day following the 2nd Monday of March,
1934. All officers, members of committees, members of boards, trustees and
commissioners elected at all annual meetings subsequent to 1933 shall qualify and
assume their respective offices on the 1st day of January following such annual meeting.
13Editor's Note: So in original.
A290:17 11 - 15 - 2007
PRIVATE AND SPECIAL LAWS RELATING TO SANFORD
Sec. 6. Saving clause. Except as hereinbefore provided otherwise, the town meeting of
said inhabitants of said town of Sanford on said 1st Monday of December, and the
Tuesday following said 1st Monday of December, shall be subject to all of the provisions
of the revised statutes of said state and all acts amendatory thereto relating to town
meetings and town elections.
Note: This Act became effective on June 29, 1933 No Town vote was necessary.
A290:18 11 - 15 - 2007
SANFORD CODE
AN ACT RELATING TO TOWN MEETINGS OF SANFORD
(Private and Special Laws of 1959, Chapter 95)
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine, as follows:
The town officers of Sanford shall prepare a balance sheet showing in detail as of each
October 31st the total receipts and expenditures for the preceding year to the aforesaid
date of October 31st and including a statement of the assets and liabilities of said town as
of the said October 31st. This report shall be available for the voters 7 days in advance of
the annual election. The town officers shall prepare each Year a complete town report for
the fiscal year ending December 31 to be published no later than February 15 of the
following year.
Note: This provision was originally enacted by P and S Law 190, Ch. 50. P and S Law
1959, Ch. 95 repealed and reenacted the same wording.
A290:19 11 - 15 - 2007
SANFORD CODE
AN ACT TO AUTHORIZE THE TOWN OF SANFORD TO ACQUIRE, OWN,
MAINTAIN AND OPERATE A GAS PLANT
(Private and Special Laws of 1913, Chapter 165)
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine, as follows
Sec. 1. The town of Sanford is hereby authorized and empowered to acquire, own,
maintain and operate a gas plant, and for such purpose said town is vested with the power
to raise money, as hereinafter provided, for the purchase or lease of lands, buildings,
machinery and personal property necessary for properly equipping, operating and
maintaining said gas plant.
Sec. 2. Said town of Sanford is also hereby authorized and empowered to use the gas, by
it manufactured and generated, to light its streets, roads, public squares, and all buildings
or parts of buildings owned, used or occupied by it; and said town is further authorized to
sell, distribute and furnish gas for lighting, heating, manufacturing, and mechanical
purposes to individuals and corporations within the limits of said town of Sanford.
Sec. 3. For the purposes of establishing, operating, and maintaining said gas plant, the
said town of Sanford is hereby authorized and empowered to take, lease, purchase, and
hold all real estate and personal property, necessary or convenient; and may construct,
lay, maintain, and operate lines of pipe for the transmission of gas underground, over,
under and along any and all streets, roads, or ways within the limits of said town of
Sanford and for the purposes of laying its pipes and distributing gas, said town shall have
authority to take such rights in real estate across private land as may be necessary.
Sec. 4. The board of selectmen of said Sanford are hereby authorized and empowered, on
behalf of said town, to purchase any land together with all rights, privileges and
easements appurtenant thereto, or to lay pipes across the land of any person or
corporation, necessary in carrying out the purposes of this act; and if the said board of
selectmen are unable to purchase from the owners thereof any such land or easement in
such land as they deem necessary to have in carrying out the purposes of this act or
cannot agree with the said owners upon the price to be paid for such land or the easement
therein; then the said town of Sanford, by its board of selectmen, are hereby authorized
and empowered to enter upon, take and hold said land or easement therein; and within
thirty days after entering upon and determining the quantity of land to be taken and held
and the boundaries thereof, said selectmen shall file in the registry of deeds for the county
of York, notice of said taking, together with plans and descriptions of said land, with the
purposes for which it is taken, signed by the aforesaid selectmen, and after filing said
plan, description and purposes, may enter upon, take and hold the land or easements in
said land included in said description for the purposes herein designated, and may use
any portion of the land so taken and held for the purposes mentioned and contemplated in
this act, the damages therefor to be assessed by the county commissioners of York county
upon application therefor, by either the owners of said property so taken or by the
selectmen of said Sanford, said application to be made within six months after the filing
A290:21 11 - 15 - 2007
PRIVATE AND SPECIAL LAWS RELATING TO SANFORD
of said notice, plan and description before mentioned. Such damages are to be assessed in
the same manner and under the same restrictions, conditions, limitations and rights of
appeal, as are by law prescribed in the case of damages for the laying out of highways, so
far as such law is consistent with the provisions of this act.
Sec. 5. Said town of Sanford for the purpose of carrying into full effect the provisions of
this act in establishing, constructing, furnishing, equipping and fully maintaining sad14
gas plant, any at is15 annual town meeting or at any legal meeting called for that purpose,
raise money, and issue bonds, in such denominations, and on such time and rate of
interest as may be determined at such meeting to an amount necessary for said purpose,
which taken in connection with any other indebtedness of said town will not exceed five
per return of the last regular valuation thereof. Said bonds shall be signed by the
selectmen and treasurer of said town of Sanford.
Sec. 6. The building, equipping, care and management of said gas plant shall be under the
control of the selectmen; or if the legal voters of said town of Sanford at its annual town
meeting or at any meeting legally called for that purpose, so vote, said duties shall be
placed in the hands of a commission, the members of which shall be chosen in town
meeting as other municipal officers are chosen, and shall be known as "Commissioners of
Public Service." If such commission is chosen it shall then exercise the powers and duties
hereinbefore given to the board of selectmen for equipping, maintaining and operating
said gas plant. Said commission shall consist of three members, who shall be legal voters
of said town of Sanford, one chosen for one year, one chosen for two years, and one
chosen for three years and after the first year one shall be chosen each year for the term
of three years, and in case a vacancy occurs in such commission the selectmen may
appoint a member to act until the next annual town meeting.
Note: This Act was approved on March 25, 1913 and became effective on July 11, 1913.
No town vote was necessary.
14Editor's Note: So in original.
15Editor's Note: So in original.
A290:22 11 - 15 - 2007
SANFORD CODE
AN ACT RELATING TO THE CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS IN THE
TOWN OF SANFORD
(Private and Special Laws of 1913, Chapter 207)
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine, as follows:
Sec. 1. Selectmen authorized to assess for improvements, sidewalks, etc. Whenever the
selectmen of Sanford who have been authorized by a majority vote at the annual town
meeting, or at any special meeting, called for that purpose, shall have determined that a
permanent improvement should be made, by the construction, repair, alterations, renewals
or reconstruction of any sidewalks, or street gutters in said Sanford, and shall have caused
the same to be made, they shall then proceed to cause a part of the cost of such
improvement, not exceeding 1/2 of the whole cost, to be apportioned and assessed upon
abutting, adjacent, or other property or estates specially benefited thereby, and the
amount of the assessment upon such estate or other property shall be determined by said
selectmen and a list made of the same. The cost of such improvement, not exceeding 1/2
of the whole cost, shall be apportioned and assessed upon or against abutting, adjacent or
other property or estates specially benefited thereby, or to the owner or person in
possession thereof, on the 1st day of each April. In cases of mortgaged real estate, the
mortgagor, for purposes of apportioning and assessing improvement costs, shall be
deemed the owner until the mortgagee takes possession, after which the mortgagee shall
be deemed the owner. (P and SL 1951, Ch. 47)
Sec. 2. The selectmen shall, within thirty days after the list is made up, publish the list of
said assessments in two newspapers published in said Sanford or in two newspapers
published in York County at least fourteen days before the time and place set for a
hearing in respect to the amount of said assessments. Said selectmen shall mad16 each
owner, agent, or manager, if known, of real estate so assessed a copy of said list of
assessment and the time and place of hearing on the same at least fourteen days before
the day appointed for said hearing. The selectmen shall hear all the parties interested and
finally determine the amount of said several assessments, and the date of such
determination shall be the date of the commencement of the lien hereafter mentioned.
Sec. 3. All assessments so made shall constitute a lien upon the real estate so assessed, to
continue in force until paid, and shall be Certified by the board of selectmen to the
collector of taxes of said town, and if not paid on or before the first day of November
next after the same is laid, shall be collected by said collector by any of the methods
provided by law for the collection of taxes from resident or nonresident owners. Any
person aggrieved by the amount of said assessment may appeal to the next term of the
supreme judicial court to be holden in the county of York at least sixty days from the date
of final determination and judgment of the amount of said assessment by said selectmen
aforesaid, and the same proceedings shall be had in said court as provided in the case of
raising or lowering the grade of the street.
16Editor's Note: So in original.
A290:23 11 - 15 - 2007
PRIVATE AND SPECIAL LAWS RELATING TO SANFORD
Note: This Act was approved on April 1, 1913 and took effect on July 11, 1911. No town
vote was necessary. Paragraph 1 was amended in 1951 and the change has been
incorporated.
A290:24 11 - 15 - 2007

Chapter 291
SEWER DISTRICT

SEWER DISTRICT
Chapter A291
SEWER DISTRICT
IN THE YEAR OF OUR LORD
NINETEEN HUNDRED FORTY-SEVEN
Private and Special Law 1947 Chapter 169
An Act Creating The Sanford Sewerage District
As amended by the following:
Private and Special Law 1953, Chapter 86
Private and Special Law 1957, Chapter 153
Private and Special Law 1969, Chapter 13 and 137
Private and Special Law 1971, Chapter 161
Private and Special Law 1973, Chapter 161
Private and Special Law 1978. Chapter 90
Private and Special Law 1981, Chapter 2
Private and Special Law 1998, Chapter 74
Town of Sanford Referendum Vote per
Section 10 – A, March 25, 2003
Private and Special Law 2011, Chapter 11,
LD 1483, 125th Maine Legislature, First Regular Session (6-1-2011)
A291:1 12 - 01 - 2014
SANFORD CODE
BE IT ENACTED BY THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF MAINE, AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1. TERRITORIAL LIMITS - CORPORATE NAME – PURPOSES
The inhabitants and territory within the Town of Sanford in the County of York shall be,
and hereby are, created a body politic under the corporate name of the “Sanford Sewerage
District,” hereinafter called “the district,” for the purpose of providing a means of collecting,
conveying, pumping, treating and disposing of domestic sewage and commercial and industrial
waste within the district and outside the district.
The purposes herein stated shall in no event impose any obligation of duty upon said
district to operate or maintain any system or portions thereof with the district providing for
surface or highway drainage, for the operation of maintenance of storm-water lines, or impose
any obligation of duty on said district to clean, clear, or widen any brooks, streams or water
courses within said district, or to maintain any catch-basins and remove snow there from within
said district; provided however, that so long as any storm-water lines or catch-basins remain
combined or connected with any sanitary sewer lines within said district, the district shall have
the duty and obligation to operate and maintain the same, exclusive of the removal from catchbasins of ice and snow, leaves and other obstructions, until said storm-water lines and catchbasins shall be separated by said district from said sanitary sewer lines and transferred over the
Town of Sanford under the jurisdiction of the highway department or departments within said
district as hereinafter provided.
SECTION 2. POWERS
The district is authorized for the purposes of this section to take over and hold the sewers
and other assets of the existing sewerage system of the Town of Sanford and to acquire and hold
by purchase, lease, the exercise of the right of eminent domain or otherwise land, real estate,
rights or easements, or interests in land, real estate, rights or easements, located within the
district or elsewhere and personal property. The district has all the powers and authorities and is
subject to all the limitations and restrictions provided to a sanitary district formed under the
Maine Revised Statutes, Title 38, chapter 11, except that sections 1061, 1062, 1067, 1101, 1102,
1103, 1104, 1105, 1106, 1159, 1160, 1201, subsection 10, 1203, 1205, 1206, 1207 and 1210 do
not apply to the district and any notice impending automatic foreclosure issued by the district
must bear the name “Sanford Sewerage District” in all appropriate locations.
1. Other applicable laws. The district is subject to all the provisions of the Maine
Revised Statutes, Title 38, Section 1252.
2. Contracts. The district is authorized to contract with persons, corporations, districts
and other municipalities, both inside and outside the boundaries of the district, with the State of
Maine and the United States Government or any agency of either and private contractors, to
provide for disposal of sewage and commercial and industrial waste and storm and surface
water through the district’s system and through the system of any such person, corporation,
district or other municipality; and every other district and municipality of the State of Maine is
authorized to contract with the district for the collection, distribution, treatment and disposal of
sewage and commercial and industrial waste and storm and surface water.
A291:2 12 - 01 - 2014
SEWER DISTRICT
SECTION 2A. INSPECTION OF SEWERS
The officers or agents of the district shall have free access to all premises served by its
sewers, at all reasonable hours, for inspection of plumbing and sewage fixtures, to ascertain the
quality and quantity of sewage discharged and the manner of discharge, and to enforce the
provisions of this charter, the rules and regulations prescribed by the Trustees of the district and
any and all applicable federal, state and local laws.
SECTION 3. LIABILITY
As a governmental entity, as defined in the Maine Tort Claims Act, the district and its
officers, agents and employees are afforded all of the privileges and immunities granted under
the Maine Tort Claims Act. All claims seeking recovery of damages must be brought in
accordance with the terms of the Maine Tort Claims Act.
SECTION 4. POWER TO LAY AND MAINTAIN SEWERS - LIABILITY FOR
INJURIES
The district is hereby authorized to lay in and through streets and highways, under any
water course, way or public and private railroad, in the manner prescribed by law, within and
outside the district, and to remove and replace such pipes, aqueducts and fixtures as may be
necessary for the objects above set forth, and whenever the district shall lay, remove or replace
any pipes, aqueducts or fixtures in any street or highway, it shall cause the work to be done with
as little obstruction as possible to the public travel, and shall at its own expense, without
unnecessary delay, cause the earth and pavement to be replaced in proper condition. The district
shall be liable to any person injured by any fault of the district or its agents, or any defects in
the highway occasioned by the construction of the work, or during the repair of same, and also
liable to said person or persons, who are injured through carelessness of the employees of the
district.
SECTION 5. OFFENSES AND PENALTIES
Any person who shall place or leave any offensive or injurious matter or material on or in
the conduits, catch-basins or receptacles or the district contrary to the regulations, or shall
willfully injure any conduit, pipe, reservoir, flush tank, catch-basin, manhole, outlet, engine,
pump or other property held, owned or used by the district for the purpose of this Act, shall pay
twice the amount of the damage to the district to be recovered in any proper action, and that
person shall be guilty of a Class E crime.
SECTION 6. OFFICERS
A291:3 12 - 01 - 2014
SANFORD CODE
All the affairs of the district are managed by a board of 5 trustees. Trustees are elected at
the Town of Sanford annual municipal election and assume office on January 1st following the
election. The trustees must be residents and qualified voters of the district, who are elected by
ballot of the voters of the district legally qualified to vote in the Town of Sanford elections. The
trustees hold office for staggered terms of 3 years and until their successors are chosen and
qualified.
Any registered voter of the district may become a candidate for the office of trustee and
have the candidate’s name appear on the municipal election ballot by signing and presenting a
petition to the town clerk, signed by the number of registered voters of the district as provided
by the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 21-A. If a vacancy occurs more than 3 months before the
next annual election, the vacancy must be filled by the appointment of a registered voter of the
district by the town council of the Town of Sanford for the remaining period until the next
annual election.
At the January meeting following the annual election, the trustees shall elect or appoint a
chair, vice-chair, treasurer, clerk and any other necessary officers to serve until the next annual
election and until their successors are elected or appointed and qualified.
A trustee or an inhabitant of the district may serve as treasurer and shall furnish a bond or
appropriate insurance coverage in such sum and with such sureties as the trustees may approve,
with the cost of the bond or insurance to be paid by the district. Members of the board are
eligible for any office under the board, but may not receive any compensation as an officer
except as trustee, with the exception that whoever serves as treasurer receives a salary to be
determined by the trustees. Each member trustee must be sworn in for faithful performance of
the trustee’s duty.
SECTION 6A. ESTABLISHMENT OF RULES; PREPARATION OF ANNUAL REPORT
The trustees may from time to time adopt, establish and amend reasonable rules,
regulations and bylaws necessary for the proper management of the affairs of the district and
perform other acts within the powers delegated by law to the trustees. The trustees also shall
prepare, publish and make available for any interested inhabitants of the district an annual
report and financial statement of the affairs of the district for the calendar year just preceding,
such report and statement to be prepared, published and made available as soon as practicable
after the close of the calendar year.
SECTION 6B. ADOPTION OF PRETREATMENT RULES
The Trustees may adopt rules and regulations as may be appropriate or lawfully required
to enable the district as a publicly owned treatment works to comply with all state and federal
laws, including the Clean Water Act, 33 United States Code, Section 1251 and the General
Pretreatment Regulations, 40 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403, controlling the use and
operation of Districts and facilities as such, including:
A291:4 12 - 01 - 2014
SEWER DISTRICT
1. The prevention of the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment
works that will interfere with its operation.
2. The prevention of the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment
works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works inadequately
treated into receiving waters or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned
treatment works.
3. The protection of both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be
affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general
public.
4. The provision of fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation,
maintenance and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works.
5. The district’s obligation to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other
federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject.
Any such rule or regulation applies to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. The
rule or regulation may authorize the issuance of wastewater discharge permits, provide for
monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities, establish administrative review procedures,
require user reporting and provide for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs
resulting from the program established.
To the extent authorized under state or federal law, including the Maine Revised Statutes,
Title 38, Section 1252, the district may pursue civil or criminal remedies or injunctive relief
against anyone violating provisions of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this section.
Rules or regulations adopted by the district must be adopted by the Trustees in accordance
with applicable laws, including the Maine Administrative Procedure Act.
SECTION 7. MAY HOLD PROPERTY
The district is authorized and empowered to accept, by action of its trustees, from the
inhabitants of the Town of Sanford, and the Town of Sanford is authorized to convey, by deed
signed by a majority of the town council of the Town of Sanford, duly authorized by the
inhabitants of the Town of Sanford, to the district all right, title and interest that the town may
have in and to the drains and sewers located within the limits of the district on the effective date
of Private and Special Law 1947, chapter 169, but any amount on that date owed by the Town
of Sanford upon the sewers and drains, or any interest due on any amounts owed, must be paid
by the Town of Sanford, and any assessments or amounts due the Town of Sanford, by reason
or on account of any sewer or drain built by the Town of Sanford, must be paid to the Town of
Sanford.
SECTION 7-A. EXEMPT PROPERTY
A291:5 12 - 01 - 2014
SANFORD CODE
The property, both real and personal, rights and franchises of the district are forever
exempt from taxation.
SECTION 8. RIGHT OF ABUTTERS TO ENTER THE SEWER
The district at all times shall be bound to permit the owners of all premises abutting upon
its lines and pipes and conduits to enter the same with all proper sewage, upon conformity to
the rules and regulations of the district, and payment of the rates, prices and rentals established
thereof.
SECTION 8-A. CONNECTION OF PRIVATE SEWERS
Every building within the district intended for human habitation or occupancy or with
facilities for discharge or disposal of sewage or commercial or industrial waste that is accessible
to a sewer drain of that district must have a sanitary sewer or drainage system that must be
connected with that sewer or drain of the district by the owner or person against whom taxes on
the premises are assessed in the most direct manner possible within 90 days after receiving a
request for connection from the district or within such further time as the trustees of the district
may grant and, if feasible, with a separate connection for each building. Existing buildings that
are already served by a private sewer system are not required to connect with any sewer or
drain of the district as long as the private sewer or drainage system functions in a satisfactory
and sanitary manner and does not violate any applicable law or ordinance or any applicable
requirements of the state plumbing code, as determined by the municipal plumbing inspector,
the plumbing inspector’s alternate or, in the event that both are trustees or employees of the
district, the Department of Health and Human Services, Division of Health Engineering. A
building is considered to be accessible to a sewer or drain of the district for the purposes of this
section if that building or any private sewer or drain directly or indirectly connected to the
building, or carrying sewage or commercial or industrial waste from the building, is at any
point or may at some point come within 200 feet of a sewer or drain of the district; except that
nothing in this section requires the owner of any building to acquire any real property or
easement for the sole purpose of making that connection.
SECTION 9. RENTAL FOR CATCH BASINS
The district is hereby authorized to charge as annual rental to the Town of Sanford for the
use of said sewerage system as public drains for highways such reasonable sums as the district
may impose for each catch-basin within said district and connected with the district’s sanitary
sewerage system, said sum to be used under the supervision and direction of the district’s
trustees for the following purposes:
1. To clean, maintain, improve and repair said catch basins.
2. To maintain and repair storm-water lines leading from said catch basins.
A291:6 12 - 01 - 2014
SEWER DISTRICT
3. When necessary for the efficient operation of the sanitary sewerage system, to clear
brooks and streams fed by or feeding into such catch basins or storm-water lines
connected with said sanitary sewerage system.
4. To develop and carry out a program of separating such catch-basins and storm-water
lines now connected with the sanitary sewerage system, from such system where
ever such separation is feasible in the judgment of said district’s Trustees in order to
minimize the amount of storm water using the sanitary sewerage system, including
any sewerage disposal plant to be hereafter installed.
As funds provided for in this section permit, and as far as the separation may be feasible as
provided in this section, and under the direction and supervision of the Board of Trustees of the
district, the catch-basins, storm-water lines and any other surface drainage facilities now
connected with the sanitary sewerage system must as rapidly as possible be separated from the
sanitary sewer system by methods and devices such as connecting catch-basins into storm-water
lines, extending storm-water lines to natural water courses, and diverting storm-water sources
away from sanitary sewerage lines. As the separation is effected, the district, acting through its
trustees, is authorized to convey by deed signed by a majority of the trustees to the inhabitants
of the Town of Sanford, any and all right, title and interest that the district may have in and to
the separated catch-basins, storm-water lines and other surface drainage facilities now located
within the district, and the inhabitants of the Town of Sanford by action of a majority of its
town council shall accept the separated catch-basins, storm-water lines and other surface
drainage facilities to be maintained, repaired, replaced and extended under the direction of the
inhabitants of the Town of Sanford as a part of the usual and regular functions of its Highway
Department or Departments.
SECTION 10. AUTHORIZATION TO RAISE AND BORROW FUNDS.
To procure funds for the purposes of this Act and for such other expenses as may be
necessary for the carrying out of the purposes, the district without a district vote but by action
of its board of trustees, is authorized to raise funds from sources other than operational
activities by borrowing money pursuant to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 38, section 1201.
The district may issue its notes and bonds in one series or in separate series from time to time,
as long as the aggregate outstanding principal balance at any one time does not exceed
$22,000,000 unless a higher debt obligation limit is approved pursuant to section 10-A.
SECTION 10-A. INCREASES IN THE DEBT OBLIGATION LIMIT
The district is authorized to increase its debt obligation limit pursuant to the Maine
Revised Statutes, Title 38, section 1256. The district shall hold a referendum on any increase in
its debt obligation pursuant to Title 38.
SECTION 10-B. STATE AND FEDERAL AID OR GRANTS
A291:7 12 - 01 - 2014
SANFORD CODE
For accomplishing the purposes of this charter, the district through its trustees without vote
of the inhabitants may receive state and federal aid or grants.
SECTION 11. REPEALED
SECTION 12. RATES
All individuals, firms and corporations, whether public, private or municipal, shall pay to
the treasurer of the district rates pursuant to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 38, section 1202.
The district may assess a readiness-to-serve charge pursuant to Title 38, section 1202 but only
against owners or persons in possession or against whom the taxes are assessed of all buildings
or premises intended for human habitation or occupancy, whether the same are occupied or not,
that abut on a street or location through which the district has constructed a sewer line, or the
building of which is within 200 feet of a sewer line constructed by the district, although the
premises are not actually connected to the sewer line.
SECTION 13. COLLECTION OF UNPAID RATES
There shall be a lien on real estate served or benefited by the sewers of the district, to
secure payment of the rates established and due under Section 12, which shall take precedence
over all other claims on that real estate, excepting only claims for taxes.
The Treasurer of the district shall have full and complete authority and power to collect the
rates, tolls, rents and other charges established under Section 12 and the same shall be
committed to him.
The Treasurer may, after demand for payment, sue in the name of the district, in civil
action for any rate, toll, rent or other charges remaining unpaid in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
In addition to other methods established by law for the collection of rates, tolls, rents and
other charges, and without waiver of the right to sue for the same as aforesaid, the lien hereby
created may be enforced in the following manner. The Treasurer, when a rate, toll, rent or other
charge has been committed to him for collection, may after the expiration of three months and
within one year after the date when the same became due and payable, in the case of a person
resident in the district, give or cause to be given to that person, or leave or cause to be left, at
his last and usual place of abode, a notice in writing signed by the Treasurer stating the amount
of that rate, toll, rent or other charge, describing the real estate upon which the lien is claimed,
and stating that a lien is claimed on that real estate to secure the payment of that rate, toll, rent
or other charge, and demanding within 30 days after the service of that notice payment as
aforesaid. In the case of a nonresident of the district, the aforesaid notice shall be given by
registered or certified mail addressed to his last known address or by publication in a newspaper
of general circulation within the district once a week for two successive weeks, and shall
demand payment within 30 days after the mailing thereof or the first publication of notice
thereof as aforesaid. After the expiration of that period of 30 days and within one year
A291:8 12 - 01 - 2014
SEWER DISTRICT
thereafter, the Treasurer shall record in the Registry of Deeds of the county in which the
property of that person is located a certificate signed by the treasurer, setting forth the amount
of the rate, toll, rent or other charge, describing the real estate on which the lien is claimed, and
stating that a lien is claimed on the real estate to secure payment of that rate, toll, rent or other
charge, and that a notice and demand for payment of the same has been given or made in
accordance with this section and stating further that the rate, toll rent or other charge remains
unpaid. At the time of the recording of any such certificate in the Registry of Deeds as
heretofore provided, the treasure shall file in the office of the District a true copy of that
certificate, and shall mail a true copy thereof by registered or certified mail to each record
holder of any mortgage on that real estate, addressed to that record holder at his last and usual
place of abode.
The filing of the aforesaid certificate in the registry of deeds as aforesaid shall be deemed
to create, and shall create, a mortgage on the real estate therein described to the district which
shall have priority over all other mortgages, liens, attachments and encumbrances of any nature,
except liens, attachments and claims for taxes, and shall give to the district all the rights usually
possessed by mortgages, except that the district as mortgagee shall not have any right to
possession of that real estate until the right of redemption hereinafter provided by shall have
expired. If the mortgage, together with interest and costs, shall not have been paid within 18
months after the date of filing of that certificate in the Registry of Deeds as herein provided, the
mortgage shall be deemed to have been foreclosed and the right of redemption to have expired.
The filing of the certificate in the Registry of Deeds shall be sufficient notice of the existence of
the mortgage hereby provided for. In the event that the rate, toll rent or other charge, with
interest and costs as aforesaid, shall be paid within the period of redemption herein provided
for, the Treasurer of the district shall discharge the mortgage in the same manner as provided
for discharge of real estate mortgages.
SECTION 13-A. ASSESSMENT AGAINST LOT BENEFITED
Where upon petition of the owners or persons in possession of at least 51% of the front
footage of lots or parcels of land to be benefited, the district through its Board of Trustees has
voted to construct and has constructed and completed within its geographical limits, a sanitary
sewerage line together with its appurtenances and connections, being a lateral line or main or
sub-main, so called, and such sanitary sewerage line being where such a line did not previously
exist, the Trustees of said district shall determine what lots or parcels of land have benefited by
such line, together with its appurtenances and connections, and trustees shall then proceed to
cause the whole cost of such construction and completion to be apportioned and assessed upon
the lots or parcels so benefited, whether such parcel or lot is occupied or not, and against the
owner thereof or person in possession.
At the time that construction of such line has been fully completed and all costs therefore
have been submitted to the district, notification of the assessment and the amount thereof shall
be mailed by the district to the owners or persons in possession petitioning for such line or
connecting with such line. Notification of the assessment and the amount thereof shall be
mailed by the district to all other owners or person in possession to be benefited by such line at
such time as such other owners or persons in possession shall make connection therewith.
A291:9 12 - 01 - 2014
SANFORD CODE
In the event that payments of the assessments so made are not paid for a period of 90 days
or more after the notification of such assessment to the owner, or person in possession, then the
provisions of Section 13 shall be applied to the collection of such delinquent assessments.
If petition for construction of a sanitary sewerage line together within its appurtenances
and connections; being a lateral line or a main or a sub-main so called, would in the opinion of
the trustees require the construction of interceptors or trunk lines, the trustees would then cause
the proposed construction of the interceptors or trunk lines to be surveyed by a licensed
engineer and the whole cost of the project would be paid by petitioner.
SECTION 13-B. QUASI-MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
The district is hereby declared to be a quasi-municipal corporation within the meaning of
Section 136 of Chapter 53 of the Revised Statutes of 1954, and all of the provisions of said
section shall be applicable thereto.
SECTION 13-C. VALIDATION
All action heretofore taken by the Sanford Sewerage District and by the Trustees and
Officers thereof and all elections of such Trustees and Officers are hereby validated, and
declared to be legal and valid acts and elections, and the title of the Trustees and Officers of the
Sanford Sewerage District to their respective offices if hereby validated.
SECTION 13-D. SEPARABILITY
In the event that any sections or portions of Chapter 169 of the Private and Special Laws
of 1947 or of any Acts amendatory thereof shall be held to be unconstitutional or otherwise
ineffective and null and void by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining sections and
portions thereof shall be separated from those held to be unconstitutional and null and void and
shall continue to be operative.
SECTION 13-E. TOWN COUNCIL REVIEW
Prior to proposing any amendment to this Charter to the Legislature, the trustees shall
present the amendment to the Town Council of the Town of Sanford for review and comment.
SECTION 14. LOCAL REFERENDUM
This act shall take effect 90 days after the adjournment of the Legislature only for the
purpose of permitting its submission to the legal voters of the Town of Sanford present and
voting for or against the acceptance of this act as hereinafter provided for in the section at a
regular town meeting or at a special town meeting held prior to January 1, 1958, called and held
at the regular voting places of the town by the officers of the Town of Sanford authorized to call
such meetings. This act shall take effect for all the purposes hereof immediately upon its
A291:10 12 - 01 - 2014
SEWER DISTRICT
acceptance by a majority vote of the legal voters voting at said meeting; but only if the total
number of votes cast for and against the acceptance of this act in said election equals or exceeds
20% of the total vote for all candidates for Governor cast in said Town at the previous
gubernatorial election. Such election shall be called, advertised and conducted according to the
law relating to municipal elections, provided however, that the board of registration in said
Town of Sanford shall not be required to prepare for posting nor the Town Clerk to post a new
list of voters, and for the purpose of registration of voters, said Board shall be in session the
three secular days preceding such election, the first two days thereof to be devoted to
registration of voters and the last day to enable the Board to verify the corrections of said lists
and to complete and close up their records of said sessions. The Town Clerk shall reduce the
subject matter of this act to the following question:
“Shall the act amending the Charter of the Sanford Sewerage District in the Town of
Sanford, passed by the 98th Legislature, be accepted?”
The voters shall indicate by a cross or a check mark placed against the words “Yes” or
“No” their opinion of the same. A checklist shall be used at such election.
The result shall be declared by the municipal officers and due certificate thereof filed with
the secretary of state by the clerk of said town.
A291:11 12 - 01 - 2014

Chapter 292
WATER DISTRICT

Chapter A292
WATER DISTRICT
AN ACT TO INCORPORATE SANFORD WATER DISTRICT
(Private and Special Laws of 1929, Chapter 50)
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine, as follows:
Sec. 1. Territorial limits; corporate name; purposes. The territory comprising the town of
Sanford with the people residing therein, shall constitute a body politic and corporate under the
name of Sanford Water District, for the purpose of supplying the inhabitants of said district and said
municipality with water for domestic, sanitary, industrial, and municipal purposes.
Sec. 2. Source of water supply; right of eminent domain. Said district is hereby authorized, for
the purposes aforesaid to take and hold sufficient water of any surface or underground sources,
streams, springs or ponds in said district or any adjoining towns and may take and hold by purchase
or otherwise any land or real estate necessary for erecting dams, reservoirs, standpipes for storing
water or preserving the purity thereof or for protecting watershed and for laying and maintaining
aqueducts for taking, discharging and disposing of water. The provisions of sections twenty-three to
twenty-six, inclusive, of chapter sixty-one of the revised statutes shall apply to all land taken under
this section.
Sec. 3. Damages, how ascertained. Said district shall be liable for all damages sustained by
persons or Corporations in their property by the taking of any land whatsoever or water or by
flowage or by excavating through any land for the purpose of laying pipes, building dams, or
constructing reservoirs or standpipes. If any person sustaining damage as aforesaid and said
corporate district shall not mutually agree upon the sum to be paid therefor, such person or
corporation shall cause his or her or its damages to be ascertained in the same manner and under the
same conditions, restrictions and limitations as are or may be prescribed in the case of damages by
the laying out of highways.
Sec. 4. May lay pipes, etc., along public ways and across private lands. Said water district is
hereby authorized to lay in and through the streets and highways of said town of Sanford and any
adjoining town or towns and across private lands in said town of Sanford or any adjoining town or
towns and to take up, repair and replace all such pipes, aqueducts and fixtures as may be necessary
for the objects set forth, and whenever said district shall lay any pipes or aqueducts in any street or
highway, it shall cause the same to be done with as in the obstruction1
 as possible to the public
travel, and shall at its own expense, without unnecessary delay, cause the pavement and earth
removed by it to be replaced in proper condition.
Sec. 5. Management of affairs. All the affairs of said water district shall be managed by a board of
trustees, composed of three members chosen by the legal voters of said district. The first board of
trustees shall be elected at the meeting of the voters of said town of Sanford when this charter is
accepted, which meeting may be a special meeting called for said purpose. As soon as convenient
after said trustees have been chosen, they shall hold a meeting at the office of the selectmen in the
1Editor's Note: So in original.
A292:1 11 - 15 - 2007
SANFORD CODE
town of Sanford and organize by the election of a president and clerk, adopt a corporate seal, and
when necessary may choose a treasurer and all other needful officers and agents for the proper
conduct and management of the affairs of said district. At said first meeting they shall determine by
lot the term of office of each trustee so that one shall serve for one year, one for two years and one
for three years; and when the term of office of a trustee expires, the town at its annual town meeting
shall elect by ballot a successor to serve the full term of three years; and in case any other vacancy
arises it shall be filled in like manner for the unexpired term. They may also ordain and establish
such by-laws, not inconsistent with the laws of the state, as are necessary for their own convenience
and the proper management of the affairs of said district. The terms of office of said trustees shall
begin on the first Monday of January, but this provision shall not prevent the first board of trustees
from becoming such at once upon their election at the meeting in which this charter is accepted.
The trustees shall make and publish an annual report and include therein the report of the treasurer.
Each trustee shall receive in full compensation for his services an allowance of $400 per year. (P
and SL 1967, Ch. 81)
Sec. 6. Acquisition of systems of Sanford Water Company and Springvale Aqueduct
Company, authorized. Said district is hereby authorized and empowered to acquire by purchase or
by the exercise of the right of eminent domain, which right is hereby expressly delegated to said
district for said purpose, the entire plants, properties, except accounts receivable, stocks, bonds, or
other securities, franchises, rights and privileges, now owned or held by said Sanford Water
Company and Springvale Aqueduct Company, or their successors or assigns, including all lands,
buildings, pipes, standpipes, reservoirs, machinery, fixtures, hydrants, automobiles, tools, apparatus
and appliances owned by the said Sanford Water Company and Springvale Aqueduct Company, or
their successors or assigns, and used or usable in supplying water, and any other real estate in said
district or adjoining towns for the purposes herein set forth, whether their aggregate value exceeds
or not the value limit named in the charter of said companies.
Sec. 7. Procedure in case purchase price of systems of Sanford Water Company and
Springvale Aqueduct Company cannot be agreed upon. In case said trustees fail to agree with
said Sanford Water Company and Springvale Aqueduct Company, their successors or assigns, or
either of said companies upon the terms of the purchase of the above mentioned property or
properties, within three months after the acceptance of this charter by the inhabitants of said water
district as hereinafter set forth, said district, through its trustees aforesaid, is hereby authorized to
take said plants, properties and franchises, as for public use by petition therefor in the manner
hereinafter provided. And said water district, through its trustees, is hereby authorized at any time
after three months from the date of the acceptance of this charter, as aforesaid, not later than
January first, nineteen hundred and thirty, to file a petition in the clerk’s office of the supreme
judicial court for the county of York, in term time or during vacation, addressed to any justice of
said court, who, after due notice to said Sanford Water Company and said Springvale Aqueduct
Company, their successors or assigns, and their mortgagees, shall after hearing and within thirty
days after the filing of said petition appoint three disinterested appraisers, none of whom shall be
residents of the town of Sanford, for the purpose of fixing the valuation of said plants, properties,
and franchises. At the hearing aforesaid, such justice, upon motion of the petitioner, may order the
production and filing in court, for the inspection of the petitioner, all of the books and papers
appurtenant to the issue and necessary for the full understanding of the matter to be heard by said
appraisers, the terms and conditions of so producing and filing such books and papers to be
determined by the justice in his order therefor and to be enforced from time to time as any justice of
the supreme judicial court, in term time or in vacation, upon motion of either party, may deem
reasonable and proper in the premises. At such hearing, such justice upon motion of the petitioner,
may fix a time at which the said water companies shall file in the clerk’s office of the Supreme
A292:2 11 - 15 - 2007
WATER DISTRICT
judicial court for the county of York, for the inspection of the petitioner, the following; first,
schedules showing the names, residences and water service of all customers on the first day of
January in the year nineteen hundred and thirty, with the rate charged therefor; second, copies of all
contracts in force on the said first day of January, nineteen hundred and thirty; third, an itemized
statement of the gross income earned during its last complete fiscal year and up to said first day of
January and all operating expenses and fixed charges, paid or incurred during such period and
properly chargeable thereto; fourth, a memorandum of all real estate, water rights, or interest
therein, owned or controlled on said first day of January, nineteen hundred and thirty, with such
brief description thereof as would reasonably identify the same; fifth, brief descriptions,
specifications and plans of all reservoirs, mains, pipes, service pipes, hydrants, gates, gate-boxes,
shut-off boxes, fixtures and machinery and all the physical elements in such water systems, giving
in detail quantities, sizes, and lengths, and specifying the streets, roads, or ways where situated;
sixth, an itemized list of all tools, apparatus, appliances and supplies used or usable in supplying
water on said first day of January. Such orders may be enforced from time to time by any justice of
said supreme judicial court, in term time or in vacation, upon motion of either party, as such justice
may deem reasonable and proper in the premises. At such hearing the justice then sitting may, upon
motion of the petitioner, make all such decrees as he deems reasonable and proper to enable the
petitioner, through its servants and employees, to ascertain the true condition of the mains and pipes
of the said water companies, externally or internally, in the presence of the officers or agents of said
water companies, the entire expense thereof to be borne by said water district. The said appraisers
shall have the power of compelling attendance of witnesses and the production of all books,
accounts and papers pertinent to the issue and necessary for a full understanding by them of the
matter in question and may administer oaths, and any witness or person in charge of such books,
accounts and papers refusing to attend or lo2
 produce the same shall be subject to the same penalties
and proceedings, so on as applicable, as witnesses summoned to attend the supreme judicial court.
Depositions may be taken as in civil actions. The appraisers so appointed shall, after notice and
hearing, fix the valuation of said plants, properties and franchises at what they are fairly and
equitably worth, so that said water companies, their successors or assigns, shall receive just
compensation for all the same. The first day of January, nineteen hundred and thirty, shall be the
date as of which the valuation aforesaid shall be fixed, from which date interest on said award shall
run, and all rents and profits accruing thereafter shall belong to said water district. The report of
said appraisers, or a majority of them, shall be filed in said clerk’s office, in term time or in
vacation, as soon as may be after their appointment, and such single justice, or, in case of his
inability to act, any justice of said court appointed by the chief justice, may, after notice and
hearing, confirm or reject the same, or recommit it if justice so requires. Upon the confirmation of
said report the court so sitting shall thereupon, after hearing, make final decree upon the entire
matter, including the application of the purchase money and transfer of property, jurisdiction over
which is hereby conferred, and with the power to enforce said decrees as in equity cases. All
findings of fact by said court shall be final, but any party aggrieved may take exceptions as to any
ruling of law-so made, the same to be accompanied by so much of the case as may be necessary to
a clear understanding of the questions raised thereby. Such exceptions shall be claimed on the
docket within ten days after such final decree is signed, entered and filed and notice thereof has
been given to the parties or their counsel, and said exceptions so claimed shall be made up, allowed
and filed within said time unless further time is granted by the court, or by agreement of the parties.
They shall be entered at the next term of the law court to be held after the filing and entry of said
decree and there heard unless otherwise agreed; or the law court for good cause shall order further
time for hearing thereon. Before said plants, properties and franchises are transferred in accordance
with such final decree and before payment therefor, as hereinbefore provided, such justice shall,
2Editor's Note: So in original.
A292:3 11 - 15 - 2007
SANFORD CODE
upon motion of either party, after notice and hearing, take account of all receipts and expenditures
properly had or incurred by the Sanford Water Company and Springvale Aqueduct Company, their
successors or assigns, belonging to this period, front and after said first day of January, and all net
rents and profits accruing thereafter, and shall order the net balance to be added to, or deducted
from, the amount to be paid under such final decree, as the case may be. All findings of law and
fact by such justice at such hearing shall be final. On payment or tender by said district of the
amount so determined and the performance of all the other terms and conditions so imposed by said
court, the entire plants, properties and franchises shall become vested in said water district. All of
said plants, properties and franchises shall be taken and shall vest in said district, subject to all
bonds, mortgages, liens and encumbrances thereon, all which bonds, mortgages, liens and
encumbrances shall be assumed and paid by said district. The compensation to be paid to said
Sanford Water Company and Springvale Aqueduct Company, their successors or assigns, for said
plants, properties and franchises shall be the difference between the valuation thereof as fixed and
determined by said appraisers and the aggregate amount of such bonds, mortgages, liens and
encumbrances which are assumed by said district.
Sec. 8. Valid contracts of Sanford Water Company and Springvale Aqueduct Company, their
successors or assigns, to be assumed. All valid contracts now existing between the said companies
and any persons or corporations for supplying water shall be assumed and carried out by said
Sanford Water District.
Sec. 9. Bond issue authorized. For accomplishing the purposes of this act said water district is
hereby authorized and empowered through its trustees, to issue its bonds to an amount sufficient to
procure funds to pay the expenses incurred in the acquisition of said plants, properties and
franchises of said companies aforesaid, for further extensions, additions and improvements of said
plant and to refund any bonds or other indebtedness assumed by said district under this act. Said
bonds shall be a legal obligation of said water district, which is hereby declared to be a quasimunicipal corporation within the meaning of section one hundred and five of chapter fifty-one of
the revised statutes of nineteen hundred and sixteen and all the provisions of said section and acts
amendatory thereof shall be applicable thereto. The bonds shall be a legal investment for savings
banks. The trustees may also borrow on the notes of the district such sums as may be necessary to
meet the current expenses of the district in anticipation of the collection of water rates.
Sec. 10. Water rates; sinking fund. All individuals, firms and corporations, whether public,
private or municipal, shall pay to the treasurer of said district the rates established by said board of
trustees for the water used by them, and said rates for like services shall be uniform within the
district. Said water rates shall be so established as to provide revenue for the following purposes:
I. To pay the current running expenses for maintaining the water systems and provide for such
extensions and renewals as may become necessary, except where such extensions shall have been
provided for by an issue of bonds authorized by section thirty-seven, chapter fifty-five of the
revised statues as amended.
II. To provide for payment of interest on the indebtedness of the district.
III. To provide each year a sum equal to not less than one or more than four percent of the entire
indebtedness of the district, which sum shall be turned into a sinking-fund to provide for the final
extinguishment of the funded debt. The money set aside for the sinking-fund shall be devoted lo the
retirement of the obligations of the district, or invested in such securities as savings banks are
allowed to hold. Provided, however, that the trustees may, in their discretion and in lieu of the
A292:4 11 - 15 - 2007
WATER DISTRICT
establishment of a sinking-fund, issue the bonds of the district so that not less than one per centum
of the amount of the bonds so issued shall mature and be retired each year.
Sec. 11. Exempt from taxation. The property belonging to and situated within said district shall be
exempt from taxation.
Sec. 12. Incidental powers and privileges granted. All incidental powers, rights and privileges
necessary to the accomplishment of the main object herein set forth are granted to the corporation
hereby created.
Sec. 13. Subject lo3
 local referendum; procedure. This act shall take effect when accepted by a
majority vote by ballot of the inhabitants of the town of Sanford at a meeting to be specially called
and held for the purpose on or before the twentieth day of August, nineteen hundred and twentynine, and the selectmen of the town of Sanford are hereby authorized to call said meeting, Such
special meeting shall be called by the selectmen as aforesaid by issuing their warrant directed to
any constable of the town directing him to notify and warn the inhabitants of said town to assemble
at the town hall in said Sanford at such reasonable time not later than said August twentieth,
nineteen hundred and twenty-nine, as they may direct, to choose a moderator to preside at said
meeting; to vote upon the acceptance of this an,4
 to elect trustees for said water district and transact
such other business as may properly come before said meeting. In case said selectmen shalt 5
 refuse
or unreasonably neglect lo6
 call said meeting it may be called by any justice of the peace in said
district upon petition and application of ten or more inhabitants of said Sanford. The town Clerk of
Sanford shall reduce the subject matter of this act to the following questions: “Shall the Act to
Incorporate Sanford Water District be accepted?” And the voters shall indicate by placing a cross
against the words “Yes” and “No” their opinion of the same. The results shall be declared by the
selectmen of Sanford and due certificate thereof filed by the town clerk with the secretary of state.
The clerk of the town of Sanford shall be clerk ex-officio of all meetings of the inhabitants of said
water district and shall make and preserve a record of all such meetings as the records of said town
are made and preserved. This act shall take effect ninety days after the final adjournment of the
legislature so far as necessary to empower the calling and holding of all of said meetings. The
approval of this act in the manner provided by this section shall constitute an acceptance by said
water district of the methods of appraisal prescribed by section seven hereof and shall bind said
water district and said water companies, or their successors or assigns thereto.
Sec. 14. Act void unless property of Sanford Water Company and Springvale Aqueduct
Company is acquired. Sections two, three and four of this act shall be inoperative, null and void,
unless said water district shall first acquire by purchase or by the exercise of the right of eminent
domain, as in this act provided, the plants, properties and franchises, rights and privileges now held
by the Sanford Water Company and Springvale Aqueduct Company, their successors or assigns.
Sec. 15. Expenses; how borne. All costs and expenses arising under the provisions of this act shall
be paid and borne as directed by the court in the final decree provided by section seven of this act.
3Editor's Note: So in original.
4Editor's Note: So in original.
5Editor's Note: So in original.
6Editor's Note: So in original.
A292:5 11 - 15 - 2007
SANFORD CODE
Sec. 16. Rights exercised in accordance with R.S., c. 55. Nothing herein contained is intended to
repeal or shall be construed as repealing the whole or any part of chapter fifty-five of the revised
statutes as amended. All the rights and duties herein prescribed shall be exercised and performed in
accordance with the applicable provisions of chapter fifty-five of the revised statutes and acts
additional thereto and amendatory thereof.
Note: This act was approved on March 15, 1929 for the purpose of having a local referendum. It
was accepted by the voters on August 10, 1929 under Article 2 of the Warrant. Subsequent
amendments have been incorporated and are noted in the text.
A292:6 11 - 15 - 2007
§ 280-18-4 SANFORD CODE § 280-18-4
290:798