Town of Turner, Maine
11 Turner Center Rd. Turner, Maine 04282 – 207-225-3414 - www.turnermaine.com
TOWN OF TURNER MAINE ADDRESSING ORDINANCE
ADOPTED APRIL 13, 1996
SECTION 1 - PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to enhance the easy and radio location of properties by law
enforcement, fire, rescue and emergency medical services personnel in the Town of Turner.
SECTION 2 - AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to and consistent with the Municipal Home Rule Powers as
provided for in Article VIII, Part 2, Section 1 of the Constitution of the Sate of Maine and Title 30-A
MRSA Section 3001.
SECTION 3 - ADMINISTRATION
This Ordinance shall be administered by the Planning Board, which is authorized to and shall assign
road names and numbers to all properties, both on existing and proposed roads, in accordance with
the criteria in Sections 4 and 5. The Planning Board shall also be responsible for maintaining the
following official records of this Ordinance to include:
a. A map of Turner showing road names and the numbering systems.
b. An alphabetical list of all owners of record of all property showing their assigned numbers.
c. An alphabetical list of all roads with property owners listed in order of their assigned numbers.
SECTION 4 - NAMING SYSTEM
All roads that serve two or more properties shall be named regardless of whether the ownership is
public or private. "Road" refers to any highway, road, street, avenue, lane, private way, or similar
paved, gravel, or dirt thoroughfare. "Property" refers to any property on which a more or less
permanent structure has been erected or could be placed. A road name assigned by the Town of
Turner shall not constitute or imply acceptance of the road as a public way.
The following criteria shall govern the naming system:
a. No two roads shall be given the same name (e.g., no Pine Road and Pine Lane).
b. No two roads should have similar-sounding names (e.g., Beech, Beach).
c. Each road shall have the same name throughout its entire length.
SECTION 5 - NUMBERING SYSTEM
Numbers shall be assigned every fifty feet along both sides of the road, with even numbers appearing
on the left side of the road and odd numbers appearing on the right side of the road, determined by
the number origin.
The following criteria shall govern the numbering system:
a. All number origins shall begin from Route 4, (Auburn Road), for roads in an East/West orientation
and from the Auburn/Minot town line for roads in a North/South orientation except for dead end
roads. The numbering of which shall originate at the intersection of the adjacent road and terminate
at the dead end.
b. The number assigned to each structure shall be that of the numbered interval falling closest to the
front door. If the front door cannot be seen from the main road, the number shall be that of the
interval falling closest to the driveway for said structure.
c. Every structure with more than one principle use or occupancy shall have a separate number for
each use or occupancy. (i.e. duplexes will have two separate numbers; apartments will have one road
number with an apartment number, such as 235 Maple Street, Apt. 2).
SECTION 6 - COMPLIANCE
All owners of structures shall, by the date stipulated in Section 8, display and maintain in a
conspicuous place on said structure, the assigned numbers in the following manner:
a. NUMBER ON THE STRUCTURE OR RESIDENCE: Where the residence or structure is within fifty feet
of the edge of the road right-of-way, the assigned number shall be displayed on the front of the
residence or structure near the front door or entry.
b. NUMBER AT THE STREET LINE: Where the residence or structure is over fifty feet from the edge of
the road right-of-way, the assigned number shall be displayed on a post, fence, wall, mail box, or on
some other structure at the property line next to the walk or access drive to the residence or
structure.
c. SIZE AND COLOR OR NUMBER: Numbers shall be located to be visible from the road and shall be a
minimum of four inches tall and should be in a color contrasting to the color of the structure or object
to which it is attached.
d. Every person whose duty it is to display an assigned number shall remove any different number that
might be mistaken for, or confused with the number assigned in conformance with this ordinance.
e. INTERIOR LOCATION: All residents and other occupants are requested to post the assigned number
and road name next to their telephone for emergency reference.
SECTION 7 - NEW CONSTRUCTION AND SUBDIVISIONS
All new construction and subdivisions shall be named and numbered in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance and as follows:
a. NEW CONSTRUCTION: Whenever any residence or other structure is constructed, placed or
developed, it shall be the duty of the new owner to obtain an assigned number from the Planning
Board’s designated agent. This shall be done at the time of the issuance of the building permit.
b. NEW SUBDIVISIONS: An applicant for subdivision approval shall show a proposed road name and lot
numbering system as required in Section 5 on the pre-application sketch plan submission to the
Planning Board. On the final plan showing proposed roads, the applicant shall mark on the plan, lines
or dots, in the center of the streets at intervals of every 50 (fifty) feet beginning at the intersection
with the existing street to aid in assignment of numbers to structures subsequently constructed.
SECTION 8 - EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall become effective as of April 1996 and it shall be the duty of each property owner
to comply with this ordinance including the posting of property numbers within thirty days following
notification. On new structures, numbering is to be installed before final inspection or when the
structure is first used or occupied, whichever comes first.
SECTION 9 - POSTING
The Board of Selectmen acting on behalf of the Town of Turner may post or cause to be posted in the
right of way of any roads or on public property the numbers of property on publicly owned objects as
the Board of Selectmen may determine to be appropriate to assist emergency personnel and
individuals to find property. Removal or destruction of property numbers posted by the Town shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $100 or more than $500 for each offense.
SECTION 10 - ENFORCEMENT
a. it shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
b. Any person in violation of this Ordinance shall be penalized in accordance with Title 30-A Section
4452.
Town of Turner, Maine
11 Turner Center Rd. Turner, Maine 04282 – 207-225-3414 - www.turnermaine.com
BARKING DOG ORDINANCE
ADOPTED APRIL 8, 1995
Section 1.
No owner or person having custody of any dog kept within the legal limits of the Town of Turner shall
allow such dog to unnecessarily annoy or disturb any person by continued or repeated barking or
other loud or unusual noises.
Section 2.
Upon written complaint by the person disturbed, signed and sworn to, any constable or Animal
Control Officer of the Town of Turner or duly qualified law enforcement official may investigate and
may give written notice to the owner or keeper or such dog that such annoyance or disturbance must
cease. The warning shall be made a part of the complaint.
Section 3.
Thereafter, upon continuance of such annoyance or disturbance, such owner shall be guilty of civil
violation and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of $25.00 for the first offense. Each
additional conviction after the first conviction shall be punished by a fine of $50.00. All fines so
assessed shall be recovered for the use of the Town of Turner through District Court
Town of Turner, Maine
11 Turner Center Rd. Turner, Maine 04282 – 207-225-3414 - www.turnermaine.com
FIRE DEPARTMENT SERVICE BILLING ORDINANCE
Adopted April 3, 2004
Amended March 31, 2007
Amended February 4, 2008
Amended June 7, 2010
Section 1: Statement of Purpose:
The Town of Turner is engaged in providing fire suppression, fire rescue and fire safety services and
organized as a municipality under the laws of the State of Maine; and in consideration of services
rendered hereby desires to set the following billing policy for Fire Department Services. This ordinance
is adopted pursuant to municipal home rule ordinance authority and Title 30-A MRSA, Section 3001.
Section 2: Definition of Services:
The Town of Turner will seek payment for the cost of services provided by the Town of Turner Fire
Department. Services the Town of Turner shall seek payment for including, but are not limited to:
A - Scene and safety control at traffic accidents;
B -Disentanglement operations and assist rescue with Extrication from vehicles:
C - Fluid mitigation at traffic accidents;
D - Vehicle Fire;
E - Hazard Mitigation Operations
Section 3: Fees for Services:
Upon adoption of this Ordinance, the Board of Selectmen in there expressed authority shall be
authorized to review and set the fees as they deem in the best interest of the Town of Turner.
Section 4: Explanation of Charges:
A - Command & Control Scene Safety:
Positioning of fire apparatus and personnel so as to protect the scene from other traffic and deny
entry into the scene of unauthorized personnel. Police can the move traffic around the area the fire
department has deemed as the safe zone for the occupants of the vehicles and the rescuers on the
scene. Safely staging other incoming agencies responding to this incident and may also include a
pulled hose line for protection of people on scene from possible fires and fumes or residue from such
things as gasoline and air bag propellants. The most important function is establishing incident
command of the scene, which is the fire departments responsibility at emergency incidents of this
nature, and to coordinate with other responding agencies for their needs at the scene.
Patient care is the responsibility of Emergency Medical Service personnel but assistance may be
requested by the EMS personnel.
B - Disentanglement / Extrication:
Anytime a person has to be lifted or taken out of an emergency situation or forcible entry is necessary
to gain proper access to victims the fire department will assist ambulance or EMS (Emergency Medical
Services) personnel in a coordinated effort on their own. This could include, but is not limited to: car
accidents, industrial accidents, confined spaces, below grade rescues, or even high angle rescues to
name just a few. Ropes, ladder devices, air monitoring equipment, self contained breathing apparatus,
hydraulic equipment, shoring, saws, cribbing, air bags are just a few of the types of equipment used in
extrication issues.
C - Fire Suppression::
Fire suppression at a traffic accident is any time fire department personnel have to contain or
extinguish a fire. It can also be the laying of hose lines and positioning a hand line for the protection of
individuals at the scene because of fire, smoke, or leaking fluids, such as gasoline.
D - Hazard Mitigation:
Any time fire department personnel have to deal with any hazardous substances via containment or
absorption with pads for carbon-based substances like gas or oil, or removal via pads and sand or
other means permitted by the DEP (Department of Environmental Protection). This could be a car
accident, trucking accident or a fixed facility. The mitigation of all hazardous material and substances is
done in conjunction with the DEP.
E - Billing Procedures:
1 - First billing on or about the 15th of each month for all reports submitted for billing in the
prior 30-day period.
a) Terms 30 days; with same billing to all parties involved in the same accident;
2 - Second Notice, if invoice has not been settled in 60 days.
3 - 90 day notice sent by certified mail.
4 - Collection Agency to be contacted after 120 days.
F - Considerations for Write Off:
1 - When the claim was not paid with a valid reason (insured not at fault, not covered)
2 - Not covered and failed to pay after 60 day notice.
3 - If all attempts to contact insurance companies and /or individuals failed by any common
method available listed above.
Section 5: Administration and Enforcement:
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk and the Town Manager to effectively pursue the requirements of
this Ordinance for payment of services rendered by the Fire Department as specifically outlined
above.
Section 6: Effective Date:
This ordinance shall take effect upon adoption by the Town of Turner at it's annual Town meeting of
April 3, 2004.
Section 7: Validity and Serverability:
If any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall
not invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
Section 8: Conflict with Other Ordinances:
This Ordinance shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other
applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, by law, permit, or provision of law. Where this Ordinance
imposes a greater restriction upon the use of Fire Department Services, the provisions of this
Ordinance shall control.
A TRUE COPY OF THE ORDINANCE ENTITLED Fire Department Service Billing Ordinance.
ATTESTED:___________________________________________
Scott LaFlamme, Town Manager
FEES ESTABLISHED BY THE BOARD OF SELECTMEN APRIL 3, 2004 Amended February 2, 2008, June 7,
2010
Hourly rate for Engine Trucks: $200.00/hr
Hourly rate for Squad Truck: $100.00/hr
If the minimum call out fee for rolling to a scene when toned out exceeds $500.00, these charges will
be reviewed by the Fire Chief, on Scene Commander or Department Officer and forwarded to the
Town Office for billing.
Town of Turner, Maine
11 Turner Center Rd. Turner, Maine 04282 – 207-225-3414 - www.turnermaine.com
HOLDING TANK ORDINANCE
ADOPTED NOVEMBER 15, 1995
AMENDED APRIL 12, 1997
SECTION I. TITLE:
This ordinance shall be known and cited as the Town of Turner, Maine Holding Tank Ordinance, and
will be referred to as "this Ordinance."
SECTION II. PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish the requirements for the use and maintenance of holding
tanks utilized as first time disposal systems designed to receive and retain wastewater from
commercial uses. It is hereby declared that the enactment of this Ordinance is necessary for the
protection, benefit, and preservation of the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of
the Town of Turner, Maine.
SECTION III. AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION:
A. This Ordinance is hereby adopted and hereafter amended pursuant to and consistent with Article
VIII-A of the Maine Constitution, the provisions of Title 30A M.R.S.A. Section 3001 and the Maine
Subsurface Waste Water Disposal Rules (144A CMR 241).
B. This Ordinance shall be administered by the Local Plumbing Inspector.
SECTION IV. APPLICABILITY:
This Ordinance applies to the approval for the installation of and the maintenance of holding tanks
utilized as first time disposal systems for commercial uses not located in the Shoreland Area as defined
in the Town ofTurner Zoning Ordinance nor to satisfy the requirements for a Seasonal Conversion
Permit. This Ordinance does not allow the use of holding tanks for first time disposal systems for
residential uses.
SECTION V. AMENDMENTS, VALIDITY AND SEVER ABILITY AND EFFECTIVE DATE:
A. AMENDMENTS
1. Initiation of Amendments: An amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by:
a. The Board of Selectmen, provided a majority of the Board has so voted; or
b. Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least 10% of the number of votes
cast in the municipality in the last gubernatorial election.
2. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment at least 14 days
prior to a town meeting. Notice of the public hearing shall be posted at the Town Office a
least 14 days prior to the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be published twice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the area. The date of the first notice shall be at least 14
days before the hearing and the date of the second notice shall be at least 7 days before the
hearing.
3. Adoption of Amendments: An amendment to this Ordinance may be adopted by a majority
vote of the Town Meeting.
B. VALIDITY AND SEVER ABILITY
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court to be invalid, such decision
shall not invalidate any other section or provision.
C. EFFECTIVE DATE
The effective date of this Ordinance is the date of adoption by the Town Meeting on November 15,
1995.
SECTION VI. ENFORCEMENT:
A. NUISANCES
Any violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed a nuisance.
B. LOCAL PLUMBING INSPECTOR
It shall be the duty of the Local Plumbing Inspector to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. If the
Local Plumbing Inspector shall find that any provision of this Ordinance is being violated, he shall
notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and
the action necessary to correct it. A copy of such notices shall be maintained as permanent record.
C. LEGAL ACTION
When the above action does not result in the correction or abatement of the violation or nuisance
condition, the selectmen, upon notification from the Plumbing Inspector, are hereby authorized and
directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, including seeking
injunctions of violations and the imposition of fines, that may be appropriate or necessary to enforce
the provisions of this Ordinance in the name of the municipality.
D. FINES
Any person, including but not limited to the landowner, a landowners agent or a contractor who
orders or conducts any activity in violation of this Ordinance shall be penalized in accordance with
Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 4452. Each day the violation exists shall be considered a separate violation.
Such persons shall also be liable for court costs and attorney fees incurred by the Town of Turner.
SECTION VII. APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND CONTENT:
A. APPLICATION PROCEDURE
1. All applications for a Holding Tank Permit shall be in writing on forms provided for that
purpose. Applications shall be received by the Plumbing Inspector during normal business
hours.
2. The Plumbing Inspector shall provide the applicant with a dated receipt at the time the
application is submitted.
3. Within fifteen (15) days of receiving an application the Plumbing Inspector shall approve,
with conditions or deny the application.
B. FEES
All applications for a First Time Holding Tank Permit shall be accompanied by an application fee of
$10.00 payable to the Town of Turner. The Selectmen shall have the authority to revise the fee
schedule to better reflect the actual cost to the town of administering and enforcing this Ordinance
after holding a public hearing.
C. EXPIRATION OF APPROVALS
All Holding Tank Permit approvals shall expire one (1) year after the date of issuance unless the work
there under has commenced. All work associated with the installation of a holding tank shall be
completed within six (6) months from the date that work commenced.
D. All applications for a permit for a holding tank for first time disposal shall be made in writing on
forms provided by the town for that purpose. The submission shall contain the following information
and exhibits.
1. Name of the owner (s) of record and applicant's name and address, if different;
2. Sketch map showing the general location of the property;
3. The tax map and lot number of the parcel;
A copy of the deed to the property, option to purchase the property or other documentation to
demonstrate right, title or interest in the property on part of the applicant;
5. The Holding Tank Application Form shall be accompanied by the required HHE 200 Form approved
the Local Plumbing Inspector;
6. A signed agreement between the property owner and/or applicant and a transporter meeting
applicable licensing requirements to pump and maintain the tank; and
7. A report or other documentation from a Site evaluator that indicates that due to site conditions, lot
configuration, or other constraints, the installation of a system with a disposal field is not feasible.
SECTION VIII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The Following standards shall be utilized by the Plumbing Inspector in reviewing applications for a
holding tank for first time disposal systems. The Plumbing Inspector shall approve the application
unless it is found that the applicant has not satisfied one or more of the following standards.
A. A holding tank for a first time disposal system shall not be permitted in any Shoreland Area as
defined in the Town of Turner Zoning Ordinance.
B. A holding tank for a first time disposal system shall not be permitted to satisfy the requirements for
a Seasonal Conversion Permit under Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 4215 Subsection 2.
C. The installation of a disposal field is not feasible due to site conditions, lot configuration or other
constraints.
D. The plumbing in the structure shall be modified for maximum water conservation and all water
closets shall meet or exceed ASME A112.19.2 for 1.6 gallons per flush.
E. A deed covenant shall be required for structures served by a holding tank. As a minimum, the
covenant shall include a statement that a holding tank is serving the structure for the disposal of
human sewage and wastewater. The aforementioned statement shall be a separate stand-alone
section or paragraph.
F. The agreement between the property owner and/or applicant and transporter shall be filed by the
applicant in the Town Office and indicate the location of the Septage disposal site or sites. Only those
sites approved by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection shall be utilized.
G. The holding tank shall be equipped with a visual and audible alarm device. The alarm shall be
located and adjusted in a manner that assures the tank is pumped before it is full.
SECTION IX. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
The applicant shall provided copies of all pumping records to the Local Plumbing Inspector by January
15th of each year.
SECTION X. APPEALS:
A. ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
The Board of Appeals, may, upon written application of an aggrieved part and after public notice, hear
and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by, or failure to act, by the Local Plumbing Inspector in the administration of this
Ordinance. Such appeals shall be taken within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision.
B. The Board of Appeals shall not have the authority to allow holding tanks for first time disposal
system in locations or for uses prohibited by this Ordinance.
C. An aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings before the Board of Appeals
may take an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State laws within 45 days from the date any
decision of the Board of Appeals.
SECTION XI. DEFINITIONS:
AGGRIEVED PARTY: an owner of land whose property is directly affected by the granting or denial of a
permit; or a person whose land abuts or is across a road, street, or body of water for which a permit is
granted; or any other person or group of persons who have suffered particularized injury as a result of
the granting or denial of a permit.
COMMERCIAL: provisions for services on the premises, or the sale of goods to the general public on a
regular basis for a charge or fee other than home occupations. For the purpose of this definition
commercial shall also include the assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packing or
processing of goods. The term commercial shall not include: single family residential dwelling units,
duplexes, multi-family dwelling units, mobile home parks, congregate housing, group homes, hospice,
nursing homes, elderly housing complexes, hotels, motels, and dwellings or rooms for rent or lease.
HOLDING TANK: a closed, watertight structure designed and used to receive and store wastewater or
septic tank effluent. A holding tank does not discharge wastewater or septic tank effluent to surface or
ground water or onto the surface of the ground. Holding tanks are designed and constructed to
facilitate ultimate disposal of wastewater at another site.
LOCAL PLUMBING INSPECTOR: a person as defined in Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 4221 and Title 30-A
M.R.S.A. Section 4451.
SEASONAL CONVERSION PERMIT: written authorization issued by the Local Plumbing Inspector to
allow the conversion of a seasonal dwelling unit located in a Shoreland area to a year-round use.
SHORELAND AREA: the land area located within two hundred and fifty feet (250) feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high water line of any great pond or river; within seventy-five (75) feet of a
stream; or two hundred and fifty (250) feet of the upland edge of a fresh water wetland.
WASTE WATER: any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in suspension or solution, or
the water-carried waste from the discharge of water closets, laundry tubs, washing machines, sinks,
dishwashers, or other sources of water-carried wastes of human origin. This term specifically excludes
industrial, hazardous, or toxic wastes and materials.
Turner HTO 10/26/95 Amended: April 12, 1997
Town of Turner, Maine
11 Turner Center Rd. Turner, Maine 04282 – 207-225-3414 - www.turnermaine.com
Town of Turner, Maine
Automobile Grave Yard and Junk Yard Ordinance
Adopted June 11, 1994
Amended April 8, 1995
Amended April 8, 2000
Amended April 7, 2001
Amended April 5, 2003
Amended April 3, 2004
Table of Contents
Section 1 - Purpose …………….....................................................................................1
Section 2 - Authority ……………...................................................................................1
Section 3 - Applicability ……………………….........................................…………….............1
Section 4 - Definitions …………………………...................................................................1
Section 5 - Permit Required ……………………….............................................................3
Section 6 - Hearings ……………………………….................................................................4
Section 7 - Submission Requirements ..……………………...............................................4
Section 8 - Standards ……………………….......................................................................5
Section 9 - Enforcement, Suspension, and Revocation………………………......................6
Section 10 - Penalties ………………………………..............................................................7
Section 11 - Sever ability ……………………………….........................................................7
Section 12 - Appeals ………………………………................................................................7
Section 1 - PURPOSE
A. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide adequate controls to insure that the
establishment, operation and maintenance of automobile recycling businesses do not have a
negative effect on public health, safety and general welfare or on the natural environment.
B. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide adequate controls to insure that the operation
and maintenance of existing automobile graveyards, junkyards and automobile recycling
businesses do not have a negative effect on public health, safety and general welfare or on the
natural environment.
Section 2 - AUTHORITY
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA Section 3001 and Title 30-A MRSA Section 3751
et seq.
Section 3 - APPLICABILITY
A. This ordinance shall apply to any automobile graveyard junkyard or automobile recycling
businesses now existing or to be established, all or part of which is within the Town of Turner.
B. This ordinance shall not apply to any Town of Turner waste handling facility.
C. This Ordinance shall not apply to bona fide farm and/or agricultural uses whenunserviceable
vehicles- scrap metal and other items that may meet the definition of junk are
stored for future use or to repair or maintain farm equipment used in connection with the
owner’s ongoing farm or agricultural operations. Should the farm or agricultural use cease, the
provisions of this ordinance shall be met.
D. Farm or Agricultural operations shall provide proof of farming operations with a copy of
their Schedule F Federal Form.
Section 4 - DEFINITIONS
Agricultural Operation: Operations that include, but are not limited to the harvest of agricultural
products such as milk, hay, corn, fruit and other harvest type of items grown on the land and used for
the continued agricultural operation.
Automobile Graveyard: A yard, field or other area used as a place of storage, other than temporary
storage not to exceed ninety (90) days by an establishment or place of business which is engaged
primarily in doing auto body repair work for the purpose of making repairs to render a motor vehicle
serviceable, for three (3) or more unserviceable, discarded, worn out or junked motor vehicles as
defined in Title 29-A MRSA, Section 101, subsection 42, or parts of such vehicles. Automobile
graveyard includes an area used for dismantling, salvage and recycling of motor vehicles.
Automobile Recycling Business: A premise of a person who purchases or acquires salvage vehicles for
the purpose of reselling the vehicles or component parts of the vehicles or rebuilding or repairing
salvage for the purpose of resale or for selling the basic materials in the salvage vehicles, provided
that eighty (80) percent of the business premises specified in Section 7.C. is used for automobile
recycling operations.
Junkyard: A yard, field or other area used to store discarded, worn out or junked plumbing, heating
supplies, household appliance or furniture, scraped or junked lumber, rotten wood, scrap metal, rope,
rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber debris or any other waste material, garbage dumps, waste dumps,
and sanitary fills.
Road: State and Town maintained highways and streets and privately owned street designated for
vehicular travel other than driveways.
Stream: Stream or brook means a channel between defined banks. A channel is created by the action
of surface water and has two (2) or more of the following characteristics.
A. It is depicted as a solid or broken blue line on the most recent edition of the US Geological
Survey 7.5 minute series topography map or if that is not available, 15-minute service
topography map.
B. It contains or is know to contain flowing water continuously for a period of at least three (3)
months of the year in most years.
C. The channel bed is primarily composed of material such as sand and gravel, parent material
or bedrock that has been deposited or scoured by water.
D. The channel contains aquatic animals such as fish, aquatic insects or mollusks in the water
or, if no surface water is present in the streambed.
E. The channel bed contains aquatic vegetation and is essentially devoid of upland vegetation.
Stream or brook does not mean a ditch or other drainage way constructed and maintained solely for
the purpose of draining storm water or a grassy swale.
Unserviceable Vehicle: Any motor vehicle which is wrecked, dismantled, unable to be operated legally
on any public highway, such as, but not limited to unregistered or undisputed automobiles, or which is
not being used for the purpose for which it was manufactured regardless of whether it is registered.
Water Body: Any great pond, river or stream.
Wetland: Swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, which are:
A. Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration
sufficient
to support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland
vegetation typically adapted to life in saturated soils; and
B. Not considered part of a great pond, river, stream or brook. These areas may contain small
stream channels or inclusions of land that do not conform to these criteria.
Section 5 - PERMIT REQUIRED
A. No person may establish, and the owner of property shall not permit the first time
establishment, operation or maintenance of any automobile graveyard or automobile recycling
businesses without meeting the requirements of the Town of Turner Zoning Ordinance. Prior to
the Municipal officers considering a permit application for the establishment of a first time
automobile graveyard or automobile recycling business required by this ordinance site plan
review approval as required by the Town of Turner Zoning Ordinance shall be obtained from
the Planning Board. First time junkyards and automobile graveyards are prohibited in the Town
of Turner.
B. No person may operate or maintain, and the owner of property shall not permit the
operation or maintenance of a previously existing legal automobile graveyard, junkyard or
automobile recycling business without each year re-applying and obtaining a permit renew
under the standards herein set forth in this ordinance.
C. The currently approved permits issued shall remain in affect until October 1, 2005. Permits
issued in 2005 and each succeeding year, in accordance with this ordinance shall be for a time
frame not to exceed one (1) calendar year and shall expire on September 30th of each calendar
year regardless of the date of issue, unless earlier suspended or revoked.
D. Permit Fees:
1. The annual fee for a permit for an automobile graveyard, automobile recycling
business or junkyard of which no portion is within one hundred (100) feet of a road
shall be fifty ($50.00) dollars, plus the cost of posting and publishing the notice required
in Section Six.
2. The annual fee for a permit for a new automobile recycling business shall be two
hundred dollars ($200), plus the cost of posting and publishing the notice required in
Section Six-APPLICATION PROCEDURES
A. Applications for a permit or renewal permit shall be made on forms provided that they shall
be determined to be complete by the Code Enforcement Officer prior to processing.
B. Applications for renewal of existing automobile graveyards, junkyards or automobile
recycling businesses shall not be required until October 1, 2005. Thereafter, the renewals shall
be yearly on or before October 1st of any given year.
C Permits shall be granted by the Municipal Officers only after all required fees are paid in full
and the automobile graveyard, junkyard or automobile recycling business is in compliance with
all applicable Federal, State and local Ordinances and laws and the standards set out below
and 30-A MRSA ss 3751 et seq. The Municipal Officers may impose restrictions, limitations and
conditions in connections with the granting of any permit.
Section 6 - HEARINGS
A. The Municipal Officers shall hold a public hearing before granting a permit for operating or
maintenance of an automobile graveyard, junkyard or establishing an automobile recycling
business. Notice of the hearing shall be posted at least seven (7) days and not more than
fourteen (14) days before the hearing in at least two (2) public
places in the municipality and published in a newspaper being generally circulated in the
Municipality. Written notice of the application shall be mailed to the Department of Motor
Vehicle Enforcement Division by the applicant.
Section 7 - SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Any application for a first time automobile recycling business permit and all applications for a renewal
permit for existing automobile graveyard, junkyard or automobile recycling business beginning with
the year 2001 shall contain the following information.
A. The property owner’s name and address and the name and address of the person or entity
that will operate the site. Size of the lot and percentage used by the business is to be
presented.
B. An area map (a copy of a USGS 7.5 minute topographical map or similar map with contour
intervals) showing the area where the operations will be and the location of all roads within
1000 feet of the site.
C. A set of site plans drawn to scale showing the following.
1. The boundary lines of the property and setback requirements.
2. Plans shall depict the specific location and size of all areas within the property
boundary lines for the dismantling and storage of vehicles and parts.
3. The specific location and size of all buildings and structures used in the business.
4. The location of all adjacent properties and what they are used for within 1000 feet of
the area where vehicles will be placed, or within 500 feet of the property line on the lot
that the operation is located, whichever is the greater distance.
5. The location of any water bodies and wetlands on the property or within 200 feet of
the property lines.
6. A description of the soil on the property
7. The location of any sand and gravel aquifer as depicted on the current USGS
Topographical Maps
8. The boundaries and elevation of the 100-year flood plan as depicted on the current
FEMA Flood Plain Maps
9. The location, size and type of all existing or proposed screening
10. A plan for the containment of fluids, containment and disposal of batteries and
storage or disposal of tires.
Section 8 - STANDARDS
Before granting a new permit or a renewal permit the Municipal Officers shall find that the following
standards have been met.
A. All material in any previously legally existing automobile graveyard, junkyard or automobile
recycling business between June, 1993 and April, 2003 shall be screened from view form any
portion of a road or any property not in the same ownership adjacent to the automobile
graveyard, junkyard or automobile recycling business by natural or manmade object, plantings,
properly constructed fences or building or combination thereof. Hills, gullies, embankments or
berms constructed to form a screen must be constructed to blend with the landscape by
loaming and seeding or other treatment so as to establish a natural appearance. Screening
required by this paragraph must be well constructed and properly maintained at a minimum
height of six (6) feet and acceptable to the Municipal Officers.
B. All material in any previously legally existing between June 1993 and April 2003, of any
automobile graveyard, junkyard or automobile recycling business prior to January 1, 2013 shall
be screened from view from any portion of a road or any property not in the same ownership
adjacent to the automobile graveyard, junkyard or automobile recycling business by natural
plantings, hills, gullies, embankments to form a natural screen that blends with the landscape,
so as to establish a natural appearance. Man made fences will no longer be an acceptable
screen.
C. All new automobile recycling businesses licensed after April 2003 shall be screened from
view from any portion of a road or any property not in the same ownership adjacent to the
automobile recycling business by natural plantings, hill, gullies, embankments to form a screen
that blends with the natural landscape so as to establish a natural appearance.
D. No automobile graveyard or junkyard portion thereof shall be within three hundred (300)
feet of any water body, sand and gravel aquifer, residence, public park or playground, school,
cemetery or church or within a one hundred year floodplain, unless such automobile
graveyard, junkyard or automobile recycling business was in legal existence prior to January 1,
1994.
E. No automobile graveyard or junkyard or automobile recycling business or any portion
thereof shall be within one hundred (100) feet of a public or private water supply except a
private water supply that serves only the yard or yard owners residence.
F. No automobile graveyard, junkyard or automobile recycling business or any portion; thereof
shall be within one hundred (100) feet of any public road regardless of when the yard was
established.
G. Upon receiving a motor vehicle, the fuel tank and battery shall be removed and fuel, engine
ubricant, transmission fluid, brake fluid and engine coolant shall be drained from the vehicle
and placed into watertight, covered containers. Written plans and copies of contracts to
dispose of these items are to be part of an initial application and renewal statements for these
items or new contracts and plans are to be submitted at renewal time.
H. All dismantling of motor vehicles with power tools shall take place within a building.
I. No noise, vibration, glare, fumes or odor shall be emitted which is detectable to the normal
senses from any abutting property no in the same ownership
Section 9 - ENFORCEMENT, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce the requirements of this Ordinance.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually inspect each automobile graveyard, junkyard or
automobile recycling business to determine compliance with its permit, at anytime during
reasonable business hours.
C. Upon determination of the Code Enforcement Officer or complaint of an aggrieved party
that the standards of this ordinance or applicable Federal, State or local ordinances are being
violated and, after seven days notice sent by certified mail return receipt requested or
delivered in person to the owner or operator of an automobile graveyard, junkyard or
automobile recycling business, the Municipal Officers may hold a public hearing to determine
whether a permit issued to establish, operate or maintain an automobile graveyard, junkyard,
or automobile recycling business should be suspended or revoked. In determining whether a
permit to establish, operate or maintain an automobile graveyard or junkyard should be
suspended or revoked, the Municipal Officers will consider the legality of the issuance of the
permit as well as the overall operating and compliance record of the automobile graveyard or
junkyard in question. Whether or not junkyard is in compliance with all applicable laws and
standards at the time of a suspension or revocation hearing shall not be the sole basis for
determining whether or not to suspend or revoke a permit. A permit to establish, operate or
maintain an automobile graveyard or junkyard may be suspended or revoked even if it is in
compliance with all applicable laws and standards at the time of a hearing if it is determined
that there has been repeated or serious violations of applicable laws and standards or damage
to the environment such as noise, air, light, ground or surface water pollution.
Section 10 - PENALTIES
A. Any person, firm or corporation establishing operation or maintaining an automobile
graveyard, automobile recycling business or junkyard in violation of this ordinance will be
subject to a civil penalty of not less than one hundred ($100) nor more than $2,500, for each
day the violation exists. The maximum penalty may exceed $2,500 by may not exceed $25,000
when it is shown that there has been a previous conviction by the same party within the past
two (2) years of this ordinance. Each day a violation exists shall be considered a separate
violation.
Section 11 - SEVER ABILITY
If a provision of this ordinance is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment
shall be confined in its operation to that provision of this ordinance directly involved in the
controversy which gave rise to the judgment and shall not affect or impair the validity of any other
provision of this ordinance.
Section 12 - APPEALS
An aggrieved party may take an appeal within forty-five (45) days from a decision of the Municipal
Officers to Superior Court in accordance with Rule 800 B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
Planning Board Ordinance
Turner, Maine
Amended April 5, 2008
1
PLANNING BOARD ORDINANCE
TURNER, MAINE
1. Establishment
Pursuant to Article VIII-A of the Maine Constitution and Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 3001, the
Town of Turner hereby establishes the Turner Planning Board.
2. Appointment
A. Board members shall be appointed by the municipal officers and sworn by the clerk or
other person authorized to administer oaths.
B. The Board shall consist of seven (7) members with a quorum consisting of four (4)
members.
C. The term of each member shall be three years. Terms shall run from July 1st through
June 30.
D. When there is a permanent vacancy, the municipal officers shall, within 30 days of its
occurrence, appoint a person to serve for the unexpired term. A vacancy shall occur upon
the resignation, including resignation by absence, or death of any member, or when a
member ceases to be legal resident of the town. The municipal officers may remove
members of the Planning Board by unanimous vote, for cause, after notice and hearing.
E. A municipal officer may not be a member.
F. All members shall be legal residents of the Town of Turner.
3. Organization and Rules
A. The Board shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary and fill such other offices
as it may deem necessary. The term of office shall be for one year with eligibility for reelection
with elections held in July.
B. Any question of whether a member shall be disqualified from voting shall be decided by a
majority vote of the members except the member who is being challenged.
C. The Chairman shall call at least one regular meeting of the Board each month.
D. No meeting of the Board shall be held without a quorum consisting of four (4) members.
The Board shall act by majority vote, calculated on the basis of the majority of the Board
present and voting.
Planning Board Ordinance
Turner, Maine
Amended April 5, 2008
2
E. The Board shall adopt rules or bylaws for transition of business and the secretary shall
keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, correspondence, findings and
determinations. All records shall be deemed public and may be inspected at reasonable
times.
4. Duties and Powers
A. The Board shall perform such duties and exercise such powers as are provided by town
ordinances and the laws of the State of Maine.
B. The Board shall submit an annual report to be included in the annual town report.
C. The Board, together with the municipal officers, is authorized to contract with federal,
state and private agencies to obtain goods and services necessary to its proper function.
5. Repeal of Existing Planning Board
Adoption of this Ordinance shall repeal any and all previous Planning Board Ordinances.
6. Effective Date
This Ordinance shall become effective when enacted by the legislative body of the Town of
Turner.
7. Validity and Severability
Should any action or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other provision of this Ordinance.
8. Amendments
This Ordinance shall be amended in accordance with procedures specified in Title 30-A MRSA
Section 3002 at any Town Meeting.
Town of Turner, Maine
11 Turner Center Rd. Turner, Maine 04282 – 207-225-3414 - www.turnermaine.com
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Policy
1. All activities which involve filling, grading, excavating, or other similar activities which result in
destabilized soil conditions, and which require a permit shall require a written soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan. The plan shall be submitted to the permitting authority for
approval and shall include provisions, when applicable, to the following:
? Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil
? Temporary runoff features such as hay bales, slit fencing or diversion ditches.
? Permanent stabilization structures, such as retaining walls or rip rap.
2. In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall be designed to fit with the
topography and soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes, where high cuts and fill may be
required, shall be avoided wherever possible so that natural contours will stay in place.
3. Erosion and sedimentation control shall apply to all aspects of the proposed project involving
land disturbance, and shall be in operation during all stages of activity. The amount of exposed
spoil at every phase of construction shall be minimized to reduce the potential for erosion.
4. Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily, or permanently, stabilized within one (1) week
of starting. In all cases, permanent stabilization shall occur within nine (9) months of the initial
date of exposure in addition to the following:
? Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one (1) bale per fivehundred
(500) square feet, and shall be maintained until a catch of vegetation is
established
? Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable methods may be
required to maintain the mulch cover
? Additional measures shall be taken where necessary, in order to avoid siltation into the
water. Such measures may include the use of staked hay bales and/or silt fences.
5. Natural and man-made drainage ways and drainage outlets shall be protected from water
erosion. Drainage ways shall be designed and constructed in order to carry water from a
twenty-five (25) year, 24-hour storm or greater, and shall be stabilized with vegetation, or lined
with rip rap.
If erosion and sedimentation control plans are not followed, a stop work order may be
imposed until such time that proper erosion and sedimentation control is in place.
Town of Turner, Maine
11 Turner Center Rd. Turner, Maine 04282 – 207-225-3414 - www.turnermaine.com
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT PERMITS FOR ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION I: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY: The purpose of this Ordinance is to control the issuance of
special amusement permits for music, dancing or entertainment in facilities licensed by the State to
sell liquor, registered with the State as a bottle club or any other business established, whether
licensed or permitted or not. This section is adopted pursuant to 28-A M.R.S.A. ss 1054 and 30-A
M.R.S.A. ss 301.
SECTION II: DEFINITIONS: The following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates another
meaning:
(A) ENTERTAINMENT: includes any amusement, performance, exhibition or diversion whether
live, tape or otherwise for patrons or customers of the licensed premises whether provided a) by
professional entertainers; b) by full-time or part-time employees of the licensed premises whose
incidental duties include activities with an entertainment value; c) by patrons induced by prizes or
otherwise to act as entertainers; or d) by any other person.
(B) PREMISES: includes all parts of the contiguous real estate occupied by a business over
which the owner/operator has direct or indirect control or interest or which the owner/operator uses
in the operation of the business.
SECTION III: SPECIAL AMUSEMENT PERMIT REQUIRED: No person shall permit on the premises of any
business, any music, except radio or mechanical device, dancing or entertainment of any sort unless
the person has obtained from the Board of Selectmen a special amusement permit under this
Ordinance.
(A.) APPLICATIONS: Applications for special amusements permits and annual renewals thereof
shall be made in writing to the Board of Selectmen and shall state the name of the applicant;
his business address; the nature of the business, including a specific description of the
entertainment to be offered; the location to be used; whether the applicant has ever had a
license to conduct the type of business therein described either denied or revoked and, if so,
the applicant shall describe those circumstances specifically; whether the applicant, including
all partners and corporate officers, has ever been convicted of a felony and, if so, the applicant
shall describe those circumstances specifically; and any additional information as may be
required by the Board of Selectmen prior to the issuance of the permit, including but not
limited to, a copy of the applicant's current liquor license, if any.
(B) ENTERTAINMENT REGULATED: No special amusement permit shall be issued for a premises
that will offer entertainment, which includes:
1. Exposing to view the genitals, pubic hair, anus, vulva or any portion of the female
breasts at or below areola area thereof. "Exposing to view:" includes without limitation
appearing without an opaque covering or appearing with only an opaque covering,
which adheres to the skin, such as body paint.
2. The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks or
genitals.
(C.) CODE COMPLIANCE: No special amusement permit may be issued for any thing or act or
premises if the premises and buildings to be used do not comply with all ordinances, codes and
regulations of the Town.
(D.) FEES: The fee for a special amusement permit shall be One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) and
shall be paid when the application is made.
(E.) PUBLIC HEARING ON APPLICATIONS: Prior to granting a special amusement permit, the
Board of Selectmen shall hold a public hearing. Reasonable notice of the hearing shall be given
by the Town Clerk to the applicant and shall be published at least once in a newspaper having a
general circulation in the Town. At the public hearing, testimony of the applicant and of any
interested person shall be heard.
(F.) ISSUANCE OF PERMITS: After public hearing and within fifteen (15) days of the Board of
Selectmen's receipt of the completed application, the Board of Selectmen shall grant the
special amusement permit requested unless the issuance of the permit would violate any
prohibition in this Ordinance or any State law or Town Ordinance or is otherwise contrary to
the public health, safety or welfare. In granting a permit, the Board of Selectmen may impose
reasonable restrictions to protect property owners in the vicinity of the business premises
from any nuisance aspects of the proposed amusements including, without limitation, noise
and hours of operation. The applicant shall be informed in writing of the decision on his
application and of the reasons for the decision.
(G.) TERMS AND TRANSFERABILITY: Special amusement permits shall be issued for a term of (1)
calendar year and shall expire on the first day of the following year unless earlier suspended or
revoked. Special amusement permits are not transferable.
(H.) RENEWALS: Special amusement permit renewal applications shall be processed by the
Town Clerk who shall circulate the application among appropriate Town agencies for comment.
The Clerk shall forward the application to the Board of Selectmen with a summary of the
agency comments. Renewals shall be approved or denied by the Board of Selectmen.
(I) APPEALS: An appeal by the applicant or any aggrieved person may be taken from the
decision of the Board of Selectmen to the Superior Court pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine
Rules of Civil Procedure.
SECTION IV: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION: After a public hearing preceded by notice to the permit
holder and the public, the Board of Selectmen may suspend or revoke a special amusement permit on
the grounds that the premises or activities on the premises violated or violate the provisions of this
Ordinance, the terms of the permit or the provisions of any other Town Ordinance or of the permit or
the provisions of any other Town Ordinance or regulation or any State law. Appeals from such decision
may be taken to the Superior pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Revised Statutes.
SECTION V: ADMISSION CHARGES: A licensed hotel, Class A restaurant, Class A restaurant malt liquor
licensee, as defined in Title 28-A of the Maine Revised Statutes or premises registered as a bottle club
or any other business establishment club or any other business establishment that has been issued a
special amusement permit, may charge admission in designated areas as approved in the permit.
SECTION VI: INSPECTION OF PREMISES: Each permit holder, by accepting a special amusement
permit, agrees to allow inspection of his premises by representatives of the Town during business
hours without prior notice and at other times with prior notice.
SECTION VII: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES: No permit holder shall allow on the permitted premises any
activity described in Section II B, 1 or 2 of the Ordinance, without regard to whether such activity is
carried out by professional entertainers, employees or any other person and without regard to
whether any compensation is paid by the permit holder.
SECTION VIII: PENALTY: Violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be punished by a civil
penalty of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). Each act of violation and every day upon which any such
violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to such penalty, the Town may
enjoin or abate any violation of this Ordinance by appropriate action. In this Ordinance, the Town shall
recover its costs of suit, including reasonable attorneys' fees.
SECTION IX: SEVER ABILITY: In the event that any provision of this ordinance is held invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such ruling shall not affect the remaining provisions which shall remain in
full force and effect.
SECTION X: EFFECTIVE DATE: The effective date of this Ordinance shall be the date of its adoption by
the Town: i.e.: April 8, 1995
TOWN OF TURNER, MAINE
STREET CONSTRUCTION
ORDINANCE
Amended April 8, 1995
Amended April 13, 1996
Amended April 12, 1997
Amended April 18, 1998
Amended April 10, 1999
Amended April 6, 2002
Amended April 5, 2003
Amended April 3, 2004
Amended March 31, 2007
Amended April 10, 2010
Amended April 5, 2014
Amended April 9, 2016
Amended May 19, 2018

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION I. Statement of Purpose 1
SECTION II. Authority, Administration, and Effective Date 1
SECTION III. Applicability 1
SECTION IV. Application Procedures 1
SECTION V. Public Acceptance of Streets 5
SECTION VI. Street Design Standards 5
SECTION VII. Street Construction Standards 9
SECTION VIII. Additional Improvements and Requirements 12
SECTION IX. Certification of Construction 13
SECTION X. Performance Guarantees 13
SECTION XI. Inspection 15
SECTION XII. Waivers 16
SECTION XIII. Separability 16
SECTION XIV. Appeals 17
SECTION XV. Amendments 17
SECTION XVI. Violations and Enforcement 17
SECTION XVII. Definitions 18

1
Town of Turner, Maine
Street Construction Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
TOWN OF TURNER, MAINE
STREET CONSTRUCTION ORDINANCE
SECTION I. Statement of Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the health, safety, and public welfare of the residents
of Turner through establishing minimum construction standards for streets.
SECTION II. Authority, Administration, and Effective Date
A. Authority: This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to and consistent with Article VIII-A of the
State of Maine Constitution and Title 30-A, M.R.S.A. Section 3001.
B. Administration: This Ordinance shall be administered by the Planning Board.
C. Effective Date: The effective date of this Ordinance is July 8, 1988 which was the date of
preparation of the final draft of this Ordinance. The ultimate enactment authority rests with
its adoption at a Town meeting. Adoption of this Ordinance shall repeal any previously
adopted road construction and acceptance standards.
SECTION III. Applicability
A. New Construction: This Ordinance shall apply to the construction of all new streets within
the Town whether public or private. No street shall be accepted as a town way unless they
meet the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Alterations: Alterations, widening, and improvements shall be consistent with Sections VI
and VII Street Construction Standards of this Ordinance.
C. Higher Design and Construction Standard: Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to
prevent the design and construction of streets which meet higher standards, use improved
methods, or higher quality materials.
SECTION IV, Application Procedures
Prior to the construction of any new street or the reconstruction or lengthening of an existing
street, the applicant shall request to be placed on the Board's agenda at least twenty-eight (28)
days in advance of the meeting by contacting the Chair or the Planner. Applicants who attend a
meeting but who are not on the Board's agenda may be heard but only after all agenda items have
been completed, and then only if a majority of the Board so votes. Every application shall be
accompanied by the written certificate of the Town's Code Enforcement Officer that the applicant
is not in violation of any Town Ordinance regulating land use. No application shall be considered
complete, nor shall any application be in order for review or approval unless accompanied by this
written certificate. The Board shall not waive this requirement.
2
Town of Turner, Maine
Street Construction Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
Applications for street construction or reconstruction shall be submitted on application forms
provided by the Town. Ten (10) copies of the completed application form, required plans, and
related information shall be submitted to the Planning Board no less than twenty-eight (28) days
prior to the regular meeting.
The Planning Board shall make available at Town Hall documents for review by the Fire
Department, Rescue Chief, Road Commissioner, and Superintendent of Schools. The Planning
Board can request that the Fire Chief, Rescue Chief, The Road Commissioner and Superintendent
of Schools provide the Planning Board with official comments upon the adequacy of their
department's existing capacity to service the proposed development.
A. Submission Requirements
1. The name(s) of the applicant(s);
2. The name(s) of the owner(s) on record of the land upon which the proposed street is to
be located;
3. A statement of any legal encumbrances of the land upon which the proposed street is to
be located;
4. The proposed starting and completion dates of each major phase of street
construction/reconstruction;
5. A statement indicating the nature and volume of traffic expressed in Average Daily
Traffic expected to use the proposed street;
6. The estimated cost of the project and a written statement of the applicant’s financial
and technical capacity to carry out the project as proposed to include:
a. Financial Capacity.
The applicant shall demonstrate the availability of financial resources sufficient
to implement the proposed plan. In determining the applicant’s financial
capacity, the Board shall consider cost estimates for implementation of the plan,
letters from prospective sources of financing, the proposed time frame for
construction, and performance guarantees required of the applicant.
b. Technical Ability.
i. The applicant shall demonstrate the qualifications of the contractors and
consultants who will supervise, construct and inspect the improvements
associated with the proposed street.
ii. In determining the applicant's technical ability the Board shall consider
the applicant's previous experience, the experience and training of the
applicant's consultants and contractors, and the number and nature of
any violations of previous approvals granted to the applicant.
3
Town of Turner, Maine
Street Construction Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
7. When necessary a written statement on how owners of property that utilize the street
will be notified as to when construction/reconstruction will begin and completed;
8. When necessary a written narrative and/or plan explaining how traffic and pedestrians
will be moved through the project limits, including transitions during the change from
one phase of construction to the next, as applicable; and
9. When necessary a written procedure for notifying users of the street, local emergency
officials, and local government officials (including the names and phone numbers)
whenever significant traffic impacts are anticipated to occur.
10. A written statement of the applicant’s plan to address stormwater control and erosion
control measures in Section VIII.
B. Plans: The plans and illustrations submitted as part of the application shall be prepared by a
Licensed Professional Engineer to include the following information.
1. The scale of the plan. (All streets and roadway plan and profile drawings shall be
drawn to a scale 1" = 50' horizontal and 1" = 5' vertical;
2. The direction of magnetic north;
3. A plan profile and typical cross section views of all proposed streets;
4. The starting and ending point with relation to established roads, streets, or ways and
any planned or anticipated future extensions of the streets. (All terminal points and the
center line alignment shall be identified by survey stationing.);
5. The roadway and roadway limits with relation to existing buildings and established
landmarks;
6. Dimensions, both lineal and angular, necessary for locating boundaries and necessary
for locating subdivisions, lots, easements, and building lines;
7. The lots, if any, as laid out and numbered on said street showing the names of all
owners of abutting property;
8. All natural waterways and watercourses in or on land contiguous to the said streets or
ways;
9. The kind, size, location, profile, and cross-section of all existing and proposed drainage
ways and structures and their relationship to existing natural waterways;
10. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan showing interim and final control
provisions;
11. Curve data for all horizontal and vertical curves shall be the center line radius, arc
4
Town of Turner, Maine
Street Construction Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
length, beginning of curve, and end of curve points;
12. All center line gradients shall be shown and expressed as a percent;
13. All curve and property line radii of intersections;
14. The limits and location of any proposed sidewalks and curbing;
15. The location of all existing and proposed overhead and underground utilities to include,
but not limited to, the following: (Note: When a location, in the case of any
underground utility, is an approximate, it shall be noted on the plan as such.)
a. Storm drains;
b. Telephone line poles or underground vaults;
c. Electrical power line poles or underground vaults;
d. Street lights.
16. The name(s) of each proposed new road or street.
17. Lines or dots in the center line of the proposed road at intervals of every fifty (50) feet
beginning at the intersection with the existing street.
C. Upon receipt of plans for a proposed public street, the Board shall forward one copy to the
Municipal Officers and one copy to the Road Commissioner for review and comment. Plans
for streets which are not proposed to be accepted by the municipality shall be sent to the Road
Commissioner for review and comment.
D. Streets Within Proposed Subdivisions: Streets proposed as part of a subdivision as defined in
the Town of Turner's Subdivision Ordinance shall be submitted to the Planning Board as an
integral part of the Subdivision Application. Plans shall conform to the provisions of this
Ordinance as well as that required by the Town of Turner's Subdivision Ordinance.
E. Application Fee: An application fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the Town of Turner upon
submission of an application. The Selectmen shall have the authority to review and revise the
application fee.
There shall be an additional payment of $500.00. This portion of the application fee shall be
known as the Planning Board Review Escrow Account. The monies shall be made by check
payable to the Town of Turner, Maine. These funds or portion thereof may, from time to
time, be used by the Town, at the request of the Planning Board, for purposes to be
determined by the Planning Board in order to make payments for reasonable costs, expenses
and services incurred by, or contracted for by the Town through the Planning Board at its
discretion which relates directly to the review of the application. Such services may include,
but need not be limited to, consulting engineering fees, architectural fees, land use planner
fees and attorney fees. All such fees must relate to the review of the application pursuant to
the review criteria of the Town of Turner Ordinances and the laws of the State of Maine. If
the balance in the applicant's portion of the Planning Board Review Escrow Account shall be
drawn down by 75 percent, the Planning Board shall require that an additional 50 percent of
the original Planning Board Review Escrow Account Fee be deposited. The Planning Board
shall continue to notify and require an additional 50 percent of the original Planning Board
Review Escrow Account Fee be deposited as necessary whenever the balance of the account
5
Town of Turner, Maine
Street Construction Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
is drawn down by 75 percent of the original deposit. The Town, at the request of the
Planning Board shall refund all the remaining monies in the account upon payment of all
costs and services related to the Planning Board review. Such payment of remaining monies
shall be made no later than thirty (30) days after the approval of the application, denial of
application, or approval with condition of the application. Such refund shall be accompanied
by a final accounting of expenditures from the fund. The monies in such fund shall not be
used by the Planning Board for any enforcement purposes.
The application fee shall be waived if the street is being reviewed as an element of a
Subdivision Application.
F. Application Review
1. Public Hearing: The Board shall hold a public hearing at the first meeting the application
is presented and shall publish notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least two times, the date of the
first publication to be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Notice of the public
hearing shall be mailed to all abutters of the proposed street seven (7) days prior to the
hearing by the Town of Turner.
2. Complete Application: At the first meeting held, the Board shall notify the applicant
whether or not the application is complete, and what, if any, additional submissions are
required for a complete application. Determination by the Board that the application is
complete in no way commits or binds the Board as to the adequacy of the application to
meet the requirements of this Ordinance.
3. Application Approval: The Board shall, within thirty (30) days of a public hearing or
within sixty (60) days of having received the completed application or within such other
time limit as may be mutually agreed to, deny or grant approval on such terms and
conditions as it may deem advisable to satisfy this Ordinance and to preserve the public
health, safety, and general welfare. In all instances, the burden of proof shall be upon the
applicant. In issuing its decision, the Board shall make a written finding of fact
establishing that the application does or does not meet the provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION V. Public Acceptance of Streets
The approval by the Planning Board of a proposed public street shall not be deemed to constitute or
be evidence of any acceptance by the Municipality of the street. Final acceptance of a proposed
public street shall be by an affirmative vote at a Town Meeting.
SECTION VI. Street Design Standards
A. These design standards shall be met by all streets and shall control the roadway, shoulders,
curbs, sidewalks, drainage systems, culverts, and other appurtenances.
B. Streets shall be designed to discourage through traffic within a residential subdivision.
C. The character, extent, width, and grade of all streets shall be considered in their relation to
existing or planned streets.
6
Town of Turner, Maine
Street Construction Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
D. Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow street (not meeting the width requirements of
the standards for streets in this ordinance), or when the Comprehensive Plan indicates plans
for realignment or widening of a road that would require use of some of the land in the
subdivision, the plan shall indicate reserved areas for widening or realigning the road marked
"Reserved for Road Realignment (Widening) Purposes." Land reserved for such purposes
may not be included in computing lot area or setback requirements.
E. Any subdivision expected to generate average daily traffic of more than 300 trips per day
shall have at least two street connections with existing public streets or streets on an approved
subdivision plan for which performance guarantees have been filed and approve, for fire,
rescue, and safety reasons. On subdivisions with only one access where expected trip
generation will exceed 200 average daily trips per day, the Planning Board shall require a
written or verbal statement from the fire chief relating to the ability or need for water supply
for firefighting and his/her recommendation to provide water supply, if needed. The Board
may waive this requirement to allow for open space development as provided for in Section
4.I of the Town of Turner Zoning Ordinance.
F. Any privately-owned street serving four dwelling units or less will not require pavement.
G. The following design standards apply according to street classification:
7
Town of Turner, Maine
Street Construction Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
Description
Collector
Minor
Privately
Owned
Street1
Industrial/
Commercial
Mobile
Home Park
Minimum right-of-way width
60 feet
60 feet
60 feet
60 feet
23 feet
Minimum pavement
width/travelway width
24 feet
20 feet
20 feet
24 feet
20 feet
Sidewalk width
5 feet
5 feet
N/A
5 feet
N/A
Minimum grade
.5 percent
.5 percent
.5 percent
.5 percent
.5 percent
Maximum grade
8 percent
10 percent2
10 percent2
8 percent
10 percent
Minimum centerline radius
200 feet
150 feet
150 feet
200 feet
150 feet
Minimum tangent between
curves of reverse alignment
200 feet
100 feet
100 feet
200 feet
100 feet
Roadway crown
1/4"/ft.
1/4"/ft.
1/4"/ft.
1/4"/ft.
1/4"/ft.
Minimum angle of street
intersections
90 degrees
90 degrees
90 degrees
90 degrees
90 degrees
Maximum grade within 75 feet
of intersection
3 percent
3 percent
3 percent
3 percent
3 percent
Minimum curb radii at
intersections
20 feet
15 feet
15 feet
20 feet
15 feet
Minimum r-o-w radii at
intersections
10 feet
10 feet
10 feet
10 feet
10 feet
Minimum width of shoulders
(each side)
3 feet
3 feet
3 feet
3 feet
3 feet
1 Standards for Privately-owned streets in Open Space Subdivisions as provided for in Section 4.I of the Town of Turner Zoning
Ordinance shall not be required to meet minimum right-of-way width or minimum pavement width/Travel way width contained herein.
2 The maximum 10% grade maybe increased to 12% for not more than 100 feet, as measured from the end of a vertical curve to the
beginning of the next vertical curve, within any 1,000 feet of road length.
3 When privately owned streets will be gravel the roadway crown shall be 1/2"/ft.
H. The centerline of the roadway shall be the centerline of the right-of-way.
I. Dead End Streets: In addition to the design standards above, dead-end streets shall be
constructed to provide a cul-de-sac turn-around with the following requirements for radii.
Property line 65 feet; outer edge of pavement 50 feet. A use of a hammer-head turn-around
may be permitted as an alternative to a cul-de-sac turn-around. In the case of a hammer-head
turn-around, the width shall be 30 feet wide and 60 feet long/measured from the center line of
the abutting street and shall be located at least 50 feet from the end of the travel way. The
Board may require the reservation of a 20-foot easement in line with the street to provide
continuation of pedestrian traffic or utilities to the next street. The Board may also require
the reservation of a 60-foot easement in line with the street to provide continuation of the
road where future subdivision is possible.
8
Town of Turner, Maine
Street Construction Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
J. Grades, Intersections, and Site Distances
1. Grades of all streets shall conform in general to the terrain so that cut and fill are
minimized while maintaining the grade standards above.
2. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves to provide for the minimum
site distances below.
3. Where new street intersections or driveway curb-cuts are proposed, site distances, as
measured along the road onto which traffic will be turning, shall be based upon the
posted speed limit and conform to the table below.
Posted Speed Limit (MPH) 25 30 35 40 45 50 55
Sight Distance (feet) 200 250 305 360 425 495 570
Where necessary, corner lots shall be cleared of all growth and site obstructions
including ground excavation to achieve the required visibility.
4. Cross (four-cornered) street intersections shall be avoided insofar as possible except as
shown on the Comprehensive Plan or at other important traffic intersections. A
minimum distance of 600 feet shall be maintained between centerlines of proposed and
existing streets which enter on same side and 150 feet shall be maintained between
centerlines of streets which enter on the opposite side of an existing or proposed street.
The 600-foot distance between centerlines shall not apply to the Village District, and
Open Space Subdivisions as defined in the Town of Turner Zoning Ordinance. In the
Village District and Open Space Subdivisions, the minimum distance of 150 feet shall
be maintained between centerlines of proposed and existing streets.
K. Sidewalks: Where the Planning Board requires the installation of sidewalks, they shall meet
these minimum requirements.
1. Bituminous Sidewalks
a. The gravel aggregate sub-base course shall be no less than 10 inches thick.
b. The crushed aggregate base course shall be no less than 2 inches thick.
c. The hot bituminous pavement surface course shall be no less than 2 inches after
compaction.
2. Portland Cement Concrete Sidewalks
a. The sand base shall be not less than 6 inches thick.
b. The Portland Cement concrete shall be reinforced with 6 inch square, number 10
wire mesh and shall be no less than 4 inches thick.
L. Common Driveways:
1. Common driveways may serve two single-family dwelling units. The Code
9
Town of Turner, Maine
Street Construction Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
Enforcement Officer shall review and approve all plans for common driveways.
2. The following design and construction standards shall apply to common driveways.
Minimum travel width 12 feet
Minimum angle of street intersections 75 degrees
Maximum grade within 30 feet of intersections 2 percent
3. Erosion and sedimentation Control: Adequate provisions shall be undertaken to
minimize erosion and sedimentation.
4. Common driveway entrances shall comply with Section VI.J.3 to the greatest extent
practical as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
5. Common driveways shall comply with the Town of Turner Application for Driveway
Entrances.
SECTION VII. Street Construction Standards
A. Minimum thickness of material after compaction:
Collector
Minor
Privately
Owned
Street
Industrial
Commercial
Mobile
Home
Parks
Aggregate Subbase
Course
24"
18"
18"
24"
18"
Crushed
Aggregate Base
Course
3"
3"
3"
4"
3"
Hot
Bituminous
Pavement
Total
Thickness
3"
2 1/2"
2 1/2"
3”
2 1/2"
Surface Course
1"
2 1/2"
2 1/2"
1 "
2 1/2"
Base Course
2”
2"
10
Town of Turner, Maine
Street Construction Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
B. Preparation
1. Before any clearing has started on the right-of-way, the centerline and side lines of the
new road shall be staked or flagged at 50-foot intervals.
2. Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way, width necessary for travelway,
shoulders, sidewalks, drainageways, and utilities shall be cleared of all stumps, roots,
brush, and other objectionable material. All shallow ledge, large boulders, and tree
stumps protruding above the natural profile of the land shall be removed from the
travelway, shoulders, sidewalks, and drainageways.
3. All organic materials shall be removed to a depth of 2 feet below the subgrade of the
roadway. If rocks and boulders are protruding from the sub-base, they shall be
removed to two feet below the sub-grade. On soils which have been identified as not
suitable for roadways, the subsoil shall be removed from the street site to a depth of
two feet below the subgrade and replaced with material meeting the specifications for
gravel aggregate sub-base below. In lieu of removal of all organic material,
engineering fabric (geotextile) shall be used to stabilize the road base.
4. Side slopes shall be no steeper than a slope of 3 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical and
shall be graded, limed, fertilized, and seeded according to the specifications of the
erosion and sedimentation control plan.
5. All underground utilities shall be installed prior to paving to avoid cuts in the
pavement. Building sewers and water service connections shall be installed to the edge
of the right-of-way prior to paving.
C. Bases and Pavement
1. Sub-base
a. The Aggregate Sub-base Course shall be sand or gravel of hard durable particles
free from vegetative matter, lumps, or balls of clay and other deleterious
substances. The gradation of the part that passes a 4-inch square mesh sieve shall
meet the following grading requirements.
Sieve Designation Percentage of Weight Passing
Square Mesh Sieves
4 inch 100%
1/4 Inch 25-70%
No. 40 0-30%
No. 200 0-7%
Aggregate for the sub-base shall contain no particles of rock exceeding 6 inches
in any dimension.
2. Base
a. The Aggregate Base Course shall be sand or gravel of hard durable particles free
from vegetative matter, lumps, or balls of clay and other deleterious substances.
The gradation of the part that passes a 1 1/2-inch square mesh sieve shall meet
11
Town of Turner, Maine
Street Construction Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
the following grading requirements.
Sieve Designation Percentage of Weight Passing
Square Mesh Sieves
1 2 inch 100%
2 Inch 45-70%
1/4 Inch 30-55%
No. 40 0-20%
No. 200 0-5%
Aggregate for the base shall contain no particles of rock exceeding 3 inches in
any dimension.
3. Pavement Joints: Where pavement joins an existing pavement, the existing pavement
shall be cut along a smooth line and form a neat, even, vertical joint.
4. Curbs and Gutters
a. Street curbs and gutters shall be installed as required by the Board.
b. Curbs shall be vertical except when sloped curbs are specifically allowed by the
Board.
5. Pavements
a. Pavement shall be Hot Mix Asphalt as specified in Section 401 of the latest
revisions of the Maine Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications for
Highways and Bridges, or
b. Minimum standards for the base layer of pavement shall meet the former MDOT
specifications for plant mix grade B with an aggregate size no more than : inch
maximum.
Minimum standards for the surface layer of pavement shall meet the former
MDOT specifications for plant mix grade C with an aggregate size no more than
2 inch maximum.
D. Scenic View Locations: When a proposed street or the reconstruction of an existing street
will pass a scenic view locations as identified in the Town of Turner Comprehensive Plan,
road design shall provide shoulders of suitable width or turn-outs to allow vehicles to safely
leave the travelway at the scenic view location.
12
Town of Turner, Maine
Street Construction Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
SECTION VIII. Additional Improvements and Requirements
A. Erosion Control: The procedures outlined in the erosion and sedimentation control plan shall
be implemented during the site preparation, construction, and clean-up stages. Erosion of soil
and sedimentation of water-courses and water bodies shall be minimized. The following
measures shall be included, where applicable, as part of any Subdivision review and
approval.
1. Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be done in such a
way as to minimize erosion.
2. Development shall keep cut-fill operations to a minimum and ensure conformity
with topography so as to create the least erosion potential and so as to adequately
handle surface water runoff.
3. The disturbed area and the duration of exposure of the disturbed area shall be
kept to a practical minimum.
4. Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practical.
5. Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be used to protect exposed critical areas
during development.
6. The permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control measure shall
be installed as soon as practical on the site.
7. Until the disturbed area is stabilized, sediment in the runoff water shall be
trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or other acceptable
methods.
8. Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation, regrading or other
development, it shall be the responsibility of the developer causing such
sedimentation to remove it from all adjoining surfaces, drainage systems and
watercourses and to repair any damage at his or her expense as quickly as
possible.
9. Maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses originating and completely on
private property is the responsibility of the owner to the point of open discharge
at the property line or at a communal watercourse within the property.
10. The standards set forth in the Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for
Construction, Best Management Practices (March 1991 and as amended) shall be
employed.
11. The most current standards set forth in the Stormwater Management Law
administered by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection shall be
employed.
B. Storm Water Management Design Standards
13
Town of Turner, Maine
Street Construction Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
1. All stormwater improvements for street construction shall be designed to be in
compliance with the most current standards of the Stormwater Management Law
as administered by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
2. All street construction projects that fall below the minimum thresholds of the
Stormwater Management Law shall comply with the Erosion Control Standards of
this Section.
C. Cleanup: Following street construction, the developer or contractor shall conduct a thorough
clean-up of stumps and other debris from the entire street right-of-way. If on-site disposal of
the stumps and debris is proposed, the site shall be indicated on the Plan and be suitable
covered with fill and topsoil, limed, fertilized, and seeded.
D. Street Names, Signs, and Lighting: Streets which join and are in alignment with streets of
abutting or neighboring properties shall bear the same name. Names of new streets shall not
duplicate, nor bear phonetic resemblance to the names of existing streets within the
municipality and shall be subject to the approval of the Board. No street name shall be the
common given name of a person. The developer shall reimburse the Municipality for the
costs of installing street name, traffic safety, and control signs. Street lighting shall be
installed as approved by the board.
E. Street Reconstruction and/or Extension: When an existing street will be reconstructed
and/or extended the developer/or contractor shall comply with the following.
1. The proposed construction phasing or sequence shall reasonably minimize traffic
impacts.
2. The developer/contractor shall ensure that emergency service vehicles have
reasonable and timely access to and through the project site.
3. The developer/contractor shall provide an adequate roadway surface at all times; taking
into account traffic speed, volume and duration.
4. A the end of each day of construction residents shall be provided with safe access
and egress from their property.
SECTION IX. Certification of Construction
Upon completion of street construction and prior to a vote by the Municipal Officers to submit a
proposed town way to a town meeting, a written certification signed by a professional engineer
registered in the State of Maine shall be required by the Municipal Officers at the expense of the
applicant, certifying that the proposed town way meets or exceeds the design and construction
requirements of this Ordinance. AAs built@ plans shall be submitted to the Municipal Officers.
SECTION X. Performance Guarantees
A. Types of Guarantees: With submittal of the application for a street approval, the applicant
shall indicate one of the following performance guarantees that will be provided for an
amount adequate to cover the total construction costs taking into account the time-span of the
14
Town of Turner, Maine
Street Construction Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
construction schedule and the inflation rate for construction costs.
1. Either a certified check payable to the Town or a savings account or certificate of
deposit naming the Town as owner for the establishment of an escrow account;
2. A performance bond payable to the Town issued by a surety company approved by the
Municipal Officers;
3. An irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution establishing funding for the
construction from which the Town may draw if construction is inadequate approved by
the Municipal Officers; or
4. An offer of conditional agreement limiting the number of units built or lots sold until
all required street related construction have been constructed.
The conditions and amount of performance guarantee shall be determined by the Board with
the advice of the Town Engineer, Road Commissioner and Municipal Officers.
B. Contents of Guarantee: The performance guarantee shall contain a construction schedule,
cost estimates for each major phase of construction taking into account inflation, provisions
for inspections of each phase of construction, provisions for the release of part or all of the
performance guarantee to the developer, and a date after which the developer will be in
default, and the Town shall have access to the funds to finish construction.
C. Escrow Account: A cash distribution to the establishment of an escrow account shall be
made by either a certified check made out to the municipality, the direct deposit into a
savings account, or the purchase of a certificate of deposit. For any account opened by the
applicant, the municipality shall be named as owner or co-owner, and the consent of the
municipality shall be required for a withdrawal. Any interest earned on the escrow account
shall be returned to the applicant except for any portion of the interest earned which was
needed in addition to the principal of the escrow account to pay for completion of the
required improvements.
D. Conditional Agreement. The Board, at its discretion, may permit for the applicant to enter into
a binding agreement with the municipality in lieu of the other financial performance
guarantees. Such an agreement shall provide for approval of the application on the condition
that no units be built or lots sold until either:
1. It is certified by the Board, or its agent, that all of the required improvements have
been installed in accordance with this Ordinance regulations and the regulations of
the appropriate utilities; or
2. A performance guarantee, acceptable to the municipality, is submitted in an amount
necessary to cover the completion of the required improvements at an amount
adjusted for inflation and prorated for the portions of the required improvements
already installed.
Notice of the agreement and any conditions shall be recorded by the applicant subdivider
at the Registry of Deeds. Release from the agreement shall follow the procedures for
release of the performance guarantees contained in Section X.G. Proof of recording shall
be provided by the applicant to the Board.
15
Town of Turner, Maine
Street Construction Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
E. Performance Bond: A performance bond shall detail the conditions of the bond, the method for
release of the bond or portions of the bond to the applicant, and the procedures for collection
by the municipality. The bond documents shall specifically reference the project for which
approval is sought.
F. Letter of Credit: An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other lending institution shall
indicate that funds have been set aside for the construction of the street and may not be used
for any other project or loan.
G. Release of Guarantee: Prior to the release of any part of the performance guarantee, the
Board shall determine to its satisfaction that the proposed improvements meet or exceed the
design and construction requirements for that portion of the improvements for which the
release is requested.
H. Default: If, upon inspection, it is found that any of the required improvements have not been
constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications filed as part of the application, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall so report in writing to the Municipal Officers, the Board, and
the applicant. The Municipal Officers shall take any steps necessary to preserve the Town’s
rights.
I Privately-Owned Roads: Where streets are to remain privately-owned roads, the following
words shall appear on the recorded plan.
All roads shall remain private roads to be maintained by the developer or the lot owners
and shall not be accepted or maintained by the Town.
SECTION XI. Inspection
A. Notification of Construction: At least five (5) days prior to commencing street construction
or alteration of roads, the applicant shall.
1. Notify the Code Enforcement Officer in writing of the time when (s) he proposes to
commence construction so that the municipal officers can arrange for inspection to be
made. The inspecting official shall assure that all municipal specifications,
requirements and conditions of approval shall be met during the construction and shall
assure the satisfactory completion of improvements required by the Planning Board.
2. Deposit with the municipal officers a check for the amount of 2% of the estimated costs
of construction and improvements to pay for the costs of inspection. If upon
satisfactory completion of construction and cleanup there are funds remaining, the
surplus funds shall be refunded to the applicant within 30 days. If the inspection
account shall be drawn down by 90%, the applicant shall deposit an additional 1% of
the estimated costs of construction and improvements.
3. At least five days prior to commencing construction, the applicant shall provide the
Town with the type and amount of the performance guarantee approved in Section 10
A. above
B. Noncompliance With Plan: Upon finding that the improvements have not been constructed in
16
Town of Turner, Maine
Street Construction Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
accordance with the approved plans and specifications, the inspector shall so report in writing
to the Municipal Officers, Planning Board, Code Enforcement Officer and applicant. The
Municipal Officers shall take any steps necessary to assure compliance with approved Plans.
C. Modification During Construction: If at any time it appears necessary or desirable to modify
the required improvements before or during construction of the of the required
improvements, the inspecting official is authorized to approve minor modifications due to
unforeseen circumstances such as encountering hidden outcrops of bedrock, natural springs,
etc. The inspecting official shall issue any approval under this section in writing and shall
transmit a copy of the approval to the Municipal Officers, Planning Board and Code
Enforcement Officer. Revised plans shall be filed with the Planning Board for the record.
For major modifications, such as relocation of rights-of-way, changes in grade by more than
1%, etc. the applicant shall submit to the Planning Board an amended application for review
and approval in accordance with Section IV.
SECTION XII. Waivers
A. Any requests for waivers from submission requirements and/or review standards
shall be in writing. Waiver requests shall indicate the requirements requested to
be waived and shall indicate what special circumstances exist that the required
improvements or standards are not necessary to provide for the public health,
safety, or welfare, or are inappropriate because of inadequate or lacking
connecting facilities adjacent to or in proximity of the proposed development.
B. Where the Board finds, based on written justification by the applicant, and makes
written findings of fact that due to extraordinary and unnecessary hardships that
may result from strict compliance with this Ordinance, or where there are special
circumstances of a particular application, certain required improvements or
review standards are not necessary to provide for public health, safety or welfare,
or are inappropriate because of inadequate or lacking connecting facilities
adjacent to or in proximity of the proposed development, it may waive this
requirement, subject to appropriate conditions provided that the performance
standards of this ordinance have been or will be met. Waivers may not be granted
if the waiver will have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the
Comprehensive Plan, this Ordinance, or any other ordinance or law, or if this
ordinance expressly does not allow a waiver from the requirement a waiver is
sought. In granting waivers, the Planning Board shall require such conditions as
will assure the purpose of this ordinance is met.
SECTION XIII. Separability
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason
held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions thereof.
17
Town of Turner, Maine
Street Construction Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
SECTION XIV. Appeals
An appeal may be taken within 30 days from the Board=s decision on the application, by any party
to Superior Court in accordance with Rule 80B. of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
SECTION XV. Amendments
A. Initiation of Amendments: An amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by:
1. The Planning Board provided a majority of the Board has so voted;
2. Request of the Municipal Officers; or
3. Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least 10 percent of the number of
voters cast in the municipality at the last gubernatorial election.
B. The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed amendment. Notification
of the hearing shall be posted in the Town Office at least thirteen (13) days before the
hearing and published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least two
(2) times with the date of the first publication at least twelve (12) days before the hearing and
the date of the 2nd publication at least seven (7) days before the hearing. The Planning Board
shall make a report and its recommendation on the proposed amendment within ten (10) days
after the public hearing has been closed.
C. Adoption of Amendment: An amendment of this Ordinance shall be adopted by a majority
vote of the Town Meeting.
SECTION XVI. Violations and Enforcement
A. No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity may undertake activities governed by this
Ordinance without first having a final plan thereof approved by the Planning Board.
B. Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner=s agent or contractor, who
orders or conducts any activity in violation of this Ordinance shall be penalized in accordance
with the provisions of Title 30-A M.R.S. A. Section 4452. Each day a violation exists shall
be considered a separate violation.
18
Town of Turner, Maine
Street Construction Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
SECTION XVII Definitions
In this Ordinance, the following terms have the following meanings unless a contrary meaning is
required by the context or is specifically prescribed. Terms not defined shall have their customary
dictionary meaning.
Collector Street: A residential street expected to generate average daily traffic of more than 300
trips per day, or street which serves as feeder to arterial streets and collector of traffic from minor
streets. Trip generation shall be based on the most current version of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers “Trip Generation”.
Common Driveway: A vehicle accessway serving two dwelling units.
Existing Public Street: Roads which are maintained by the Town of Turner and the State of
Maine.
Industrial or Commercial Street: A street servicing industrial or commercial uses.
Minor Street: A street servicing expected to generate average daily traffic of not more than 300
trips per day. Trip generation shall be based on the most current version of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers “Trip Generation”.
Privately Owned Street: A street which is not intended to be dedicated as a townway.
Reconstructed: Reconstructed means the rebuilding of a road or section of a road to improve its
serviceability.
Repair: Repair means to take necessary action to fix normal damage or storm damage.
Reserve Frontage Street: A street which provides residential frontage other than that on a through
traffic street.
Street: Public and private ways such as alleys, avenues, highways, roads and other rights-of-ways,
as well as areas on a subdivision plans designated as rights-of-ways for vehicular access, other than
driveways, farm roads or logging roads.
Amended April 8, 1995
Amended April 13, 1996
Amended April 12, 1997
Amended April 18, 1998
Amended April 10, 1999
Amended April 6, 2002
Amended April 5, 2003
Amended April 3, 2004
Amended March 31, 2007
Amended April 10, 2010
Amended April 5, 2014
Amended April 9, 2016
Amended May 19, 2018
Town of Turner, Maine
11 Turner Center Rd. Turner, Maine 04282 – 207-225-3414 - www.turnermaine.com
Town Beach Ordinance
Adopted April 18, 1998
Amended March 1999
Amended April 4, 2009
Amended April 2, 2011
I. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the safety, enjoyment, health, and welfare of all
persons using the town beach and parking facilities at Bear Pond, to further provide a means of
maintenance, operation and protection of the town beach and parking area, and to provide a family
oriented atmosphere at an environmentally friendly and enjoyable town beach for residents and land
owners of Turner and their accompanied guests. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to municipal
home rule ordinance authority and Title 30-A, MRSA s 3001.
II. ADMINISTRATION, AUTHORITY, APPLICABILITY, and EFFECTIVE DATE
A. Administration of the town beach will be by a Committee consisting of Volunteers overseen by the
Town Manager. The Committee is responsible for maintenance, operation, and general stewardship of
the Turner town beach and parking area.
B. Authority to act: The Committee shall oversee all parking and beach areas and shall adopt,
establish, and as necessary, revise, with the consent of the Board of Selectmen, any additional rules
and regulations that they may deem necessary to maintain safety. These safety rules and regulations,
not inconsistent with this ordinance, shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the facility and shall
have the full force and effect of law.
C. Applicability: This ordinance shall apply to Town owned property at Bear Pond which includes a
beach and parking area.
D. Effective Date: This ordinance shall take effect upon adoption by the Town of Turner.
III. DEFINITIONS
A. "Town" is the Town of Turner, Maine.
B. "Municipal Officers" means the Board of Selectmen.
C. "Beach" is the property owned by the Town of Turner adjacent to Bear Pond, Beach Street, and Bear
Pond Road.
IV. GENERAL RULES
A. Conduct and Use
1. Regular opening and closing dates for swimming shall be established by the Town Manager
and approved by the Municipal Officers.
2. Hours: The beach area shall be open during the designated hours established by the Town
Manager and approved by the Municipal Officers.
3. Picnicking: Picnicking is allowed.
4. Fires: Fires shall be confined to appropriate receptacles. The Town Manager may prohibit
fires in times of high fire danger.
5. Offensive Behavior: No person shall engage in any indecent language or loud noise which
would be offensive to any reasonable person or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior
tending to breach the town peace.
6. Children under 12 years of age must be accompanied by someone 16 years of age or older.
7. Seasonal activities and use other than swimming shall be as permitted by the Town Manager
with the approval of the Municipal Officers.
B. Sanitation
1. No bottles, cans or other trash shall be left. Users shall carry out what they carried in.
2. No pets allowed. This is not to be construed as limiting the use of Seeing Eye or disability
assistance animals.
3. No trash what so ever will be put in the portable toilets.
4. Children shall not be allowed to swim in disposable diapers except for those exclusively
made for swimming. All children who require diapers and do not have the proper disposable
diapers are required to wear rubber pants that will contain all human waste.
C. Safety
1. No motorized watercraft shall be moored, launched or beached.
2. There shall be no water skiing permitted from the beach.
3. All motor vehicles shall be parked in the designated areas for parking except for emergency
and maintenance vehicles.
4. All bicycles shall be parked in the designated areas.
D. Prohibited Activities are
1. The use of soap, shampoo or other cleaning agents.
2. The use of glass containers.
3. Activities which endanger persons or willful damage to any town property at the facility,
including and without limiting to, changing rooms, bathrooms, fire receptacles, fencing, trees,
brush or other vegetation.
4. The use of tents or overnight camping.
5. Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages and illegal drugs.
6. Soliciting.
7. Smoking is prohibited thereby declaring the beach area a Tobacco Free Zone.
E. Authorized Use: Residents are required to obtain a beach pass annually. The fee shall be
established by the Municipal Officers.
V. VIOLATION and PENALTY
First time and minor violations of this ordinance not involving any property damage,injury, or cost to
the Town will be enforced by means of a warning issued by an enforcement officer as described under
section VI. Subsequent violations, or violations that result in any property damage, injury to others, or
any costs to the Town may result in more formal enforcement proceedings, whereby, a complaint will
be filed on behalf of the Town before a court of competent jurisdiction. Any person found in violation
of this ordinance by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be subject to a fine payable to the Town
of Turner of not more than $100 or the cost of damages to town property.
VI. ENFORCEMENT
This ordinance may be enforced by any duly authorized law enforcement officer, as well as other
individuals designated by the Municipal Officers or Directors.
VII. SERVERABILITY
Should any section or portion of this ordinance be declared invalid by a court, the remaining sections
or portions of this ordinance shall remain in force.
Page 1 of 7
TOWN OF TURNER, MAINE
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE
FOR REGISTERED CAREGIVERS ORDINANCE
ADOPTED APRIL 6, 2019
SECTION 1: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY: The purpose of this Ordinance is to
provide procedures and standards relating to the operation of medical marijuana
establishments and to require their annual licensing. This ordinance is enacted pursuant to
authority granted under 30-A M.R.S. § 3001, 22 M.R.S. § 2423-A(14) and 22 M.R.S. §
2429-D.
SECTION 2: DEFINITIONS. As used in this ordinance, unless the context otherwise
indicates, the following terms have the following meanings.
Registered caregiver retail store. “Registered caregiver retail store” means a registered
caregiver authorized under state law to cultivate medical marijuana for qualifying
patients that operates a retail store to sell medical marijuana to qualifying patients.
Registered dispensary. “Registered dispensary” means a dispensary authorized under
state law to cultivate and dispense medical marijuana to qualifying patients and
caregivers.
Marijuana testing facility. “Marijuana testing facility” means a public or private
laboratory authorized under state law to test medical marijuana for contamination,
potency or cannabinoid profile.
Marijuana Manufacturing facility. “Marijuana Manufacturing facility” means a
Marijuana Manufacturing facility authorized under state law to manufacture marijuana
products for medical use or to engage in marijuana extraction for medical use.
Cultivation area. “Cultivation area” means a Registered Caregiver’s indoor or outdoor
area used for cultivation of marijuana for a qualifying patient that is enclosed and
equipped with locks or other security devices that permits access only to a person
authorized to have access to the area as defined in Title 22 Chapter 558-C of the Maine
Revised Statutes.
Medical marijuana establishment. "Medical marijuana establishment" means a registered
caregiver retail store, marijuana testing facility, Marijuana Manufacturing facility, or
Cultivation area.
State registration authority. “State registration authority” means the authority created or
designated by the State for the purpose of regulating and controlling registration for
medical marijuana establishments.
Page 2 of 7
Registered caregiver "Registered caregiver" means a caregiver who is registered by the
Department of Administrative and Financial Services pursuant to section 2425-A.
Disqualifying drug offense. "Disqualifying drug offense" means a conviction for a
violation of a state or federal controlled substance law that is a crime punishable by
imprisonment for one year or more, but does not include (1) An offense for which the
sentence, including any term of probation, incarceration or supervised release, was
completed 10 or more years earlier; or (2) An offense that consisted of conduct that
would have been permitted under the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act.
SECTION 3: LICENSE REQUIRED: No person shall operate a medical marijuana
establishment, nor shall any property owner permit the use of his or her premises to be
operated as a medical marijuana establishment, without first obtaining a license from the
Board of Selectmen prior to commencing operations pursuant to this Ordinance.
a. An applicant must complete a site plan review, and receive approval form the
Planning Board, pursuant to the Town of Turner Zoning Ordinance Section 5.
b. Notwithstanding Section 3(a), if an applicant applies for a license, which will be
located at a premises that has previously been through a site plan review, for the
same type of medical marijuana establishment applicant is seeking to license the
Board of Selectmen may waive the site plan review requirement for the applicant.
c. A license shall be for a period of one year from the date of its issuance.
d. A license must be obtained prior to the opening of a medical marijuana
establishment.
e. Renewal of an existing license is governed by Section 9 of this Ordinance.
f. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary within this Section a caregiver operating
a preexisting Medical marijuana establishment in compliance with State law and
Town Ordinances shall have 12 months from the date of enactment of this
Ordinance to obtain a license pursuant to this Ordinance, and will not be subject
to the requirements in Section 3(a) in order to obtain a license for said preexisting
Medical marijuana establishment.
SECTION 4: APPLICATION: An applicant for a medical marijuana establishment
license shall complete and file an application with the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO), or
such other person designated by the Town Manager, on the provided form, and request to be
placed on the Board of Selectmen’s agenda no less than 30 days in advance of a regularly
scheduled meeting, together with the applicable nonrefundable license fee, as well as the
following supporting materials:
a. A copy of the applicant’s state registration application and supporting
documentation, as submitted to the state registration authority.
Page 3 of 7
b. Evidence of all state approvals or conditional approvals required to operate a
medical marijuana establishment, including, but not limited to, a state registry
identification card or registration certificate.
c. If not included in the applicant’s state registration application, a description of the
form of ownership of the business enterprise together with attested copies of any
articles of incorporation, bylaws, operating agreement, partnership agreement or
articles of association that govern the entity that will own and/or operate the
medical marijuana establishment.
d. If not included in the applicant’s state registration application, an affidavit that
identifies all owners, officers, members, managers or partners of the applicant.
e. A release for each applicant and for each officer, owner, member, manager or
partner of the applicant seeking a license allowing the Town of Turner to obtain
criminal records and other background information related to the individual.
f. A statement as to the precise nature of the business with a description of the
nature of all products and services offered to its customers.
g. Evidence of all other approvals or conditional approvals required to operate the
medical marijuana establishment, including Planning Board approval and any
applicable food or victualer’s license.
h. Evidence of compliance with the requirements of Section 11 and evidence that
the standards listed in Section 10 have been met.
If the Board of Selectmen determines that a submitted application is not complete, they shall
notify the applicant within ten (10) business days of the additional information required to
process the application. If such additional information is not submitted within thirty (30)
days of the Board of Selectmen’s request, the application may be denied.
SECTION 5: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT, OFFICERS, ETC: Upon receipt
of an application or of a notice of a change of any of the individuals listed in Section 4(d), the
Town Clerk shall provide copies of the completed application to the CEO, or such other
person designated by the Town Manager, for the purposes of reviewing the application and
carrying out any necessary site review of the premises at which the establishment will be
located.
a. The CEO shall determine if an applicant’s proposal could comply with all
applicable town ordinances;
b. The CEO may coordinate with any other Town employee, agent, or independent
contractor to carry out any such inspection the CEO deems necessary to determine
if applicant’s proposal could be in compliance with Town Ordinances.
Page 4 of 7
c. The CEO shall have 21 days from the date a completed application is forwarded
from the Board of Selectmen to complete a review of the applicant’s premises and
submit an affirmative, negative, or conditional report to the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 6: ACTION ON APPLICATION:
a. PUBLIC HEARING: Prior to granting a license, the Board of Selectmen shall
hold a public hearing. Reasonable notice of the hearing shall be given by the
Town Clerk to the applicant and shall be published at least once in a newspaper
having a general circulation in the Town. At the public hearing, testimony of the
applicant and of any interested person shall be heard.
b. ISSUANCE OF LICENSES: After public hearing and within fifteen (15) days of
said public hearing, the Board of Selectmen shall grant the license requested
unless the issuance of the license would violate any prohibition in this Ordinance
or any State law, Town Ordinance, Planning Board conditions of approval, or is
otherwise contrary to the public health, safety or welfare. In granting a license, the
Board of Selectmen may impose reasonable restrictions to protect property
owners in the vicinity of the business premises from any nuisance aspects of the
proposed Medical Marijuana Establishment including, without limitation, noise
and hours of operation. The Board of Selectman may adopt the conditions of
approval imposed by the Planning Board pursuant to their site plan review process
as restrictions to of the applicant’s premises by reference to said conditions. The
applicant shall be informed in writing of the decision on the application and of the
reasons for the decision.
SECTION 7: STATUS AND DISPLAY OF LICENSE: No license issued under this
Ordinance may be assigned or transferred to another entity. Any change in ownership or
change in the officers of an owner shall require a new license. Licenses are limited to the
premises for which they are issued and are not transferable to another location. The license
shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the medical marijuana establishment for which
the license is issued. An application for a new license pursuant to this Section may be treated
as a new application pursuant to Section 4 or a renewal pursuant to Section 9 at the discretion
of the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 8: DUTY TO UPDATE INFORMATION: Any license holder issued a
license under this Ordinance shall have the duty to maintain updated and accurate
information regarding all of the information provided pursuant to the application process and
as required in Section 4 of this Ordinance within ten days of any change of status. Failure to
provide and maintain current and accurate information may result in revocation of the
applicant's license.
SECTION 9: RENEWALS: Applications for renewal of licenses shall be submitted at
least sixty (60) days prior to expiration of the existing license. Any license holder that fails
to submit a renewal application by the applicable deadline shall not have authority to operate
Page 5 of 7
until a license is granted. License renewal applications shall be processed by the Town Clerk
who shall circulate the application among appropriate Town agencies for comment. The
Manager shall forward the application to the Board of Selectmen with a summary of the
agency comments. Renewals shall be approved or denied by the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 10: STANDARDS FOR LICENSE DENIAL OR REVOCATION:
Renewals of existing licenses shall be denied by the Board of Selectmen, and an existing
license may be suspended or revoked by the Board of Selectmen after notice and hearing, if
the applicant, or any owner of the applicant or license holder:
a. Fails to meet the requirements of this ordinance;
b. Has had a license for a marijuana establishment revoked by a municipality or by
the State;
c. Has not acquired all necessary State and local approvals prior to issuance of the
license;
d. Has been convicted of a disqualifying drug offense; or
e. Has provided false or misleading information in connection with the license
application.
SECTION 11: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS: In order to obtain a license pursuant
to this ordinance, the applicant shall demonstrate to the Board of Selectmen that the
following requirements will be met. A license holder shall comply with all of these
requirements during the term of the license.
a. Fixed location. All licensed premises shall be fixed, permanent locations. License
holders shall not be permitted to operate medical marijuana establishments in other
than the licensed premises, such as at farmer’s markets, farm stands or kiosks.
b. Security.
i. The licensed premises shall have lockable doors and windows and shall be
served by an alarm system.
ii. Additional security requirements for Registered caregiver retail store,
Marijuana Manufacturing facility, and Marijuana testing facility.
1. The Registered caregiver retail store, Marijuana Manufacturing
facility, or Marijuana testing facility shall have video surveillance
capable of covering the exterior and interior of the facility. The
video surveillance system shall be operated with continuous
recording twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week and video
shall be retained for a minimum duration of thirty (30) days. Such
records shall be made available to law enforcement agencies when
investigating a criminal complaint.
Page 6 of 7
2. The Registered caregiver retail store, Marijuana Manufacturing
facility, or Marijuana testing facility shall have exterior spot lights
with motion sensors covering the full perimeter of the building(s),
subject to other ordinances and the Board of Selectmen’s discretion.
c. Ventilation.
i. The licensed premises shall comply with all odor and air pollution standards
established by statute or ordinance, or as a condition of approval by the
Planning Board.
ii. All medical marijuana establishments shall have an odor mitigation system
installed that has been approved by a Maine licensed engineer, indicating
that the system will provide odor control sufficient to ensure that no odors
are perceptible off the premises.
d. Waste disposal. The licensed premises shall not dispose of waste and/or residue
from the growth, cultivation, processing, and storage of medical marijuana in an
unsecured waste receptacle not in its possession and control.
e. Loitering. The facility owner/operator shall make adequate provisions to prevent
patrons or other persons from loitering on the premises. It shall be the license
holder’s obligation to ensure that anyone found to be loitering or using marijuana
or marijuana products in the parking lot or other outdoor areas of a licensed
premises is ordered to leave.
f. Compliance with requirements of state and local law. A medical marijuana
establishment shall meet all operating and other requirements of state and local law.
To the extent the state has adopted or adopts in the future any law or regulation
governing medical marijuana establishments that conflicts in any way with the
provisions of this Ordinance, the more restrictive shall control.
g. Marijuana Manufacturing Facilities. A Marijuana Manufacturing facility
applicant must provide specific information about the extraction equipment to be
used on the licensed premises, including how all fire and electrical standards will
be met. Marijuana Manufacturing facility license holders shall not employ
extraction methods that use fossil fuel based solvents, including but not limited to
butane, hexane, and propane.
SECTION 12: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES. In addition to revocation or suspension of
a medical marijuana establishment license as provided in this Ordinance, the violation of any
provision of this Ordinance may be punished, at the decision of the Board of Selectmen, by a
fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $2,500.00 for each offense. Each act of violation
and every day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.
In addition to such penalty, the town may enjoin or abate any violation of this Ordinance. All
fines and penalties, together with costs of prosecution of violations, which shall include the
town's cost and attorney's fees, shall inure to the benefit of the town. This section shall be
enforced by the Board of Selectman, or their designee. Notice of violations by medical
Page 7 of 7
marijuana establishment license holders of other provisions of this Ordinance shall be
provided to the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 13: LICENSE FEE AND COSTS.
a. The initial license fees for a Medical marijuana establishment shall be $100.00.
There shall be no renewal fee for an existing Medical marijuana establishment
unless there has been a change in use resulting in initial application approval
being required.
b. Applicant shall be responsible for any costs incurred by the Town in the
processing of an application, including but not limited to publication fees for any
public hearing.
c. The Selectmen shall have the authority to revise the annual license fees and
renewal fees after holding a public hearing.
SECTION 14: SEVERABILITY. If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this
Ordinance is for any reason held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion
shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
SECTION 15: APPEALS. Appeals may be taken to the Maine Superior Court in
accordance with Rule 80-B, Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
Zoning Ordinance
of the
Town of Turner, Maine
Amended: April 6, 2019

Zoning Ordinance
of the
Town of Turner, Maine
Adopted June 12, 1993
Effective date: July 12, 1993
Amended: June 11, 1994
Amended: April 8, 1995
Amended: April 13, 1996
Amended: July 21, 1997
Amended: April 18, 1998
Amended: April 10, 1999
Amended: April 8, 2000
Amended: April 7, 2001
Amended: April 6, 2002
Amended: April 5, 2003
Amended: April 3, 2004
Amended: April 8, 2006
Amended: April 5, 2008
Amended: April 4, 2009
Amended: April 10, 2010
Amended: April 2, 2011
Amended: April 14, 2012
Amended: April 6, 2013
Amended: April 5, 2014
Amended: April 9, 2016
Amended: April 8, 2017
Amended: May 19, 2018
April 6, 2019
Contents
SECTION 1. GENERAL ......................................................................................................................................... 1
A. TITLE .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1
B. AUTHORITY ......................................................................................................................................................... 1
C. PURPOSES ........................................................................................................................................................... 1
D. APPLICABILITY ...................................................................................................................................................... 2
E. CONFLICTS WITH OTHER ORDINANCES ...................................................................................................................... 2
F. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY .................................................................................................................................... 2
G. EFFECTIVE DATE ................................................................................................................................................... 2
H. AMENDMENTS ..................................................................................................................................................... 2
I. REPEAL OF EXISTING ORDINANCES ........................................................................................................................... 3
SECTION 2. NONCONFORMANCE ....................................................................................................................... 4
A. PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................................................ 4
B. GENERAL ............................................................................................................................................................ 4
C. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES .............................................................................................................................. 4
D. NONCONFORMING USES ........................................................................................................................................ 8
E. NONCONFORMING LOTS ...................................................................................................................................... 10
F. ILLEGAL REDUCTION IN DIMENSIONS ....................................................................................................................... 10
SECTION 3 DISTRICT PURPOSES, DISTRICT USES AND SPACE AND BULK STANDARDS OF DISTRICTS ............... 11
A. GENERAL PURPOSES ............................................................................................................................................ 11
B. SPECIFIC DISTRICT PURPOSE .................................................................................................................................. 11
C. FLOATING COMMERCIAL ...................................................................................................................................... 13
D. LOCATION OF DISTRICTS ....................................................................................................................................... 14
E. RULES GOVERNING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES .............................................................................................................. 14
F. DIVISION OF LOTS OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES ............................................................................................................ 15
G. DIVISION OF LOTS BY MUNICIPAL BOUNDARIES ......................................................................................................... 15
H. DISTRICT USES ................................................................................................................................................... 15
I. SPACE AND BULK STANDARDS ............................................................................................................................... 26
SECTION 4 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS .............................................................................................................. 31
A. BACK LOT ......................................................................................................................................................... 31
B. LOTS SERVED BY NONCONFORMING RIGHTS-OF-WAY ................................................................................................. 32
C. APARTMENT CONVERSIONS .................................................................................................................................. 32
D. RURAL II DENSITY ............................................................................................................................................... 33
D.I. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ........................................................................................................ 34
E. ELDER COTTAGE HOUSING OPPORTUNITY (ECHO) UNITS ........................................................................................... 36
F. MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS .................................................................................................................................. 37
G. ELDERLY AND CONGREGATE HOUSING COMPLEXES .................................................................................................... 39
H. MOBILE HOMES ................................................................................................................................................. 39
I. OPEN SPACE SUBDIVISIONS .................................................................................................................................. 41
J. AFFORDABLE HOUSING INCENTIVE ......................................................................................................................... 52
K. HOME OCCUPATION ........................................................................................................................................... 53
L. STANDARDS FOR NON-COMMERCIAL ANIMAL RAISING IN THE VILLAGE AND GENERAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS ....................... 55
M. SOILS ............................................................................................................................................................... 56
N. WATER QUALITY ................................................................................................................................................ 56
O. ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES ....................................................................................................................................... 56
P. SEPTIC WASTE DISPOSAL ...................................................................................................................................... 56
Q. CAMPGROUNDS ................................................................................................................................................. 57
R. SWIMMING POOLS ............................................................................................................................................. 57
S. SIGNS ............................................................................................................................................................... 57
T. SHORELAND AREAS ............................................................................................................................................. 65
U. TEMPORARY DWELLINGS ...................................................................................................................................... 76
V. NON-RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY STRUCTURES ............................................................................................................ 76
W. COMMERCIAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND RELATED FACILITIES ....................................................................... 77
X. INDIVIDUAL LOT PHOSPHOROUS MANAGEMENT ....................................................................................................... 80
Y. FARM ENTERPRISE .............................................................................................................................................. 83
Z. STORAGE TANKS ................................................................................................................................................. 84
AA. RENTAL CABINS ............................................................................................................................................. 84
BB. SHOREFRONT COMMON AREAS ........................................................................................................................ 85
CC. APARTMENTS ACCESSORY TO COMMERCIAL USES ................................................................................................. 85
DD. IN-LAW APARTMENTS ..................................................................................................................................... 86
SECTION 5. SITE PLAN REVIEW ............................................................................................................ 87
A. THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION ARE ................................................................................................................... 87
B. APPLICABILITY ............................................................................................................................................... 87
C. ADMINISTRATION ........................................................................................................................................... 88
D. SITE PLAN REVIEW APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS ......................................................................................... 92
E. GENERAL REVIEW STANDARDS ...................................................................................................................... 96
F. SPECIFIC STANDARDS ................................................................................................................................... 113
G. WAIVERS ...................................................................................................................................................... 120
SECTION 6. ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES ................................................................... 123
A. ADMINISTERING BODIES AND AGENTS ................................................................................................................... 123
B. PERMITS REQUIRED........................................................................................................................................... 123
C. FEES .............................................................................................................................................................. 125
D. PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTERING NON-SITE PLAN REVIEW PERMITS ........................................................................... 126
E. ENFORCEMENT................................................................................................................................................. 127
SECTION 7. APPEALS ...................................................................................................................................... 129
A. ESTABLISHMENT ............................................................................................................................................... 129
B. POWERS AND DUTIES ........................................................................................................................................ 129
C. APPEAL PROCEDURE .......................................................................................................................................... 132
SECTION 8. DEFINITIONS................................................................................................................................ 135
APPENDIX 1 160
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 1
ARTICLE I
TOWN OF TURNER ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION 1. General
A. Title
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Turner,
Maine, and will be referred to as "this Ordinance."
B. Authority
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the enabling provisions of Article VI I I-A of the
Maine Constitution, the provisions of Title 30-A, M.R.S.A. Section 3001 (Home Rule), the
State's Growth Management Law, Title 30-A, M.R.S.A. Section 4312 et seq, and the
Mandatory Shoreland Zoning Act, Title 38 M M.R.S.A. Sections 435, et seq.
C. Purposes
The purposes of this Ordinance are:
I To implement the provisions of the Town's comprehensive plan;
2. To promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the community;
3. To encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the community;
4. To promote traffic safety;
5. To provide safety from fire and other elements;
6. To provide an allotment of land area in new developments sufficient for adequate
enjoyment of community life;
7. To conserve natural resources;
8. In shoreland areas, to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; to
prevent and control water pollution; to protect fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird
and other wildlife habitat; to protect buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated
erosion; to protect archaeological and historic resources; to protect freshwater; to control
building sites, placement of structures and land uses; to conserve shore cover, and
visual as well as actual points of access to inland waters; to conserve natural beauty and
open space; and to anticipate and respond to the impacts of development in shoreland
areas, as defined herein; and
9. To provide effective procedures for the enforcement of this Ordinance against
violators.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 2
D. Applicability
The provisions of this Ordinance shall govern all land and all structures within the boundaries
of the Town of Turner including any structure built on, over or abutting a dock, wharf or pier,
or other structure extending beyond the normal high water line of a water body or within a
wetland.
E. Conflicts with Other Ordinances
Except as otherwise specifically stated herein, (a) whenever a provision of this Ordinance
conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision of this Ordinance, the more restrictive
provision shall control, and (b) whenever a provision of this ordinance conflicts with or is
inconsistent with another ordinance, regulation or statute, this Ordinance shall apply.
F. Validity and Severability
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared invalid or unenforceable by the
courts, such decision shall not invalidate or limit the enforcement of any other section or
provision of the Ordinance.
G. Effective Date
1. The effective date of this Ordinance shall be thirty (30) days of the date of its adoption
by the legislative body, i.e., July 12, 1993.
H. Amendments
1. Initiation of Amendments: An amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by:
a. The Planning Board, provided a majority of the Board has so voted;
b. Request of the municipal officers; or
c. Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least 10% of the number of
votes cast in the municipality at the last gubernatorial election.
2. The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed amendment.
Notification of the hearing shall be posted in the Town Office at least thirteen (13) days
before the hearing and published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality at least two (2) times with the date of the first publication at least twelve
(12) days before the hearing and the date of the 2nd publication at least seven (7) days
before the hearing. The Planning Board shall make a report and its recommendation on
the proposed amendment within ten (10) days after the public hearing has been closed.
3. When the proposed amendment would result in a rezoning that permits industrial,
commercial or retail development in a district where previously prohibited or that
prohibits all industrial, commercial or retail development in a district where previously
permitted, the Town Clerk shall notify the owner(s) of each parcel in and abutting the
area to be rezoned by mail at least fourteen (14) days before the hearing. Such notice
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 3
shall contain a copy of a map indicating the area to be rezoned. Notice under this
subsection is not required for any other type of proposed zoning amendment including
overlay zoning ordinances or any type of zoning ordinances required under Title 30-A
M.R.S.A. Section 4314, subsection 2 and 3.
4. In addition to the notice required in Section 3 above, the Town Clerk shall provide
written notification by first class mail to land owners whose property is being
considered for placement in a Resource Protection District. Such notice must be sent
not later than fourteen (14) days before the Planning Board holds a public hearing on
the proposed rezoning to Resource Protection.
5. The Town Clerk shall forward a copy of the text of the proposed amendment to the
Selectmen and Planning Board of adjacent communities of when a zoning amendment
is proposed which is within 500 feet of a common town border at least thirteen (13)
days in advance of the public hearing. The adjacent community may provide verbal or
written testimony.
6. Adoption of Amendment: An amendment of this Ordinance may be adopted by a
majority vote of a regular or special Town Meeting and unless otherwise specified
therein, shall become effective upon adoption.
7. Copies of amendments attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk that affect an area
within 250 feet of the normal high water line of a great pond, river or upland edge of a
wetland or 75 feet horizontal distance from a stream shall be submitted to the
Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection following adoption by
the municipal legislative body and shall not be effective unless approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection. If the Commissioner
fails to act on any amendment within 45 days of the Commissioner's receipt of the
amendment, the amendment is automatically approved. Any application for a permit
submitted to the municipality within the 45 day period shall be governed by the terms
of the amendment if such amendment is approved by the Commissioner.
I. Repeal of Existing Ordinances
Adoption of this Ordinance shall repeal on the effective date of this Ordinance any and all
previously enacted Site Review, Shoreland Zoning and Minimum Lot Size Ordinances. This
shall not prevent enforcement of repealed ordinances with respect to the time periods in
which they were effective.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 4
SECTION 2. Nonconformance
A. Purpose
It is the intent of this Ordinance to promote land use conformities except that nonconforming
lots, structures and uses that legally existed before the effective date of this Ordinance shall
be allowed to continue subject to the requirements set forth in this section.
B. General
1. Transfer of Ownership: Nonconforming structures, lots, and uses may be transferred,
and the new owner may continue the non-conforming use or continue to use the nonconforming
structure or lot subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. Repair and Maintenance: This Ordinance allows the normal upkeep and maintenance
of nonconforming uses and structures including repairs or renovations which do not
involve expansion of the nonconforming use or structure and such other changes in a
nonconforming use or structure as federal, state, or local building and safety codes may
require.
C. Nonconforming Structures
1. Expansions: A nonconforming structure may be added to or expanded after obtaining
a permit from the same permitting authority as that for a new structure if such addition
or expansion does not increase the nonconformity of the structure and is in accordance
with subparagraphs a and b below. Should the expansion of the nonconforming structure
require Site Plan Review under Section 5.13.1.c., approval shall be obtained pursuant
to Section 5.
Further Limitations:
a. Legally existing non-conforming principal and accessory structures that do not meet
the water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback requirements may be expanded or
altered as follows as long as all other applicable standards contained in this Ordinance
are met.
1. Expansion of any portion of a structure within 25 feet, horizontal distance,
of the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland
edge of a wetland is prohibited even if the expansion will not increase nonconformity
with the water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback
requirement.
2. Expansion of an accessory structure that is located closer to the normal
high-water line or a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a
wetland than the principal structure is prohibited even if the expansion will
not increase non-conformity with the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland setback requirement.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 5
3. For structures located less than 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the
normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of
a wetland, the maximum combined total floor area for all portions of those
structures within that 75-foot distance is 1,000 square feet, and the
maximum height of any portion of a structure that is within 75 feet,
horizontal distance, of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a
wetland is limited to 20 feet or the height of the existing structure,
whichever is greater.
4. For structures located less than 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the
normal high-water line of a great pond classified as GPA or a river flowing
to a great pond classified as GPA, the maximum combined total floor area
for all potions of those structures within that 100 foot distance is 1,500
square feet, and the maximum height of any portion of a structure that is
within that 100 foot, horizontal distance, of a great pond is 25 feet or the
height of structure, that is within 100 feet whichever is greater, except that
any portion of those structures located less than 75 feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream,
or the upland edge of a wetland must meet the floor area and height limits
of 3 above.
For the purposes of subparagraph a, a basement is not counted toward floor area.
b. Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is constructed under a nonconforming
structure, the structure and new foundation must be placed such that the
setback requirement is met to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning
Board or its designee, basing its decision on the criteria specified in Section 12(C)(2)
Relocation, below. If the completed foundation does not extend beyond the exterior
dimensions of the structure and the foundation does not cause the structure to be
elevated by more than three (3) additional feet, as measured from the uphill side of the
structure, it shall not be considered to be an expansion of the structure.
2. Special expansion allowance. Existing principal and accessory structures that exceed
the floor area or height limits set in divisions C.1.a.3 and 4 above may not be expanded
except that the limits may be exceeded by not more than 500 square feet provided that
all of the following requirements are met.
a. The principal structure is set back at least 50 feet, horizontal distance, from the
normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a
wetland.
b. A well-distributed stand of trees and other natural vegetation as defined in Section
4.T.12 extends at least 50 feet, horizontal distance, in depth as measured from the
normal high-water line or upland edge for the entire width of the property.
If a well-distributed stand of trees and other vegetation meeting the requirements
of Section 4.T.12is not present, the 500 square foot special expansion allowance
may be permitted only in conjunction with a written plan, including a scaled site
drawing, by the property owner, and approved by the planning board or its
designee, to reestablish a buffer of trees, shrubs, and other ground cover within
50 feet, horizontal distance, of the shoreline or tributary stream.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 6
c. Adjacent to great ponds classified GPA and rivers flowing to great ponds
classified GPA, except for the allowable footpath, there exists complete natural
ground cover consisting of forest duff, shrubs and other woody and herbaceous
vegetation within 50 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line.
Where natural ground cover is lacking, the area must be supplemented with leaf
or bark mulch and plantings of native shrubs, and other woody and herbaceous
vegetation in quantities sufficient to retard erosion and provide for effective
infiltration of stormwater.
d. A written plan by the property owner, including a scaled site drawing, is approved
by the planning board and is developed, implemented, and maintained to address
the following mitigation measures for the property within the shoreland zone.
1. Unstabilized areas resulting in soil erosion must be mulched, seeded, or
otherwise stabilized and maintained to prevent further erosion and
sedimentation to water bodies, tributary streams and wetlands.
2. Roofs and associated drainage systems, driveways, parking areas, and other
nonvegetated surfaces must be designed or modified, as necessary, to
prevent concentrated flow of storm water runoff from reaching a water
body, tributary stream or wetland. Where possible, runoff must be directed
through a vegetated area or infiltrated into the soil through the use of a
well, stone apron, or similar device.
3. Planting requirements. Any planting or revegetation required as a condition to the
Special Expansion Allowance must be in accordance with a written plan drafted by a
qualified professional, be implemented at the time of construction, and be designed to
meet the rating scores contained in paragraph (b) and the ground cover requirements of
paragraph (c) when the vegetation matures within the 50-foot strip. At a minimum, the
plan must provide for the establishment of a well-distributed planting of saplings spaced
so that there is at least one sapling per 80 square feet of newly established buffer.
Planted saplings may be no less than three (3) feet tall for coniferous species and no
less than six feet tall for deciduous species. The planting plan must include a mix of
at least three native tree species found growing in adjacent areas with no one species
making up more than 50% of the number of saplings planted unless otherwise approved
by the planning board or its designee based on adjacent stand comparison. All aspects
of the implemented plan must be maintained by the applicant and future owners.
4. Filing and reporting requirements. Written plans required pursuant to this section
must be filed with the Androscoggin County Registry of Deeds within fourteen (14)
days of approval. A copy of all permits issued pursuant to this section must be forwarded
by the municipality to the Department of Environmental Protection within 14 days of
the issuance of the permit.
5. No structure which is less than the required setback from the normal highwater line of a
water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland shall be expanded toward the
water body, tributary stream, or wetland as defined herein.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 7
6. Relocation: A nonconforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries of the
parcel on which the structure is located provided that the site of relocation conforms to
all setback requirements to the greatest practical extent as determined by the same
permitting authority as that for a new structure and provided that the applicant
demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage disposal system meets the requirements
of State law and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, or that
a new system can be installed in compliance with the law and said Rules. In no case shall
a structure be relocated in a manner that causes the structure to be more nonconforming.
A foundation placed under a relocated structure within 100 feet horizontal distance of
the normal high-water line of a Great Pond rated GPA 75 feet horizontal distance of
other water bodies or 75 feet horizontal distance of the upland edge of a freshwater
wetland shall not cause the height of the structure to be increased by more than three (3)
additional feet (considering the slope of land).
In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback to the greatest practical
extent, the permitting authority shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of the land,
the potential for soil erosion, the location of other structures on the property and on
adjacent properties, the location of the septic system and other on-site soils suitable
for septic systems, and within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water
line of a great pond, river or upland edge of a wetland and 75 feet horizontal distance
from a stream, the type and amount of vegetation to be removed to accomplish the
relocation shall be considered.
When it is necessary to remove vegetation within the water or wetland setback area in
order to relocate a structure, the Planning Board or its designee shall require replanting
of native vegetation to compensate for the destroyed vegetation. In addition, the area
from which the relocated structure was removed must be replanted with vegetation.
Replanting shall be required as follows:
a. Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted with at least one
native tree, three (3) feet in height, for every tree removed. If more than five
trees are planted, no one species of tree shall make up more than 50% of the
number of trees planted. Replaced trees must be planted no further from the
water or wetland than the trees that were removed.
Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and ground cover, that are removed or
destroyed in order to relocate a structure must be re-established. An area at least
the same size as the area where vegetation and/or ground cover was disturbed,
damaged, or removed must be reestablished within the setback area. The
vegetation and/or ground cover must consist of similar native vegetation and/or
ground cover that was disturbed, destroyed or removed.
b. Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel the original location of
the structure shall be replanted with vegetation which may consist of grasses,
shrubs, trees, or a combination thereof.
7. Reconstruction or Replacement:
a. Any nonconforming structure which is located less than the required setback
from a water body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed, damaged
or destroyed regardless of cause by more than 50% of the market value of the
structure before such damage, destruction or removal, may be reconstructed or
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 8
replaced in compliance with all building and safety codes provided that a permit
is obtained within two (2) years of the date of said damage, destruction or
removal and provided that such reconstruction or replacement is in compliance
with the water body, tributary or wetland setback to the greatest practical extent
as determined by the same permitting authority as that for a new structure in
accordance with the purposes of this Ordinance. In no case shall a structure be
reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its nonconformity.
If the reconstructed or replacement structure is less than the required setback it
shall not be any larger than the original structure, except as allowed pursuant to
Section 2.C.1 above, as determined by the non-conforming floor area and volume
of the reconstructed or replaced structure at its new location. If the total amount
of floor area and volume of the original structure can be relocated or
reconstructed beyond the required setback area, no portion of the relocated or
reconstructed structure shall be replaced or constructed at less than the setback
requirement for a new structure. When it is necessary to remove vegetation in
order to replace or reconstruct a structure, vegetation shall be replanted in
accordance with Section 2.C.2 above.
In addition, the provisions of Article VI of the Floodplain Management Ordinance for
the Town of Turner, Maine, shall be met. Any nonconforming structure which is
damaged or destroyed by 50% or less of the market value of the structure, excluding
normal maintenance and repair, may be reconstructed in place with a permit from the
code enforcement officer.
b. Any nonconforming structure which is located more than the required setback
from the normal high water line of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge
of a wetland and which is damaged or destroyed by fire, lightning, wind or other
natural disaster may be rebuilt provided that construction is commenced within
two (2) years after the destruction of the building or structure. In addition, the
provisions of Article VI of the Floodplain Management Ordinance for the Town
of Turner, Maine, shall be met.
D. Nonconforming Uses
1. Expansion: Expansion of nonconforming uses may be allowed provided the Planning
Board after reviewing written application determines that no greater adverse impacts
would occur as the result of the expansion as defined in section 2.D.3. and the following.
a. The expansion of a nonconforming use will be in accordance with any applicable
Performance Standards set forth in Section 4 and 5, Site Plan Review, of this
Ordinance.
b. The expansions of the nonconforming use will not encroach further on the required
setbacks.
c. Notwithstanding 1.a and b. above, a residential structure located in the
Commercial I and II districts may be expanded without Planning Board review
provided such expansion complies with all other applicable standards of this
ordinance.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 9
d. An accessory structure to a non-conforming residential use may be allowed with
a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer provided such accessory structure
complies with all applicable standards of this ordinance.
2. Resumption Prohibited: A lot, building or structure in or on which a nonconforming
use is abandoned for a period exceeding five years, or which is superseded by a
conforming use, may not again be devoted to a nonconforming use except that the
Planning Board may, for good cause shown by the applicant, grant up to a one year
extension to that time period. This provision shall not apply to the resumption of a use
of a residential structure provided that the structure has been used or maintained for
residential purposes during the preceding five (5) year period.
3. Change of Use: An existing nonconforming use may be changed to another
nonconforming use provided that (a) the proposed use has no greater adverse impact on
the subject and adjacent properties and resources than the former use; as determined by
the Planning Board and (b) applicable performance standards contained in Section 4 are
complied with and (c) approval is obtained pursuant to Section 5. The determination of
no greater adverse impact shall be made according to criteria listed below.
a. That the proposed use is of the same character or less noxious than the current
nonconforming use.
b. That the proposed use will not create a traffic hazard nor increase an existing
traffic hazard; and
c. That the amount of parking required to meet the minimum requirements for the
proposed use exists on the site or will be otherwise provided in accordance with
Section 4 of this Ordinance.
d. That the amount of noise, odors, vibrations, smoke, dust and air discharges of the
proposed use shall be equal to or less than the present use; and
e. That the rate of surface water run-off from the site will not be increased; and
f. That the hours of operation of the proposed use will be compatible with the
existing, surrounding land uses; and
g. That the proposed use will not increase the adverse impact on surrounding
properties.
4. Change of Use of a Nonconforming Structure: The use of a nonconforming structure
may not be changed to another nonconforming use unless the Planning Board, after
reviewing written application, determines that the new use is equally or more
appropriate to the district than the existing use of the nonconforming structure and will
have no greater adverse impacts than the existing use.
The determination of no greater adverse impact shall be made according to the criteria
contained in Section 2.D.3 above.
The change in use shall comply with any applicable Performance Standards set forth in
Section 4 and approval is obtained pursuant to Section 5 of this Ordinance.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 10
E. Nonconforming Lots
1. Nonconforming Lots: A nonconforming lot of record as of the effective date of this
Ordinance or amendment thereto may be built upon, without the need for a variance,
provided that such lot is in separate ownership and not contiguous with any other lot in
the same ownership, and that all provisions of this Ordinance except lot size and
frontage can be met. This subsection shall not be deemed to require contiguous lots in
a subdivision approved and recorded after September 22, 1971, to be combined.
2. Contiguous Built Lots: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in a single or
common ownership of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, if all or part of
the lots do not meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, and if a principle
use or structure exists on each lot, the nonconforming lots may be conveyed separately
or together, provided that the State Minimum Lot Size Law and State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules are complied with.
If two or more principle uses or structures existed on a single lot of record on the
effective date of this Ordinance, each may be sold on a separate lot provided that the
above referenced law and rules are complied with. When such lots are divided, each lot
thus created must be as conforming as possible to the dimensional requirements of this
Ordinance.
3. Contiguous Lots - Vacant or Partially Built: If two or more contiguous lots or
parcels are in single or common ownership of record at the time of or since adoption or
amendment of this Ordinance, if any of these lots do not individually meet the
dimensional requirements of this Ordinance or subsequent amendments, and if one or
more of the lots are vacant or contain no principle structure, the lots shall (except as
provided in paragraph 1 above) be combined to the extent necessary to meet the
dimensional requirements.
F. Illegal Reduction in Dimensions
No lot shall be reduced or created in any manner that violates the requirements of this
Ordinance. If land is subdivided, conveyed, divided or otherwise transferred in violation of
this Ordinance, no building permit or other municipal permit shall be issued with reference to
any of the land or lots so reduced or created until all such land or lots fulfill the dimensional
regulations, except as allowed by waiver or density bonus granted by the Planning Board in
connection with the approval of a subdivision plan, multi-family dwellings, elderly and
congregate housing complexes, affordable housing incentive or open space subdivisions.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
11
SECTION 3 District Purposes, District Uses and Space and Bulk Standards of Districts
A. General Purposes
1. To implement the Town of Turner’s Comprehensive Plan policies and its Future Land
Use Plan;
2. To allow future growth to occur in designated portions of the community and to restrict
growth in other areas;
3. To provide for separation of land uses that might otherwise be incompatible;
4. To protect the natural resources of the community from degradation; and
5. To provide for an orderly future growth pattern of the community.
B. Specific District Purpose
1. Agricultural/Industrial District: The purpose of the Agricultural/Industrial District is
to provide locations for industrial, manufacturing, warehousing and other businesses
that can coexist with egg production and processing. New residential development
except employee housing will not be permitted in this area. These uses are allowable
provided that safeguards are maintained to minimize degradation to the sand and gravel
aquifer which underlies this area. Lot sizes should be based on area to be covered by
structures, outside storage and parking. Maximum lot coverage ratios should not exceed
75% if it can be shown that ground water resources will be protected.
2. Commercial I District. The purpose of the Commercial I District is to provide
commercial development locations adjacent to Route 4 without conflicting with its
traffic carrying capacity. The district is intended to allow commercial uses while
controlling highway access and encouraging quality site and structure design so as to
enhance the Town's character and to avoid commercial strip development.
Development in this district should have a minimum of 40,000 square feet of lot area.
3. Commercial II District. The purpose of the Commercial II District is to provide for
commercial development locations adjacent to Route 4 that are less suitable for such
development than that of the Commercial I District due to transportation and
environmental factors. Development will not conflict with Route 4 traffic carrying
capacity. Development standards shall control highway access, encourage quality site
and structural design so as to enhance the Town's character, avoid commercial strip
development and protect natural resources. Development in this district should have a
minimum of 80,000 square feet of lot area.
4. Village District. The purpose of the Village District is to allow for traditional village
development patterns and uses to continue and expand.
5. General Residential I District. The purpose of the General Residential I District is to
provide areas that are primarily devoted to residential uses and mobile home parks.
Uses other than residential should not conflict with the residential purpose of this
district. Development in this district should have a minimum of 40,000 square feet of
lot area.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
12
6. General Residential II District: The purpose of the General Residential II District is
to maintain residential development as it currently exists or is appropriate for this type
of development at less density. The area should be primarily residential, except no
mobile home parks shall be permitted. Other land uses appropriate and compatible
with residential uses should include public and semi-public uses and commercial uses
associated with residential areas. Development in this district should have a minimum
of 80,000 square feet of lot area.
7. Rural I District. The purpose of the Rural I District is to maintain the rural character
of the Town including agricultural and forest lands. Portions of these areas are served
by road systems not designed for high traffic volumes. Residential development should
be medium density and not conflict with rural uses including agriculture and
commercial forestry. Development in this district should have a minimum of 80,000
square feet of lot area..
8. Rural II District. The purpose of the Rural II District is to preserve areas not well
suited for development. They are not well suited for development because of natural
resource values that include wildlife habitat and wetlands, physical characteristics that
include steep slopes and soils not well suited to development, adjacency to large
undeveloped tracts of land, lack of accessibility by public roads, areas where new
public roads could result in significant public expenditures and critical lake watersheds.
These factors make the Rural II areas only suitable for new development at low densities.
Development in this district should have a minimum of 5 acres of lot area when
suitable private road access is available. Residential subdivisions, in these areas, shall
be a minimum of one dwelling per 5 acres and no new public roads shall be created.
Clustering of residential development shall be required.
9. Shoreland District. The purpose of the Shoreland District is to provide for residential
and other land use activities generally associated with Shoreland setting including light
commercial uses adjacent to the Town’s, ponds, rivers and wetlands while protecting
water quality, shorelands and visual quality as required by the Mandatory Shoreland
Zoning Act. The Shoreland District is that area within two hundred and fifty (250) feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high water line of a great pond or river or within two
hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland.
The Shoreland District does not include those areas depicted on the Official Zoning Map
as other Districts even though they may fall within the 250-foot area.
10. Resource Protection District. The purpose of the Resource Protection District is to
regulate development which would adversely affect water quality, productive habitat,
biological ecosystems, or scenic and natural values. This district shall include the
following areas, except those areas which are currently lawfully developed.
a. Areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of freshwater
wetlands and wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers which are rated
"moderate" or "high" value by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife as of January 1, 1973.
b. Floodplains, except in the Village District, along all rivers, streams, brooks,
ponds and floodplains along artificially formed great ponds defined by the 100-
year floodplain as designated as areas of special flood hazard, Zones A and AE
for the Town of Turner, Androscoggin County, Maine, identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency in a report entitled "Flood Insurance Study -
Androscoggin County Maine" dated July 8, 2013 with panels: 082E, 084E,
085E, 091E, 092E, 093E, 094E, 101E, 102E, 103E, 104E, 108E, 111E, 112E,
113E, 114E, 116D, 118E, 180E, 181E, 182E, 183E, 184E, 201E, 202E, 203E
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
13
204E, 206E, 211E, 212E, derived from the county wide digital Flood Insurance
Rate Map entitled “Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map, Androscoggin County
Maine”. In the absence of these, by soil types identified as recent floodplain soils.
c. Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of 20 percent or
greater when they occur within the limits of the shoreland area.
d. Areas of two or more contiguous acres supporting wetland vegetation and hydric
soils which are not part of freshwater wetland as defined, and which are not
surficially connected to a water body during the period of normal high water
when they occur within the limits of the shoreland area.
e. Androscoggin and Nezinscot Rivers and Gulf Island Pond Shorelines and land
purchased by the Land for Maine Future Fund: These areas require regulation so
that future development does not diminish the area’s natural value.
f. Areas other than those described in a-e above that are depicted as Resource
Protection on the Official Zoning Map.
C. Floating Commercial
1. Purpose: The purpose of the Floating Commercial District is to provide areas of
sufficient size and characteristics for future commercial and industrial development.
2. This Ordinance may be amended to affix the Floating Commercial District following
the procedures set forth in Section 1.H. of this Ordinance and the following:
a. The District may be affixed only in the Rural I District.
b. The minimum land area to be rezoned shall not be less than fifty (50) acres.
c. The District shall not be affixed more than two (2) times without updating the
comprehensive plan.
d. Only those uses allowed in the Commercial I and Commercial II Districts shall
be permitted.
e. The Planning Board shall review the request for rezoning and make written
findings of fact as to whether the following criteria are met.
1) The applicant(s) for rezoning shall provide the Planning Board an overall
development plan for the area to be rezoned; the development plan which
may be developed from existing sources of maps and data at a minimum
shall contain the following:
a.) The type and size of the proposed development activity.
b.) Internal Circulation and Parking Plan.
c.) Suitability of soils for subsurface Sewage Disposal.
d.) The direction of existing surface water drainage across the site.
e.) Location of wetlands on the site.
f.) Estimated daily and peak hour traffic to be generated by the
development.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
14
2) Transportation systems and other public services have the capacity to serve
the area. The Board shall consider the capacity and condition of roads
which will provide access to the site. Access to the site shall not be in a
residential street or through residential areas. The Board shall request
Town Development heads to evaluate the proposal based upon current
department capacities to serve the development.
3) At least seventy (70) percent of the land area is suitable for proposed uses.
In determining suitability, the Board shall consider soil suitability, slope of
the land and the existence of wetlands regulated by this ordinance, the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection, and the Army Corps of
Engineers.
4) The proposed rezoning will not adversely affect residential values. In
determining adverse affect, the Board shall consider the location of
existing or approved residential development activity and the impact of
rezoning on traffic, noise and lighting on such residential areas.
5) Is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
D. Location of Districts
Said Districts are located and bounded as shown on the Official Zoning Map, entitled "Zoning
Map of Turner, Maine," dated April 8, 2006, and on file at the Town Office, and as from time
to time amended in accordance herein. The Official Map shall be signed by the Town Clerk
and Chairperson of the Planning Board at the time of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance
certifying the date of such adoption or amendment.
E. Rules Governing District Boundaries
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning
Map, the following rules shall apply.
1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways,
rivers or streams shall be construed to follow such center lines.
2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as
following such lot lines.
3. Boundaries indicated as approximately following Town limits shall be construed as
following Town limits.
4. Boundaries of the Shoreland Area (those areas regulated by Title 38 M.R.S.A. Section
435) on the Official Zoning Map are merely illustrative of their general location. The
exact location and boundaries of the area shall be determined by on-site inspection and
measurement from the normal high-water line or the upland edge of a wetland.
5. Boundaries indicated as approximately following natural features such as floodplains,
wetlands, aquifers or watershed boundaries shall be construed to follow said natural
feature. The location of said natural feature shall be determined by reference to:
a) The flood insurance rate map and floodway map;
b) The inventory of significant wetlands;
c) The state studies of significant sand and gravel aquifers, and
d) Independent site studies and evaluations.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
15
6. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those
shown on the Official Zoning Map, or other circumstances not covered by subsections I
through 5 above, the Board of Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries.
F. Division of Lots of District Boundaries
Where zoning district boundary lines divides a lot or parcel of land in the same ownership of
record at the time such line is established by adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, the
use regulations applicable to the one portion of the lot may be extended into the other portion
of the lot by not more than 50 feet provided that the other portion is not within the Shoreland
or Resource Protection Districts.
G. Division of Lots by Municipal Boundaries
When a lot is situated in part in the Town of Turner and in part in an adjacent municipality,
the provisions, regulations and restrictions of this ordinance shall be applied to that portion of
such lot as lies in the Town of Turner.
H. District Uses
The land uses permitted in each district, in conformance with the Performance Standards
(Section 4) and Site Plan Review (Section 5) of this Ordinance, are shown in the following
tables.
KEY: Yes - permitted (no local permit necessary) (May require building permit).Must
comply with standards contained in Section 4 of this Ordinance.
No - prohibited
CEO - permit from code enforcement officer required
PB - Requires Planning Board Review
LPI - Local Plumbing Inspection
(1) Multi-family dwellings/apartments may be allowed as an accessory use in
commercial structures.
(2) Requires Site Plan Review.
(3) Requires Subdivision Review.
(4) Must comply with performance standards on lots of five acres or less.
(5) Expansion of existing cemeteries only.
(6) In the Resource Protection District, not permitted in areas so designated because
of wildlife value.
(7) Mobile home parks may be allowed in the Rural I and Agricultural/Industrial
Districts for the purpose of providing bonafide farm labor housing. The mobile
home park must be located on Farm owned property, be managed by the Farm
owner and shall be occupied by only employees who work on the farm and their
families. Within six (6) months of abandonment of the production agriculture,
the mobile home park shall be removed. Such mobile home parks shall comply
with the Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
16
(8) In existing structures only.
(9) If in compliance with Section 4.K.1.a.-d., no permit required.
(10) Only allowed after Commercial/Floating District is affixed and Site Plan Review.
(12) Except to provide access to permitted uses within the District, or where no
reasonable alternative route or location is available outside the Resource
Protection District, in which case a permit is required from the Planning Board.
(13) Except when area is zoned for Resource Protection due to floodplain criteria in
which case site plan review is required from the Planning Board under Section 5.
Site Plan Review, of this ordinance.
(14) Requires a permit for the Code Enforcement Office if more than 100 square feet
of surface area, in total, is disturbed.
(15) A single-family dwelling or manufactured home may be allowed in the
Commercial I and Commercial II Districts provided the lot upon which it is to be
located is a back lot as defined herein, was legally established and recorded in the
Androscoggin County Registry of Deeds prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance and Sections 4.A and B are met.
(16) Except the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a permit for Filling and Earth
Moving from 10 to 1,000 cubic yards associated with development and
construction requiring a CEO permit.
(17) Accessory structures to commercial, manufacturing and industrial structures and
uses of greater than 1,000 square feet in total floor area shall require a review and
approval of compatibility by the Code Enforcement officer pursuant to Section
4.V.
(18) Should the structure which is to be converted from a seasonal dwelling to a yearround
dwelling be accessed by a nonconforming right-of-way, the CEO shall
require the provisions of Section 4.B to be met.
(19) Except housing units used for the purpose of providing bonafide farm labor
housing are allowed with permit from the permitting authority. Single Family
Dwelling – CEO, Duplex – CEO, Mulit-Family Dwelling – PB with Site Plan
and Subdivision Approvals and Manufactured Home – CEO.
(20) Except Motor Vehicle Sales located along Route 4 in the Village District with
Planning Board Approval.
(21) In addition to Site Plan Review, the Planning Board shall find that the standards
contained in Section 4.Y are met.
(22) Not permitted in Resource Protection District when zoned Resource Protection
due to slopes or wildlife value.
(23) Excluding bridges and other crossings not involving earthwork, in which case no
permit is required.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
17
(24) Permit not required, but must file a written “notice of intent to construct” with
CEO.
(25) See further restrictions in Section 4.T.8.
(26) Allowed with Site Plan Review approval only on lots that have the required street
frontage on Route 219.
(27) Except when located within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of Beals (Crystal) Pond in which case the use is prohibited.
The aforementioned footnote shall be applicable to the following uses in the
Commercial II District:
1. Auto Body Shops
2. Auto Repair
3. Auto Car Wash
4. Gasoline Service Station
5. Bulk Oil, Gas Terminal
6. Heavy Manufacturing
7. Light Manufacturing
(28) When located within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line
of Beals (Crystal) Pond, minimum standards found in Section 4.T, Shoreland
Areas, are applicable, as well as the Shoreland Space and Bulk Standards for
“minimum lot size/density,” “minimum shore frontage”, “shoreland area minimum
setback,” shoreland area building coverage ratio” and shoreland area maximum
structure height”.
The aforementioned footnote shall be applicable to all the allowed uses found in
the Commercial II District.
(29) A CEO permit is required when the activity within 250 feet, horizontal distance,
of the normal high-water line of Beals (Crystal) Pond.
The aforementioned footnote shall be applicable to “Filling and Earth Moving
10-1,000 cubic yards.”
(30) Motor vehicle sales may expand with Planning Board Site Plan Review approval
and the expansion area complies with Section 5.F.3.
(31) Person(s) proposing a public or private schools, certified family child care
provider, parks, playgrounds, and/or churches which are located within fivehundred
(500) feet of an existing Medical Marijuana Establishment, as measured
from the Medical Marijuana Establishments’ actual structure or controlled area to
the property line of the proposed public or private school, certified family child
care provider facility, park, playground, and/or church, shall be required to sign a
form, which may be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer, which indicates
that they are aware that an existing Medical Marijuana Establishment is located
within five-hundred (500) feet of their proposed site.
RESIDENTIAL USES
District
Use Agricultural
/ Industrial
Commercial
I
Commercial
II
Village General
Residential I
General
Residential II
Rura
l I
Rura
l II
Shoreland Resource
Protection
Single family dwelling No19 No No CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO No
Duplex No19 No No CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO No
Multi-family dwelling1
No19 No No PB3
PB3
PB3
No No No No
Manufactured Home No19 No No CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO No
Mobile Home Park No7
No No No PB3
No7
No7
No No No
Open Space Development No No No PB3
PB3
PB3
PB3
PB3
PB3
No
Congregate Housing No No No PB2
PB2
PB2
No No No No
Structures Accessory to
Allowed Uses
CEO CEO CEO28
CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
Swimming Pool CEO CEO CEO28
CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
Conversion of Seasonal
to Year-round
No CEO CEO28
CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO18
No
Home Occupation9, 31
CEO CEO CEO28
PB CEO CEO CEO CEO PB PB
Private Sewage Disposal
Systems for Allowed
Uses
LPI
LPI LPI28
LPI
LPI
LPI
LPI
LPI
LPI
LPI
Uses Similar to Uses
Requiring Permit from
CEO
CEO
CEO CEO28
CEO
CEO
CEO
CEO
CEO
CEO
CEO
Uses Similar to Uses
Requiring Planning Board
Approval
PB
PB PB28
PB
PB
PB
PB
PB
PB
PB
Uses Similar to Not
Permitted
No No No No No No No No No No
Yard Sales Yes Yes Yes28
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
In-Law Apartment No No No CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO No No
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 18
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
19
EDUCATION, INSTITUTIONAL AND PUBLIC USES
District
Use Agricultural
/ Industrial
Commercial
I
Commercial
II
Village General
Residential
I
General
Residential
II
Rural
I
Rural II Shoreland Resource
Protection
Accessory Structures CEO CEO CEO28
CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
Church, Synagogue, Paris
House31
No No No PB2
PB2
PB2
No No No No
Community Centers31 No PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
No PB2
PB2
No PB2 No
Day Care31 PB2
PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2,8 No PB2
No
Essential Services
A. Roadside
distribution lines
(34.5kV and lower) in
the shoreland area
B. Non-roadside or
cross-country
distribution lines
involving ten poles or
less in the shoreland
area
C. Non-roadside or
cross-country
distribution lines
involving eleven or
more poles in the
shoreland area
YES
-
-
-
YES
-
-
-
YES28
-
-
-
YES
YES24
CEO
PB2 & 25
YES
-
-
-
YES
-
-
-
YES
-
-
-
YES
-
-
-
PB2
CEO25
CEO
PB2 & 25
PB2
CEO25
PB2 & 25
PB2 & 25
Fire, Police Stations PB2
PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
No PB2
No No No No
Government Office No PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
No PB2
No No No No
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
20
Use Agricultural
/ Industrial
Commercial
I
Commercial
II
Village General
Residential
I
General
Residential
II
Rural
I
Rural II Shoreland Resource
Protection
Group Homes No No No PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2
No No No
Hospice, Nursing Home No No No PB2
PB2
PB2
No No No No
Museum/Library No PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
No PB2
PB2,8 No No No
Public, Private Schools31 No No No PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2
No No No
Public Utility Facility PB2
PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2
No No
Municipal Recycling PB2
PB2
PB2, 28 No No PB2
PB2
No No No
Clinics/Hospital No PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
No PB2
No No No No
Private and Semi-Public
Clubs
No PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
No PB2
No PB2
PB2 No
Uses Similar to Uses
Requiring Review
Planning Board Permit
No PB PB2, 28 PB PB PB PB PB PB PB
Uses Similar to Not
Permitted
No No No No No No No No No No
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
21
OUTDOOR, RESOURCE BASE USES
District
Use Agricultural
/ Industrial
Commercial
I
Commercial
II
Village General
Residential I
General
Residential II
Rural
I
Rural
II
Shoreland Resource
Protection
Accessory Structures CEO CEO CEO28
CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
Agriculture Yes Yes Yes28
PB4
PB4
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Confined Feeding
Operations
CEO PB2
PB2, 28 No No No PB2
PB2
No No
Agriculture Products
Processing and Storage
CEO PB2
PB2, 28 No No No PB2
PB2
No No
Farm Stands Yes PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
PB2
Yes Yes Yes PB2
No
Clearing or removal of
vegetation for activities
other than timber
harvesting
Yes Yes Yes28
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes CEO
Individual, Private
Campsites
No No No No CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
Piers, docks, wharfs,
bridges & other structures
& uses extending over or
below the normal highwater
line or within a
wetland
A. Temporary
B. Permanent
CEO23
PB
CEO23
PB
CEO23, 28
PB28
CEO23
PB
CEO23
PB
CEO23
PB
CEO23
PB
CEO23
PB
CEO23
PB
CEO23
PB
Private Common Docking
Facility
No No No No No No No No PB2 PB2/22
Public Docking Facility No No No PB2
No No No No PB2
PB2/22
Road and Driveway
Construction
CEO CEO CEO28
CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO PB No12
Parking Facilities Yes Yes Yes28
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes PB No13
Cemetery No No No PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2,5 No PB2,5 No
Mineral Exploration Yes Yes Yes28
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes CEO14
CEO14
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
22
Use Agricultural
/ Industrial
Commercial
I
Commercial
II
Village General
Residential I
General
Residential II
Rural
I
Rural
II
Shoreland Resource
Protection
Mineral Extraction PB2
PB2
PB2, 28 No PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2
No PB2
Quarries PB2
PB2
PB2, 28 No No PB2
PB2
PB2
No PB2
Golf Course No PB2
PB2, 28 No PB2
PB2
PB2
No PB2
PB13
Parks and Recreation31 PB2
PB2
PB28 PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2
Filling and Earth Moving
<10 cubic yards
Yes Yes Yes28
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes CEO
Filling and Earth Moving
10-1,000 cubic yards
Yes Yes Yes28, 29 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes PB PB
Filling and Earth Moving
>1,000 cubic yards
CEO CEO CEO28
CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO PB PB
Sludge Spreading Yes PB2
PB2, 28 No No No PB2
PB2
No PB2
Septage Disposal Site Yes PB2
PB2, 28 No No No PB2
PB2
No No
Uses Similar to Allowed
Uses
Yes Yes Yes28
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Uses Similar to Use
Required Permit from
CEO
CEO CEO CEO28
CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
Uses Similar to Uses
Required Planning Board
Permit
PB PB PB28 PB PB PB PB PB PB PB
Uses Similar to Not
Permitted
No No No No No No No No No No
Breeder & Brooder Barns Yes Yes Yes28
No No No PB2
PB2
No No
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
23
COMMERCIAL USES
District
Use Agricultural
/ Industrial
Commercial
I
Commercial
II
Village General
Residential I
General
Residential II
Rural
I
Rura
l II
Shoreland Resource
Protection
Accessory Structures17
CEO CEO CEO28
CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
Amusement Facility
(indoor)
PB2
PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
No No No No No No
Commercial Recreation No PB2
PB2, 28 No No PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2 No
Rental Cabins No No No No No No PB2
PB2
PB2
No
Automobile Recycling No PB2
No No No No PB2
No No No
Automobile Graveyard No No No No No No No No No No
Junkyard No No No No No No No No No No
Auto Body Shop PB2
PB2
PB2, 27, 28 No No No26 No No No No
Auto Repair PB2
PB2
PB2, 27, 28
PB2
No No26 No No No No
Auto Car Wash PB2
PB2
PB2, 27, 28
PB2
No No No No No No
Bed & Breakfast No PB2
PB2, 28
PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2
No
Building Materials -
Retail Sales
No PB2
PB2, 28
PB2
No No PB2
PB2
No No
Commercial School No PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
No No No No No No
Firewood Processing Yes PB2
PB2, 28
No No PB2
PB2
Yes No No
Gasoline Service Station No PB2
PB2, 27, 28
PB2
No No No No No No
Hotel/Motel No PB2
No PB2
No No No No PB2
No
Indoor Theater No PB2
No PB2
No No No No No No
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
24
COMMERCIAL USES, cont.
Use Agricultural
/ Industrial
Commercial
I
Commercial
II
Village General
Residential I
General
Residential II
Rural
I
Rura
l II
Shoreland Resource
Protection
Kennel, Stable,
Veterinary Hospital
PB2
PB2
PB2, 28
No No PB2
PB2
No No No
Medical Marijuana
Establishment
A. Registered
Caregiver Retail
Store
B. Marijuana
Testing Facility
C. Marijuana
Manufacturing
Facility
D. Cultivation Area
No
No
PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2
PB2
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
PB2
No
No
No
PB2
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Motor Vehicle Sales PB2 PB2 No30 No20 No No26 No No No No
Neighborhood
Convenience Store
No PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
PB2
PB2
No No No No
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
25
COMMERCIAL USES, cont.
Use Agricultural
/ Industrial
Commercial
I
Commercial
II
Village General
Residential I
General
Residential II
Rural
I
Rura
l II
Shoreland Resource
Protection
Offices: Business,
Professional, Medical
No PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
No No No No No No
Publishing, Printing No PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
No No No No No No
Commercial
Communication Tower
PB2
PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
No No PB2
PB2
No No
Restaurant
No PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
No PB2
PB2
No PB2
No
Retail Business No PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
No No No No No No
Service Business No PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
No No No No No No
Shopping Center No PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
No No No No No No
Wholesale Business PB2
PB2
PB2, 28
No No No PB2
PB2
No No
Campground No No No No No No PB2
PB2
PB2
No13
Funeral Home No PB2
PB2, 28
PB2
No No No No No No
Agricultural Related
Services/Sales
PB2
PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
No PB2
PB2
No No No
Auction Barn/Antique
Sales
No PB2
PB2, 28 PB2
No PB2
PB2,8
No No No
Cluster Commercial
Development
PB3
PB3
PB3, 28 PB3
No No No No No No
Farm Enterprise PB21 No No No No No PB21 PB21 PB21 No
Signs CEO CEO CEO28
CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
Uses Similar to Uses
Requiring Planning Board
Permit
PB
PB PB28
PB
PB
PB
PB
PB
PB
PB
Uses Similar to Not
Permitted
No No No No No No No No No No
Peddlers Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
26
INDUSTRIAL USES
District
Use Agricultural
/ Industrial
Commercial
I
Commercial
II
Village General
Residential I
General
Residential II
Rura
l I
Rura
l II
Shoreland Resource
Protection
Accessory Structure17
YES YES YES28
YES YES YES YES YES No No
Bulk Oil, Gas Terminal PB2
PB2
PB2, 27, 28 No No No No No No No
Demolition, Waste
Disposal
PB No No No No No No No No No
Heavy Manufacturing PB2
PB2
PB2, 27, 28 No No No No No No No
Light Manufacturing PB2
PB2
PB2, 27, 28 PB2
No
No
PB No No No
Commercial Recycling
Operations
PB2
PB2
PB2, 28 No No No No No No No
Sawmill PB2
PB2
PB2, 28 No No No PB2
Yes No No
Trucking, Distribution
Terminal
PB2
PB2
PB2, 28 No No No PB2
No No No
Warehousing and Storage PB2
PB2
PB2, 28 PB2,3 No No PB2,8 No No No
Airport PB2
No No No No No No No No No
Abattoirs PB2
No No No No No PB2
PB2
No No
Bulk Grain Storage PB2
PB2
PB2, 28 No No No PB2
PB2
No No
Uses Similar to Uses
Requiring Planning Board
Permit
PB PB PB28 PB PB PB PB PB PB PB
Uses Similar to Not
Permitted
No No No No No No No No No No
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 26
I. Space and Bulk Standards
Lots in each District shall meet or exceed the following minimum space and bulk standards
(variations in bulk and space standards may be allowed by Section 4 of this ordinance and the
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance). After the effective date of this ordinance, no lot
shall be created or reduced below the minimum standards unless allowed by other provisions
of this ordinance.
1. Land below the normal high-water line of a water body and land beneath streets serving
more than two (2) lots shall not be included toward calculating minimum lot area for
single lots.
2. Lots located on opposite sides of public or private road shall be considered each a
separate tract or parcel of land unless such road was established by the owner of land
on both sides thereof after September 22, 1971.
3. The minimum width of any portion of any lot within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of
the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland shall be equal
to or greater than the shore frontage requirement for a lot with the proposed use.
4. The Planning Board may reduce the side yard and rear yard setbacks for commercial,
industrial and institutional uses. In no case shall the side yard and rear yard setbacks be
reduced by greater than 75 percent, without written agreement between abutting
property owners. With written agreement, recorded in the county registry of deeds, the
Planning Board may reduce the side and rear yard setbacks to zero. The Planning
Board shall consider the location of the lot, existing or proposed activities on adjacent
lots and the impacts of the reduced setbacks. In the decision to reduce the side yard
and rear yard setbacks, the Planning Board shall consider whether the abutting property
owners have consented to such setback reductions. The Board shall make a written
finding of fact that the reduction in setback will not affect the public health, safety and
welfare or nullify the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
5. Cul-de-sac Frontage: New building lots located at the cul-de-sacs or along curves in a
street where the radius of the curve at the front lot line is less than 90 feet, may be
designed so that they have a minimum of 35 feet of street frontage along the front lot
line, so long as lot width at the location where the principal building is to be constructed
is at least equal to the distance normally required for street frontage in that district.
6. Multiple Structures: If more than one principal structure is constructed on a single
parcel of land, the "minimum lot area" requirement shall apply to each structure, and
each structure shall meet the front, side and rear setback and road frontage
requirements.
Each structure shall be so situated and constructed to be capable of being sold or
transferred separately with a conforming lot except as may be allowed in Section 4. In
the Commercial I, Commercial, II, Village and Agricultural/Industrial Districts each
principal structure does not need be so situated and constructed to be capable of being
sold or transferred separately with a conforming lot. Provided that the required lot size,
and frontages for each principal structure, required setbacks, maximum building
coverage, maximum impervious surface ratio and minimum pervious ratio as set forth
in Section 3.I Bulk and Space Standards are met.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 27
7. Parking Areas: Parking areas shall not be located within any required front setback
area but may be located within five (5) feet of the side and rear lot lines or within zero
feet with abutting property owner agreements with approvals from the Planning Board
as noted in I.4. above.
8. Setback Measurements: All setbacks shall be measured from the property line to the
nearest part of the structure except as may be provided for in other provisions of this
Ordinance.
9. Garages, Accessory Structures: No garage or other accessory building shall be located
in the required setbacks except as permitted below. When located to the rear or side of
the principal building, accessory buildings no larger than 150 sq.ft. in floor area may be
located within the required side or rear setbacks provided that no such structure shall be
located less than 6 feet from a side or rear lot line.
10. Corner Lots: The front setback and lot frontage requirement shall be observed along
all roads abutting the lot. For the purpose of this paragraph, property lines intersecting
the road(s) shall be considered sidelines.
11. Corner Lot Obstructions: All corner lots shall be kept free from visual obstruction for
a distance of a radius of 25 feet measured from the street lines.
12. Height Limits of 45 feet may be exceeded for structures not intended for human
habitation upon review and approval of the Turner Fire Chief and Planning Board as
required in Section 5. In no case shall egress window sill height exceed 30 feet from
the ground.
13. Each lot must be able to completely contain within its boundaries an area as would be
defined by a circle with a minimum diameter equal to the required minimum road
frontage as required in the District.
14. Lots for duplexes shall require a minimum of 150 percent of the lot size and road
frontage requirements for a single-family home in the district except in the Shoreland
Area where lot size and shore frontage shall be equal to or greater than that for two
single-family dwellings.
15. Zone Line Setback: All development proposed on lots within the
Agricultural/Industrial District, Commercial I District or Commercial II District which
abut a zone line for the Village District, General Residential I District, General
Residential II District, Rural District, Shoreland District or Resource Protection District
shall maintain a 50 foot yard from the zone boundary line. This yard requirement may
be reduced to zero feet with abutting property owner agreements and approvals from
the Planning Board as noted in I.4. above
All development proposed on lots within the Village District, General Residential I
District, General Residential II District, Shoreland District and Resource Protection
District which abut a zone line for the Agricultural/Industrial District, Commercial I
District, or Commercial II District shall also maintain a 50 foot yard from the zone
boundary line. This yard requirement may be reduced to zero feet with abutting property
owner agreements and approvals from the Planning Board as noted in I.4. above
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 28
16. Table of Regulations. The table appearing below is a part of this Ordinance and sets
forth the minimum space, coverage, bulk, setback and frontage requirements that must
be observed in all districts except as allowed by waiver or density bonus granted by the
Planning Board in connection with approval of a subdivision, elderly and congregate
housing complexes, affordable housing development or open space subdivision.
SPACE AND BULK STANDARDS
District Minimum
Lot Size/
Density
Minimum
Road
Frontage
Minimum
Shore
Frontage
Minimum
Front
Setback/
Yard5
Shoreland Area
Minimum
Setback/Normal
High Water
Line/Upland
Edge/Wetland
Minimum
Side
Setback/
Yard
Minimum
Rear
Setback/
Yard
Maximum
Building
Coverage
Ratio
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
Ratio
Minimum
Pervious
Ratio
Maximum
Structure
Height
Agricultural
/Industrial
80,000 sq.
ft.
250 ft. 250 ft. 50 ft.2 /
15 ft.
100 ft./pond
75 ft./other4
15 ft./5 ft 10 ft./5 ft. 0.60 0.75 0.25 100 ft.6
Commercial
I
40,000 sq.
ft.
200 ft. 200 ft. 50 ft.2 /
15 ft.
100 ft./pond
75 ft./other4
15 ft./5 ft. 10 ft./5 ft. 0.50 0.75 0.25 45 ft.6
Commercial
II
80,000 sq.
ft.
250 ft. 250 ft. 50 ft.2 /
15 ft.
100 ft./pond
75 ft./other4
50 ft./15
ft.
25 ft./5 ft. 0.40 0.60 0.40 45 ft.6
Village8 20,000 sq.
ft.1
100 ft. 100 ft. 20 ft.2 /
10 ft.
25 ft. 10 ft./5 ft. 10 ft./ 5
ft.
0.50 0.80 0.20 45 ft.6
General
Residential I
40,000 sq.
ft.
200 ft. 200 ft. 70 ft.3 100 ft./pond
75 ft./other4
25 ft. 25 ft. 0.20 0.40 0.50 35 ft.6
General
Residential
II
80,000 sq.
ft.
250 ft. 250 ft. 70 ft.3 100 ft./pond
75 ft./other4
25 ft. 25 ft. 0.20 0.50 0.50 35 ft.6
Rural I 80,000 sq.
ft.
250 ft. 250 ft. 70 ft.3 /
25 ft9.
100 ft./pond
75 ft./other4
25 ft./
10 ft. 9
25 ft./
10 ft. 9
0.30 0.50 0.50 45 ft.6
Rural II 5 acres 300 ft. 300 ft. 70 ft. 3 /
25 ft.
100 ft./pond
75 ft./other4
25 ft./ 10
ft.
25 ft./
10 ft.
0.20 0.20 0.80 45 ft. 6
Shoreland 80,000 sq.
ft.
250 ft. 250 ft. 70 ft.3 /
35 ft. 9
100 ft./pond
75 ft./other4
25 ft. 25 ft. 0.207 0.20 N.A. 35 ft.6
Resource
Protection
80,000 sq.
ft.
250 ft. 250 ft. 70 ft.3 100 ft./pond
75 ft./other4
25 ft. 25 ft. 0.207 0.20 N.A. 45 ft.6
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 29
NOTES: 1Lot sizes for a new development may be required to exceed 20,000 sq.ft.. depending upon
soil characteristics for subsurface sewage disposal.
2Measured from the edge of the right-of-way.
3Measured from the center line of the travelway.
4Includes rivers, streams and upland edge of wetlands as defined.
5Parking lots/areas, accessory structures and storage shall not be located in the required
setbacks except as provided for herein.
6In no case shall egress window sill height exceed thirty (30) feet from the ground.
7The total area of all structures, parking lots and other non-vegetated surfaces within the
Shoreland and Resource Protection District shall not exceed 20 percent of the lot or a portion
of the lot located in the District including land area previously developed.
8All lots which have frontage on Route 4 and will be accessed from Route 4 shall comply
with all the Space and Bulk Standards for the Commercial I District.
9Except Commercial Uses which shall maintain a yard equal to the required setback.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 30
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
31
SECTION 4 Performance Standards
The performance standards contained in this Section shall apply to all uses and activities, unless
otherwise specified, whether or not specific approval or a permit is required.
A. Back Lot
Back lots may be developed for uses permitted in the district if they are or can be provided
with a right-of way that connects with a public street or a privately-owned street which
privately-owned street meets the standards contained in Section VI.H. of the Town of Turner
Street Construction Ordinance and which complies with the following provisions:
If a back lot is accessible only by a legally enforceable right-of-way, it may be used if the
following conditions are met:
I. The right-of-way must be conveyed by deed recorded in the Androscoggin County
Registry of Deeds to the owner of the back lot and be a minimum of 60 feet in width.
2. A legal description of the right-of-way by metes and bounds shall be attached to any
building permit application for construction on the back lot.
3. Except for lots of record on the effective date of this Ordinance, the right-of-way deed
must be recorded in the Androscoggin County Registry of Deeds at the time the back
lot is first deeded out as a separate parcel.
4. Creation of the right-of-way to serve the back lot shall not create a non-conforming
front lot by reducing such lot's required road frontage below the minimum, or, if the
front lot is already nonconforming, with respect to road frontage, reduce its road
frontage at all. Where the right-of-way is conveyed or granted by easement or
irrevocable license, or some grant less than a fee interest, the land over which such
right of way is placed may not be counted toward meeting minimum lot area, coverage,
bulk, setback or frontage requirements for the front lot.
5. The right-of-way may serve only one principal use or structure unless the following
provisions are met:
a. The right-of-way may serve two single-family dwellings if a driveway meeting
the standards contained in the Town of Turner Street Construction Ordinance is
built.
b. The right-of-way may serve more than two dwellings provided the provisions of
Sections VI and VI I of the Town of Turner Street Construction Ordinance are
met.
6. No more than one right-of-way for back lot development may be created out of a single
lot fronting on a state or town maintained road or private road unless each subsequent
right-of-way is created out of at least an additional frontage as required in Section 3. I.
for that District, and the right-of-way entrances to such road are at least the required
frontage plus half of the right of way width.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
32
7. If the right-of-way is brought up to standards as set forth in the Town of Turner Road
Standards Ordinance, further principal uses or structures may be constructed on a back
lot with Planning Board approval provided all other space and bulk requirements are
met for each such principal use or structure. For purposes of such approval, the sale or
lease of additional lots or the construction of additional principal structures served by
the right-of-way shall be considered in the same manner and under the same
restrictions and requirements as if such division or construction were a subdivision.
8. Each single-family dwelling on a back lot shall be located within the area defined by a
circle with a minimum diameter equal to the required road frontage as required in the
District.
B. Lots Served by Nonconforming Rights-of-way
A lot of record which could otherwise be legally built upon but which is served by a right-ofway
which does not comply with Section 4.A. of this ordinance may nevertheless be used for
a single-family dwelling with Planning Board approval. This provision shall not be
interpreted to allow lots created after March 9, 1991, to not have to comply with Section 4.A.
of this Ordinance. The Board shall require the following before approval may be granted.
1. A copy of the deed or other legal instrument, if such exists, which grants use of the
right-of-way and the description of the right-of-way;
2. A statement indicating how those that use the right-of-way to access their residences
will provide for adequate maintenance provision for the right-of-way;
3. The names and addresses of all others granted use of the right-of-way if such is not a
public easement;
4. Assurance in such form as the Planning Board may require that all other applicable
state laws and regulations and local ordinances will be complied with; and
5. A statement in recordable form signed by the applicant that if conversion of summer
camps or the erection of new dwellings accessed by the unaccepted right-of-way occurs,
those persons owning property on the unaccepted right-of-way shall continue to assume
responsibility for maintaining and plowing the access road and that, because the
private access road is not constructed to town street standards, the travel of personal,
service, emergency and maintenance vehicles over the access road may be hindered.
Nothing contained within shall be construed as requiring the Town to provide additional
services to properties on unaccepted rights-of-way not already receiving those services
or to accept such rights-of-way as public streets.
C. Apartment Conversions
1. Purpose. The purpose of these standards is to provide less expensive rental units;
make housing units available to lower income households who might otherwise have
difficulty finding housing in Turner and to protect property values and traditional
residential characteristics.
2. General Requirements. The conversion of single family dwellings, existing on the
effective date of this ordinance located on lots which otherwise would not meet the
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
33
dimensional requirements for multi-family housing may be converted to multi-family
with a permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer provided that the following are
met:
a. Such conversion shall not create more than four dwelling units in any structure
including the original dwelling unit. If the construction of the structure began on
or after September 23, 1988, and if three or more dwelling units are created in a
five-year period, subdivision approval is required from the Planning Board as
required by Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 4401 et seq.
b. The additional dwelling units shall be complete, separate house- keeping units
that are isolated from the original unit.
c. The additional dwelling units shall be designed so that the appearance of the
structure remains that of a single-family dwelling, with the exception of
emergency egress, if so required.
d. The design and size of the additional dwelling units conform to all applicable
standards in the Building Code administered and enforced by the Town of Turner
and all other applicable codes.
e. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided which does not encroach upon
required setbacks.
f. Subsurface sewage disposal shall comply with all provisions of the State of
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
D. Rural II Density
Lot size within the Rural II District requires a minimum area of five (5) acres and 300 feet of
frontage. With CEO approval, individual lot sizes in this district can be reduced to a minimum
area of 80,000 square feet with 200 feet of frontage provided all of the following criteria are
met:
1. The overall allowable density of the individual lot or lots created must meet the minimum
lot area of five (5) acres per dwelling unit.
2. To meet allowable density, the difference between the size of lot sold and the required
density must be preserved or set aside by easement or deeded conservation area with
restrictive covenants which prohibit building construction or uses other than recreational
or conservation purposes.
3. Title to the easement or deeded conservation area shall be transferred with the lot sold
and shall also be conveyed to an independent conservation group, land trust or the
Town of Turner.
4. The easement or deeded conservation area shall not include land area zoned as Resource
Protection, Land subject to existing easement rights or rights of way.
5. The easement or deeded conservation area shall be established, located or set aside in
an area that will promote conservation goals, wildlife habitat preservation, recreational
opportunities, and can be expanded or is adjacent to existing conservation areas.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
34
D.i. Planned Unit Development Standards
1. Purposes
This Section provides for developments that contain a mixture of land uses including,
but not limited to, residential, commercial, recreational, public and open space that are
preplanned and developed under a unified approach. It allows innovative approaches to
mixed use developments and authorizes the Board to reduce certain requirements of
this Ordinance provided that the following are guidelines are achieved:
a. Will be in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan;
b. Will be reasonably self-sufficient in the provision of necessary services, such as
sewerage, water supply, off-street parking, recreational amenities, and long-term
management of common facilities;
c. Will integrate a variety of residential, commercial, and/or recreational uses;
d. Will provide for efficient use of the land, minimizing the required networks of
streets and utilities; and
e. Will avoid the disadvantages of strip development by limiting vehicular access
points to the Development.
2. Permitted Districts
Plan Unit Developments are permitted in the Commercial I, Commercial II, Village and
Agricultural/Industrial Districts.
3.Procedure
a. Proposed planned unit developments shall be reviewed under the Town of Turner
Subdivision Ordinance and Section 5, Site Plan Review when the applicant
proposes to construct and/or develop non-residential uses. The tract or parcel of
land proposed for planned unit development must be in single ownership or the
subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of all the property included.
The applicant must demonstrate right, title, or interest in the land that is the
subject of the application. The planned unit development review procedure shall
consist of the following steps:
i. a preapplication conference;
ii. preliminary development plan;
iii. final development plan and subdivision and site plan review approval as
applicable.
b. The preapplication conference shall serve the purpose of informally acquainting
the Board with the overall scope and intentions of the proposed planned unit
development and of acquainting the developer with the requirements of this
Section. At the preapplication conference, the developer shall submit to the
Board a sketch plan of the proposed planned unit development, which generally
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
35
shows the bounds of the total development and the mix of land uses proposed and
their general locations. No action shall be required on the sketch plan, which is
presented for informational purposes only.
c. The preliminary development plan shall constitute a formal submission of a
subdivision application and site plan review application to the Board. In addition
to the submission requirements for subdivision and site plan review applications
the following items are required to be submitted as part of any preliminary
development plan:
i. a legal description of the total planned unit development boundaries and
of any divisions of the land, existing or proposed, within these
boundaries.
ii. a statement of present and proposed ownership of all lands within the
proposed planned unit development.
iii. a reasonably complete development schedule that indicates when the
project and stages thereof will begin and be completed.
iv. a statement sufficient to satisfy the Board that the project can be
realistically financed and completed.
v. the subdivision and site plan shall include clear notations as to which
facilities are proposed to be in public, private, or common ownership.
vi. the Board shall, as part of its review of the preliminary development
plan, conduct a public hearing on the Planned Unit development.
d. The final development plan shall constitute a formal submission of a final
subdivision application and site plan review application to the Board, but only of
such part of the Planned Unit Development that has received approval of a
preliminary development plan. In addition to the submission requirements for
subdivision and site plan review applications the following items are required to
be submitted as part of any final development plan:
i. drawings that include all the information required under the preliminary
development plan.
ii. copies of restrictive covenants or deed restrictions relating to the
development.
iii. evidence of the formation and incorporation by the developer of any
owner's association that may be proposed to manage and maintain
common spaces and facilities.
4. Standards
a. For the purpose of establishing space and bulk standards applicable to planned
unit developments, notwithstanding district regulations to the contrary, the space
and bulk standards for planned unit developments shall be as follows.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
36
Dimensional reductions shall not be considered as a variance as provided for in
Title 30-A MRSA Section 4353.4-C.
i. A Planned Unit Development shall contain at least the minimum land
area for the proposed uses as required in Section 3.I, Space and Bulk
Standards. The acreage shall be contiguous, unless the Board finds that
noncontiguous acres are part of a common, overall scheme of
development. Allowable uses shall be only those listed as permitted in
the District where the Planned Unit Development will be located.
ii. Areas may be created for nonresidential uses shall include sufficient land
area to support any proposed structures, the required off-street parking
for the uses, whether or not the parking actually is located on the lots,
and safe pedestrian circulation.
iii. All buildings or structures shall be setback from the perimeter boundary
lines of the planned unit development the minimum distances as required
in Section 3.I.
iv. . Principal structures shall be separated by a distance equal to at least
the height of the tallest adjacent structure.
v. Maximum impervious surface coverage in a Planned Unit Development
shall not exceed that set forth in Section 3.I.
vi. No lot or use shall have direct vehicular access to an existing off site
public street.
vii. Other space and bulk dimensions for Planned Unit Developments shall
be as shown and approved by the Board on the final development plan.
b. Where possible, buildings shall be oriented with consideration scenic vistas,
natural landscape features and topography.
c. All utilities shall be installed underground, unless specifically waived by the
Planning Board.
d. A system of pedestrian circulation and amenities including sidewalks within and
adjacent to the Planned Unit Development shall be provided.
E. Elder Cottage Housing Opportunity (ECHO) Units
1. Purpose: The purpose of these standards is to provide for the temporary habitation of a
dwelling unit, to be occupied by an older person(s), on lots where single family dwellings
exist, except in the Shoreland & Resource Protection Districts, so that adult children
may care for aging parents or certain persons with a disability.
2. General Requirements: The construction or placement of an "ECHO" unit on a lot
which a single family dwelling is located may be allowed by a permit granted by the
Code Enforcement Officer regardless of lot size and frontage if the following are met.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
37
a. The owner of the principal structure must reside in either the principal structure
or the "ECHO" unit.
b. The owner of the principal structure shall be related to occupants by blood,
marriage or adoption.
c. The occupants of the "ECHO" unit must be at least 62 years of age or be unable
to live independently due to a disability.
d. The number of occupants of the "ECHO" unit shall be limited to two persons.
e. All zoning setbacks and lot coverage requirements contained in Section 3 of this
ordinance shall be met. Wherever possible, the unit shall be placed to the side or
rear of existing structures.
f. There shall be a separation of a minimum of fifteen (15) feet between the principal
dwelling and the "ECHO" unit.
g. The maximum size of the "ECHO" unit shall be 560 square feet of living space
and shall be limited in size to accommodate one (1) bedroom (i.e. Park Model
Mobile Homes will be allowed).
h. The subsurface sewage disposal system on the property shall be functioning
properly and be of sufficient size to accommodate the additional flow. In addition,
there shall be sufficient land area for an expansion or replacement system
which is in compliance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
Rules, if needed.
i. The parking requirements of the performance standards contained herein or those
of the applicable zoning district apply.
j. Proper ingress and egress shall be provided to an ECHO unit.
k. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for the placement or construction of an
ECHO unit by the Code Enforcement Officer, the owner of the property shall
sign a binding agreement limiting the approval of an ECHO unit for the purposes
set forth in this subsection, and that ECHO unit must be removed or converted to
a non-habitable accessory structure within ninety (90) days from the date of
occupancy cessation or when no qualified person lives within. The agreement
shall require the ECHO use permit to be renewed each year the ECHO unit is in
use on or before April 1st. The CEO shall send notice of the renewal requirement
each year by the end of January and shall notify all non-renewed permit holders
to convert or remove the ECHO unit by May 30th.
F. Multi-Family Dwellings
1. In districts where permitted, multi-family development may be allowed by the granting
of subdivision approval by the Planning Board in accordance with the Town of Turner
Subdivision Ordinance, the following and other provisions of this Ordinance.
2. Dimensional requirements for all multi-family development shall meet or exceed the
following:
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
38
a. Within the area regulated by Title 38 M.R.S.A. Section 435 et seq., (Mandatory
Shoreland Zoning Act) lot area and shore frontage shall be equal to that required
for the equivalent number of single family dwelling units.
b. In the Village District, the lot size shall be equal to or exceed the requirements of
the State Plumbing Code per dwelling unit.
c. In the General Residential I and II Districts, lot size shall equal or exceed 80,000
sq.ft. for the first three units and 20,000 sq.ft. for each additional unit in excess of
three per structure.
d. Street frontage for eight units or less shall be not less than the required frontage
for a single-family dwelling. Street frontage for more than eight units shall be
not less than twice what is required for a single family dwelling except in the
Village District where street frontage shall be a minimum of 200 feet.
e. A density bonus of up to 10% of the total lots or units shall be allowed in multifamily
developments if, in the determination of the Planning Board, sewage
disposal capacity exists and the applicant agrees to market such lots or units
within defined affordable guidelines. Deed restrictions or other binding
provisions must be made that continue the affordability to future purchasers or
renters.
3. Water Supply
The applicant shall demonstrate the availability of adequate supply and quality of water
for both domestic and firefighting purposes. The Planning Board may require the
construction of fire ponds and dry hydrants as it deems necessary.
4. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to provide for rubbish disposal, snow removal,
and site maintenance. All outdoor storage areas for waste collection shall be enclosed
by a wooden or masonry screen at least six feet in height.
5. A 25-foot landscaped or natural vegetative buffer shall be provided and maintained
along all property boundaries.
6. Storm water and surface drainage systems shall be designed in accordance with the
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance.
7. Access, Circulation and Parking
a. The proposed development shall provide for safe access to and from public or
private roads. Safe access shall be assured by providing an adequate number and
location of access points with respect to sight-distances, intersections, schools, and
other traffic generators. All corner lots shall be kept clear from visual obstructions.
b. The proposed development shall not have an unreasonable adverse impact on the
public road system, and shall assure safe interior circulation within its site, by
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
39
separating pedestrian and vehicular traffic and by providing adequate parking and
turn around areas.
8. Recreation and Open Space
All multi-family developments of 6 dwelling units or more shall provide a developed
play area no smaller than 5,000 sq.ft. Any development in which occupancy is restricted
to the elderly need not provide a play area, but space shall be provided for outdoor
recreation.
G. Elderly and Congregate Housing Complexes
1. For each elderly housing unit contained in an elderly housing complex, there shall be
provided a minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet.
2. Minimum street frontage shall equal or exceed that required for a single family dwelling
in the District.
3. All the provisions contained in Section 4.F.3.-8 shall be met for elderly housing
complexes.
4. A density bonus of up to 10% of the total units shall be allowed in an elderly or
congregate housing complex if, in the determination of the Planning Board, sewage
disposal and water capacity exist for the project.
H. Mobile Homes
1. Mobile Home Parks
For each lot in a mobile home park, there shall be provided a minimum lot area,
frontage and setbacks as follows:
a. Lots served by individual subsurface waste water disposal systems.
Minimum lot area: 20,000 sq.ft.
Minimum lot width: 100 ft.
b. Lots served by a central subsurface waste water disposal system approved by the
Maine Department of Human Services.
Minimum lot area: 12,000 sq.ft.
Minimum lot width: 75 ft.
c. The overall density of any park served by any subsurface waste water disposal
system shall not exceed one dwelling unit per 20,000 sq.ft. of total park area.
d. Minimum Setbacks
1) Structures shall not be located less than 15 feet from any boundary line of
an individual lot.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
40
2) Mobile homes in a mobile home park adjacent to a public road shall be set
back from the road a distance equal to the set back requirements for other
residential developments in that district.
3) No mobile home lot may have vehicular access directly onto a State or
town-maintained road.
e. A 50-ft. wide buffer strip shall be provided along all property boundaries that:
1) abut residential land which has a gross density of less than half of that
proposed in the park, or
2) abut residential land that is zoned at a density of less than half of that
proposed in the park.
Further, no structures, streets or utilities may be placed in the buffer strip
except that they may cross a buffer strip to provide services to the park.
f. No lot in a mobile home park may be sold or conveyed unless such lot sold meets
the lot size requirement of the district in which it is located.
2. Safety Standards
The purpose of these standards is to establish a condition of safety that will allow the
mobile home to perform in a manner that will greatly reduce hazards that present an
imminent and unreasonable risk of death or serious personal injury to its inhabitants or
other residents of the park.
a. These standards shall apply to all manufactured housing built before June 15,
1976, or not built according to the National Manufactured Housing Construction
and Safety Standards Act of 1974, United States Code, Title 42, Chapter 70, to be
located in a mobile home park.
1) All homes with roofs added after construction will require a professional
engineer to review the roof design to determine that the roof and home can
withstand the rigors of State of Maine winter or wind uplifts that may
occur.
2) A person holding a master license issued by the State of Maine Oil and
Solid Fuel Examining Board shall inspect and certify that the heating and
fuel system meets the requirements of NFPA-31 - Installation of Oil
Burning Equipment as adopted by that Board, or other applicable standards
here-after revised or enacted.
3) A person holding a master license issued by the State of Maine Electricians
Examining Board shall inspect and certify that the electrical system is safe
and meets the National Electrical Code in effect at the time the home was
constructed.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
41
I. Open Space Subdivisions
1. Policy
It is the policy of the Town of Turner to encourage the use of open space subdivisions
in order to preserve a sense of space, provide for agriculture and forestry as well as
recreational land, preserve other resources identified in the Town of Turner
Comprehensive Plan, and harmonize new development with the traditional open,
wooded, agricultural and village landscapes of the Town.
This performance standard is intended to implement that policy by providing incentives
that afford flexibility to landowners in road and lot layout and design, placement of
residential structures and road frontage requirements and by allowing the Planning
Board to expedite procedure and to waive or reduce certain otherwise applicable
standards and provisions of this ordinance and the Town of Turner Subdivision
Ordinance if such landowners commit to the permanent preservation of important open
space resources. It shall not be construed as granting variances to relieve hardship
when the Planning Board grants waivers provided for in this section. These incentives
are designed to encourage greater flexibility and more innovative approaches to housing
and environmental design that will promote the most appropriate use of land and will
preserve, as permanent open space, agricultural or forestry land, important natural
features, wildlife habitat, water resources, ecological systems, and historic and scenic
areas for the benefit of present and future residents.
2. Purposes
A open space subdivision achieves the purposes of this performance standard by reducing
the lot size, frontage and setback requirements as contained in this Ordinance, modifying
the road design standards contained in the Town of Turner Street Construction
Ordinance, and clustering housing and uses in those areas where they have the least
impact on identified environmental, agricultural and other open space resources. These
resources are then permanently preserved by the use of covenants and restrictions or
conservation easements that run with the land. The cluster principle can be applied to
subdivisions of any size.
To qualify as an open space subdivision, a subdivision must achieve those of the
following purposes that the Planning Board determines to be applicable to its specific
circumstances:
a. Long-term protection and preservation of existing natural and other resources and
landscapes identified in the Town of Turner Comprehensive Plan, the Town of
Turner Subdivision Ordinance and this Ordinance, including, but not limited to:
1. State-defined critical areas and unique features and areas identified in the
Comprehensive Plan;
2. Historic land use patterns and historic structures;
3. Points of visual access to or from water bodies, scenic vistas as identified
in the Comprehensive Plan and points of access to water bodies;
4. Agricultural land.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
42
b. Maintenance or establishment of compatibility with surrounding land uses and
the overall character of the Town as defined by the Comprehensive Plan;
c. Provision of adequate buffers for adjoining properties where needed;
d. Contribution to townwide open space planning by creating a system of
permanently preserved open spaces both within large parcels of land and among
such parcels throughout the Town and by encouraging linkages between open
space areas;
e. Preservation of land suitable for production agriculture and forestry uses
particularly where the open space subdivision borders active agricultural or
forestry land or land suitable for the same;
f. Preservation of traditional land uses;
g. Construction of affordable housing;
h. Provision of recreation facilities, including active and passive recreational space,
in the most suitable locations for use consistent with the other purposes of this
performance standard; and
i. Attainment of planned variety and coordination in the location of structures,
architectural styles and building forms and relationships.
3. Grouping Contiguous Parcels
In order to increase design flexibility, two or more contiguous parcels of land under the
same or different ownership, including parcels separated by a public or private road,
may be grouped together as one open space subdivision, if the Planning Board finds
that such grouping and will help to achieve the purposes set forth in Section 4.I.2.a-i.
4. Planning Board Review
An individual may apply for approval of an open space subdivision either after preapplication
review of a conventional subdivision or by initially filing an application for
an open space subdivision. In either case, the Planning Board shall review the
application in accordance with Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 4404 and the Town of
Turner Subdivision Ordinance as modified by the provisions of this section.
a. Pre-application Procedure
1) Any applicant for an open space subdivision is encouraged but not required
to submit at the pre-application stage, a complete build-out plan for the
entire parcel.
2) After review of the pre-application, if the Planning Board determines that
the proposed open space subdivision meets the purposes set forth in Section
4.I.2.a-i that are applicable to the proposed subdivision as well as other
applicable provisions of this section, this Ordinance, the Subdivision
Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan, the
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
43
Board shall encourage or permit, as appropriate, the applicant to proceed
with an application for an open space subdivision.
3) If a complete build-out plan for the parcel has been submitted, the Planning
Board shall encourage, if appropriate, consideration of long-range planning
to make the most effective use of the design standards and timing
mechanisms available to accomplish the purposes set forth in Section 4.I.2.ai
and to maximize the economic benefits to the applicant and the Town
over time.
b. Application Procedure
1) Required Plans: The submissions for an open space subdivision shall
include all plans and materials required for a conventional subdivision
under the Subdivision Ordinance and this Ordinance.
c. General Requirements
In Planning Board review and approval of an open space subdivision, the
following requirements shall apply and shall supersede any inconsistent or more
restrictive provisions of this Ordinance, The Town of Turner Subdivision
Ordinance or Town of Turner, Maine, Street Construction Ordinance.
1) Use and District Requirements
(a) All open space subdivisions shall meet the use standards of the
Districts in which they are located.
2) Allowable Density
(a) The overall density of the subdivision shall not exceed the density
requirements of the Zoning District in which it is located. In the
event that an open space subdivision is located in more than one
Zoning District, the overall density of the subdivision shall not exceed
the combination of the density requirements of the Districts in which
the open space subdivision is located. In calculating overall density
the land area contained in road rights-of-ways that are proposed for
public acceptance shall be deducted prior to determining density. In
the case where the road rights-of-ways will be less than 40 feet in
width and to remain as privately owned, that land area may be
counted in determining density.
(b) The Planning Board may grant a density bonus of two (2) lots or
dwelling units for each ten (10) lots or dwelling units when it makes
a written finding that the open space subdivisions satisfies the
policies of the comprehensive plan, achieves the applicable purposes
contained in Section 4.I.2.a-i. and provides for adequate subsurface
wastewater disposal.
(c) The Planning Board may grant an additional density bonus of one (1)
lot or dwelling unit for each 10 lots or dwelling units when it makes
a written finding that the open space subdivision design provides
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
44
pedestrian friendly layouts through the use of sidewalks, wider paved
roads or trail systems within the project or provides linkages for
pedestrian or motorized vehicle movements between adjoining
properties which contributes to Town wide open space planning.
The Planning Board must find that the project can provide for
adequate subsurface wastewater disposal and adequate supply and
quality of water for both domestic and firefighting purposes of the
additional density bonus is granted.
3) A lot for a dwelling unit created as part of an open space subdivision shall
not be further subdivided, except that a lot for a dwelling unit created as
part of an open space subdivision where such lot shall have within its
bounds designated open space may not be further subdivided if the original
approved plan shall have reserved future development of such lot, but any
such further subdivision shall only be made in accordance with this
performance standard.
5. Layout and Siting Standards
In planning the location and siting of residential structures in an open space
subdivision, priority should be given to the preservation of the open space for its
natural resource value with human habitation activity located and sited on the lower
valued natural resource portion of a parcel taking into account the contours of the land
and the reasonableness of slopes.
The building lots and/or residential structures shall be laid out and be sited according to
the following principles. The Board in its discretion shall resolve conflicts between
these principles as applied to a particular site.
a. In the least suitable agricultural soils and in a manner which maximizes the
useable area remaining for the designated open space use, where agricultural,
forestry, or recreational, existing or future uses, are particularly sought to be
preserved;
b. Within woodlands, or along the far edges of open agricultural fields adjacent to
any woodland to reduce encroachment upon agricultural soils, to provide shade
in the summer, and shelter as well as solar gain in the winter, and to enable new
residential development to be visually absorbed by natural landscape features;
c. In such manner that the boundaries between residential lots and/or structures and
active agricultural or forestry land are well buffered by vegetation, topography,
roads or other barriers to minimize potential conflict between residential and
agricultural or forestry uses;
d. In locations where buildings may be oriented with respect to identified scenic
vistas, natural landscape features, topography and natural drainage areas, in
accordance with an overall plan for site development, scenic vistas may be
addressed by creating at least one scenic window per development with at least
one turnout suitable for public use;
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
45
e. In locations that provide compatibility in terms of physical size, visual impact,
intensity of use, proximity to other structures, and density of development with
other permitted uses within the District;
f. In locations such that diversity and originality in lot layout and individual
building, street, parking layout is encouraged; and
g. So that individual lots, buildings, street and parking areas shall be designed and
situated to minimize alterations of the natural site, to avoid the adverse effects of
shadows, noise and traffic on the residents of the site, to conserve energy and
natural resources, and to relate to surrounding properties, so as to improve the
view from and of buildings.
6. Space Standards
a. Shore frontage, shore setback and shoreland density requirements shall not be
reduced below the minimum required in the Zoning District.
b. Distances between residential structures shall be a minimum of the height of the
tallest adjacent structure.
c. When individual lots will be laid out, the required minimum lot size or minimum
land area per dwelling unit for the building envelope may be reduced to 20,000
sq.ft. except in the Village District where it may be reduced to 10,000 sq.ft.
provided subsurface sewage disposal complies with the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater.
Disposal Rules. The building envelope shall contain a minimum of 20,000 sq.ft.
except in the Village District a minimum of 10,000 sq.ft. of land area which does
not include 100 year floodplains, areas of two or more acres of sustained slopes
greater than 20 percent or wetlands as defined by the Natural Resource Protection
Act.
d. Minimum road frontage requirements of this Ordinance may be waived or
modified by the Planning Board provided that:
1. Any applicable provisions regarding roads in Section 4.I.8. below are
satisfied; and
2. Adequate access and turnaround to and from all parcels and/or structures
by fire trucks, ambulances, police cars and other emergency vehicles can
be ensured by private roads and/or common driveways; and
3. No common driveway shall provide access to more than four (4) lots or
dwelling units, except as provided in Section 4.I.8. below.
e. A reduction of required setback distances may be allowed at the discretion of the
Board, based upon the public benefits to be achieved from the design provided
that the front and rear setbacks shall be no less than 25 feet or that required for
the applicable Zoning District, whichever shall be less. For the perimeter of a
multi-family cluster development, overall development setback shall not be
reduced below the minimum front, side and rear setbacks required in the Zoning
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
46
District unless the Planning Board determines a more effective design of the
project can better accomplish the purposes of this performance standard.
f. No individual lot or dwelling unit shall have direct vehicular access onto a public
road existing at the time of development.
7. Utilities
At the discretion of the Planning Board, in order to achieve the most appropriate design
and layout of lots, residential structures and open space, utilities including individual
wells and septic systems may be located on designated portions of the open space, if
necessary, provided they shall not unreasonably interfere with the open space purposes
or uses to be achieved under this section and for the particular parcel(s) that is the
subject to the application for Open Space Subdivision.
a. All structures requiring plumbing in the development shall be connected to
individual septic systems or a private central collection and treatment system in
accordance with the minimum standards set forth in the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules. Proposed systems shall in no way
endanger ground water supplies which are currently being utilized as a water
source for any existing development or which are to be utilized as a common or
individual water supply for the proposed development.
b. If a private central collection system is proposed, the applicant must show either
that at least one designated site for each lot, in the open space or on the lot, has
adequate soils and land area suitable for subsurface waste disposal for each lot in
accordance with the minimum standards set forth in the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, or that a second site on the parcel has the
size, location and soil characteristics, to accommodate a system similar to the one
originally proposed. In the case of the use of chambers, there shall be designed
an excess capacity of thirty (30) percent.
c. If a private central collection system is proposed, the system shall be maintained
by an homeowners' association or under an agreement of the lot or unit owners in
the same fashion required for maintenance of the open space by a homeowners'
association or the lot or unit owners in common and written evidence of said
maintenance agreement shall be submitted to the Planning Board. The Planning
Board may require the developer and homeowners association to retain a
qualified third party to inspect and approve the system from time to time and
furnish a copy of his report to the Code Enforcement Officer.
8. Roads
The Planning Board shall require private roads and common driveways to comply with
the design standards set forth in the Turner Street Construction Ordinance except as
provided in Subsection 4.I.8.d. below.
a. The applicant shall submit to the Planning Board as part of the application for
approval a professional engineers drawing showing the location and drainage
characteristics, dimensions and grade of roads and common driveways as well as
specifications setting forth their proposed composition.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
47
b. The subdivision plan shall show the road clearly labeled "private road."
c. Whenever possible and as far as practicable, the roads and common driveways
shall:
1) follow natural contours in an effort to limit phosphorous export;
2) be limited in width, curvilinear in design, and keeping within the rural
character of the Town;
3) shall turn away from the front access to public roads, and shall use
sufficiently dimensioned culverts to accommodate predevelopment and
post-development drainage and flows, where necessary.
d. Travelways and shoulders of roads and common driveways within open space
subdivisions shall meet the following minimums:
1) Common driveways serving 3 or fewer dwelling units: 12 foot travel way.
2) Roads serving 4 units: 16-foot travel way and 3-foot shoulders.
3) Roads serving 5 to 10 units: service 16-foot paved travel way and 3-foot
shoulders.
4) Roads serving 11 to 50 units: 20 foot paved travel way and 3 foot
shoulders.
9. Open Space Requirements
In Planning Board review and approval of an open space subdivision, the following
requirements shall apply and shall supersede any inconsistent or more restrictive
provisions of this Ordinance or the Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance.
Open space set aside in an open space subdivision shall be permanently preserved as
required by this section except where open space is dedicated by a landowner under
contract with the Town for a term of years as set forth below. Land set aside as
permanent open space may, but need not be, a separate tax parcel. Such land may be
included as a portion of one or more large parcels on which dwellings are permitted
provided that a conservation easement or a declaration of covenants and restrictions is
placed on such land pursuant to Section 4.I.9.c. below and provided that the Planning
Board approves such configuration of the open space.
a. Open Space. In all Districts, except the Village and General Residential I, at
least fifty percent (50%) of the gross acreage shall remain as open space outside
of building envelopes, assigned to
individual dwelling units and/or road rights-of-ways that are proposed for public
acceptance. In the case where road rights-of-ways will be less than 40 feet in
width and to remain as privately owned, the land area on which roads are located
may be considered as open space. In the Village and General Residential I
Districts, at least forty percent (40%) of the gross acreage shall remain as open
space outside of building envelopes, assigned to individual dwelling units and/or
road rights-of-ways that are proposed for public acceptance. In the case where
road rights-of-ways will be less than 40 feet in width and to remain as privately
owned, the land area on which roads are located may be considered as open
space.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
48
b. Open Space Uses. On all parcels, open space uses shall be appropriate to the
site. Open space should include natural features located on the parcel(s) such as,
but not limited to, stream beds, individual trees of significant size, agricultural
land, forested acreage, wildlife habitat, rock outcroppings and historic features
and sites. Open space shall be preserved and maintained subject to the following,
as applicable:
1) On parcels that contain significant portions of land suited to agriculture,
open space shall be preserved for agriculture or other compatible open
space uses such as forestry, recreation (active or passive) and resource
conservation.
2) When the principal purpose of preserving portions of the open space is the
protection of natural resources such as wetlands, aquifers, steep slopes,
wildlife and plant habitats, and stream corridors, open space uses in those
portions may be limited to those which are no more intensive than passive
recreation.
3) Open space areas shall be contiguous, where possible, to allow linking of
open space areas throughout the Town.
4) The use of any open space may be limited by the Planning Board at the
time of final plan approval where the Board deems it necessary to protect
adjacent properties or uses, or to protect sensitive natural features or
resources. A proposed change in use of open space land, other than that
specified at the time of plan approval, shall be reviewed by the Planning
Board as an amendment to the approved plan.
5) Further subdivision of open space or its use for other than agriculture,
forestry, recreation or conservation, except for easements for underground
utilities, shall be prohibited and shall be so stated by deed restrictions
except as provided in Section 4.I.9.c. below. Structures and buildings
accessory to recreation or conservation uses may be erected on open space,
subject to Planning Board approval under the Site Plan Review provisions
of Section 5 of this Ordinance and this section.
c. Notations on Plan. Open space areas must be clearly labeled on the Final
Plan. The Final Plan shall include information or provide reference to a
legal document which defines open space uses, ownership, management,
method of preservation, and the rights, if any, of the owners in the
subdivision to such land or portions thereof. The open space land shall be
permanently reserved for open space purposes and is subject to reservations
for future development, including those provisions allowed under
subsection d. below. Reference or notations shall also be provided for any
conservation easements or deed restrictions required to be recorded to
implement such reservations or restrictions.
d. Preservation in Perpetuity. An owner of a parcel of land may designate all or a
portion of the parcel for open space use in perpetuity if the purposes set forth in
subparagraph 4.I.2.a-i. are achieved and all other requirements of this performance
standard are met subject to the following conditions:
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
49
1) A perpetual conservation easement, or declaration of covenants and
restrictions, restricting development of the open space land must be
incorporated in the open space plan.
2) The conservation easement may be granted to or the declarations may be
for the benefit of a private party, third party or other entity, the Town, with
the approval of the Board of Selectmen, and acceptance at Town Meeting
or to a qualified not-for-profit conservation organization acceptable to the
Planning Board.
3) Such conservation easement or declaration of covenants and restrictions
shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board and be required as a
condition of plan approval hereunder.
4) The Planning Board may require that such conservation easement, or
declaration of covenants and restrictions, be enforceable by the Town of
Turner if the Town is not the holder of the conservation easement or
beneficiary of the declarations.
5) The conservation easement or declarations shall prohibit residential,
industrial, or commercial use of such open space land (except in
connection with agriculture, forestry and recreation) and shall not be
amendable to permit such use.
6) The conservation easement or declaration shall be recorded in the
Androscoggin County Registry of Deeds prior to or simultaneously with
the filing of the Open Space Subdivision final plan in the Androscoggin
County Registry of Deeds.
7) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the conservation easement, or the
declaration of covenants and restrictions, may allow dwellings to be
constructed on portions of parcels that include protected open space land,
provided that:
a) The total number of dwellings permitted by the conservation
easement, or declaration of covenants and restrictions, in the entire
subdivision does not exceed the allowable density established in this
performance standard above;
b) The Planning Board grants approval for such lots; and
c) The applicant has reserved the rights to apply for approval for such
additional lots.
8) Ownership of Open Space Land. Open space land may be held in private
ownership (which is to be preferred) including an appropriate third party
not the applicant; or owned in common by a Homeowners’ Association
(HOA); dedicated to the Town, County or State governments or agencies;
transferred to a non-profit organization such as a conservation trust, or
association, acceptable to the Planning Board; or held in such other form of
ownership as the Planning Board finds adequate to achieve the purposes set
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
50
forth in Section 4.I.2.a-i and under the other requirements of this Ordinance
and the Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance. The Planning Board shall,
in its review, consider provisions for the ongoing maintenance and
associated costs for such maintenance of the open space.
The appropriate form of ownership shall be determined based upon the
purpose of the open space reservation as stated pursuant to Section 4.I.9.a.
above. Unless so determined, or unless deeded to the Town of Turner and
accepted by the citizens of the Town at Town Meeting, common open
space shall be owned in common by the owners of the lots or units in the
development. Covenants for mandatory membership in the association
setting forth the owners' rights and interest and privileges in the association
and the common land, shall be approved by the Planning Board and included
in the deed for each lot.
9) Flexible Open Space and Substitution; Phasing. An applicant for an
open space subdivision may at a future time designate other land to serve
as the open space for such subdivision if the Planning Board finds that the
purposes set forth in Section 4.I.2.a-i will better be served by promoting a
more innovative design and layout of lots created over time in relation to
the area(s) designated as open space if all other requirements under this
performance standard may be met. Development that is phased over time,
including a schedule over time for either sale of lots or layout of further
lots as part of the open space subdivision plan, is encouraged so that more
appropriate design of land use and preservation of greater open space may
be achieved.
10) Maintenance Standards
a) Ongoing maintenance standards, where appropriate, shall be
established, enforceable by the Town against the owner(s) of
common land, including open space land, roads and other facilities
as a condition of subdivision approval. Such maintenance standards
may include such conditions, obligations, or costs to maintain their
use, facilities and/or scenic character.
b) The owner(s) of common land or facilities including open space
lands shall have the responsibility of operation and maintenance of
the respective neighborhood recreational facilities within such
common land(s), unless such lands or facilities or portions thereof
are deeded or transferred to the Town of Turner and accepted by the
citizens of the Town at Town Meeting, or unless an approved
conservation easement or declaration of covenants and restrictions is
established which assigns maintenance responsibilities to another
party.
c) If a HOA or an agreement of owners of the lots or units is to be used,
until 51% of all lots and/or units have been sold, and a homeowners
association has been formally organized, the applicant for such
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
51
development shall be responsible for a maintenance of the common
lands and facilities.
10. Notations on Plan
Common lands, roads or facilities, including open space lands, must be clearly labeled
or referenced on the Final Plan. The Final Plan shall include information or provide
reference to a legal document which defines use, ownership, management, method of
preservation, and the rights, if any, of the owners in the subdivision to such land or
portions thereof, and shall contain a reference or notation indicating any conservation
easements, deed restrictions, or other documents regarding those provisions required to
be recorded to implement such reservations, restrictions or provisions.
11. Common Ownerships
a. Homeowners' Associations or Agreements
1) Where any portion of a subdivision is proposed or required to be held in
common by owners of lots, or owned in common by a Homeowners'
Association (HOA) or similar entity, covenants for mandatory membership
in the association setting forth the owners' rights, interest, privileges,
responsibilities for maintenance, and obligations in the association and the
common land, road or open space shall be approved by the Planning Board
and included in the deed for each lot.
2) In such event, the ownership in the HOA or similar entity, or under the
agreement of common ownership by all, the lot or unit owners shall be
established or contain provisions covering the following:
a) The HOA or common agreement must be in legal existence before
the lots or units are sold;
b) Each lot owner or unit owner shall be a member of the HOA or
subject to the agreement and shall be required by recorded covenants
and restrictions to pay fees to the HOA, or his pro rate share for
taxes, insurance and maintenance of common areas or open space,
private roads and other common facilities;
c) Property owners must pay their pro rate share of the costs in (b)
above, and the assessment levied by the HOA, and from time to time
adjusted to meet changed needs. The amounts due from each lot
owner or unit owner shall, if not paid when due, constitute a lien on
the property; and
d) The attorney for the Planning Board shall find that the HOA
documents or common lot owners' agreement presented satisfy
conditions (a) through (c) above and such other conditions as the
Planning Board shall deem necessary.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
52
J. Affordable Housing Incentive
1. Purpose. The purpose of the affordable housing incentive is to encourage developers of
residential subdivisions and multi-family developments to provide lots or units which are
affordable to very low, low and median income households as defined by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development and comply with the policies of
the Turner Comprehensive Plan.
2. Incentive. The Planning Board may, in approving a residential subdivision (but not a
mobile home park) and multi-family development, allow for an increase of up to 10
percent in the total number of lots or units if the applicant can meet the following
criteria and provisions:
a. Documentation is provided to the Planning Board that subsurface sewage
disposal systems will be sufficient to meet the increased density and that adequate
supply and quality of water for both domestic and firefighting purposes is
available;
b. The Planning Board shall require all provisions of this Ordinance and the Town
of Turner's Subdivision Ordinance to be met except provisions relating to density;
c. The applicant shall provide the Planning Board with information as to the upper
income limits for very low, low and median family incomes prepared and
published by the Department of Housing and Urban Development and affordability
formulas and data used to calculate rents and prices;
d. Prior to the initial occupancy of any multi-family dwelling and prior to any
occupancy thereafter of any multi-family dwelling unit which the affordable
housing incentive created, the Code Enforcement Officer shall be provided proof
that the occupant(s) meet the very low, low or median income criteria;
e. The Planning Board shall require the applicant to provide proof that upon transfer,
sale or disposition of the multi-family unit and/or complex, those units created
as the result of the affordable housing incentive shall continue to be occupied
by very low, low or median income households;
f. Prior to the initial sale of any lot or lot and dwelling which the affordable
housing incentive created the Code Enforcement Officer shall be provided proof
that the purchaser meets the very low, low or median income criteria; and
g. The Planning Board shall at time of subdivision approval require the deed to the
lot(s) or lots and dwelling units which the affordable housing incentive created
contain a transfer, sale or disposition clause that provides legally enforceable
assurances that upon transfer, sale or disposition that the property sale remains
affordable to very low, low or median income households. The Planning Board
shall require, at a Minimum, the following provisions to be contained in the deed.
1) Transfer shall be to a very low, low or median income household;
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
53
2) Upon death of the owner, the property may be transferred to the following:
i) spouse;
ii) child or children;
iii) members of the household who have resided on the premises for at
least one year;
iv) future sale prices of lots which the affordable housing incentive
created shall be based upon an inflation factor based upon the
Consumer Price Index or if no longer published an equivalent index
and an improvement factor;
v) future sale prices of lots and dwellings which the affordable housing
incentive created shall be based upon an inflation factor based upon
the Consumer Price Index or if no longer published an equivalent
index, improvement factors and wear and tear factor.
h. The term of such deed restrictions shall be 40 years.
K. Home Occupation
1. Home occupations which meet the following conditions do not require a Code
Enforcement Officer or Planning Board permit:
a. Do not employ any persons who do not make the residence their permanent
home;
b. Do not display any exterior signs, exterior exhibits, exterior storage of materials
or any other exterior indications of the home occupation or variation from the
residential character of the principal dwelling or accessory building;
c. Do not generate any nuisance, waste discharge, offensive noise, vibration, smoke,
dust, odors, heat, glare, radiation, fumes, or electrical interference detectable to
the normal senses or which interferes with normal radio or television reception,
or causes other nuisances which extend beyond the limits of the subject property;
and
d. Are not likely to generate regular daily or seasonal traffic.
2. Home occupations that do not meet the provisions of Section 1.a-d above and are
located in the Agricultural/Industrial, Commercial 1, Commercial II, Rural I, Rural II,
General Residential I and General Residential II Districts shall obtain a permit from the
Code Enforcement Officer and comply with the following conditions:
a. Not more than two persons who do not make the residence their permanent home
may be employed (including part-time workers);
b. The appearance of the structure or accessory structure may not be altered, except
as provided under subsection c. below or the occupation within the residence
must be conducted in a manner that would not cause the residence to differ from
its residential character by means of colors, lights or sounds;
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
54
c. Additions to the residence or accessory structure for the express purpose of a
home occupation shall be constructed and finished in the same manner as the
original structure such that the character and appearance of the principal structure
is maintained;
d. There is adequate off-street parking on the premises for customers' or clients' use;
e. There is no objectionable increase in commercial vehicle traffic over that traffic
normal for the neighborhood.
f. It does not adversely affect any natural resource or environmentally sensitive
area including, but not limited to, a wetland, aquifer, watercourse or water body.
The home occupation shall not use chemicals not commonly found in a residence
and shall not use any chemicals in quantities not commonly used in a residence.
g. The home occupation shall not generate any nuisance, waste discharge, offensive
noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, radiation, fumes or electrical
interference detectable to the normal senses or which interferes with normal radio
or television reception, or causes other nuisances which extend beyond the limits
of the subject property. All waste material from the home occupation shall be
removed promptly from the premises, according to state laws and local
ordinances.
h. Do not display any exterior exhibits, exterior storage of materials or any other
exterior indications of the home occupation or variation from the residential
character of the principal dwelling or accessory building.
3. Auto body shops and auto repair/sales in all districts that meet the definition of home
occupations and home occupations that do not meet the provisions of Section 1.a-d and
are located in the Village, Shoreland and Resource Protection Districts shall obtain a
permit from the Planning Board and comply with the following conditions:
a. No more than one person who does not make the residence his or her permanent
home may be employed;
b. Accessory structures or attached additions to the principal structure must be
compatible with the residential character of the neighborhood;
c. Except as provided in Subsection b, the appearance of the structure is not to be
altered, subject to Section 4.K.2.C. or the occupation within the residence is
conducted in a manner that would not cause the residence to differ from its
residential character by means of colors, lights and sounds;
d. There is no objectionable increase in traffic over that normal for the traffic
normal for the neighborhood;
e. If the home occupation attracts any regular customer or client traffic, there shall
be at least two but not more than three off-street parking spaces specifically
designated for use by the employee and any customers of the home occupation.
Such parking shall not be located within the front setback for the district in which
the home occupation is located. When the required parking cannot meet the front
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
55
setback requirement, it shall not be located between the house and the road as
defined by a line drawn parallel to the road which touches the point of the house
nearest the road. Such parking areas shall be set back at least ten feet from side
and rear lot lines.
f. There shall be no public display of goods or wares or machinery used in the
home occupation visible from any public or private way or adjacent properties.
g. The home occupation shall not generate any nuisance, waste discharge, offensive
noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, radiation, fumes or electrical
interference detectable to the normal senses or which interferes with normal radio
or television reception, or causes other nuisances which extend beyond the limits
of the subject property. All waste material from the home occupation shall be
removed promptly from the premises according to state laws and local
ordinances.
h. It does not adversely affect any natural resource or environmentally sensitive
area including, but not limited to, a wetland, aquifer, water-course or water body.
The home occupation shall not use chemicals not commonly found in a residence
and shall not use any chemicals in quantities not commonly used in a residence.
i. Do not display any exterior exhibits, exterior storage of materials or any other
exterior indications of the home occupation or variation from the residential
character of the principal dwelling or accessory building.
j. Subsections a-i above shall be rectroactive to June 12, 1993 in respect to auto
body shops and auto repair/sales that meet the definition of home occupations.
Such home occupations shall submit to the Planning Board a Home Occupation
Permit Application no later than October 1, 1999.
4. Home occupations not meeting the above standards shall be considered commercial
uses.
L. Standards for Non-Commercial Animal Raising in the Village and General Residential
Districts
1. Persons keeping farm animals for non-commercial purposes on lots of less than five
acres, after the date of this ordinance amendment (April 8, 2006), shall obtain a Planning
Board Permit and shall comply with the following standards:
a. A parcel of land used for the keeping of horses, mules, cows, goats, sheep,
poultry and similar size animals for the domestic use of the residents of the lot,
shall contain a lot area inclusive of residential structures of at least 80,000 sq. ft.
excluding water bodies of one quarter acre or larger, for the type and number of
animals identified below.
1) Cattle: I bovine animal per 40,000 sq.ft. lot; or
2) Horse: 2 equine animals per 40,000 sq.ft. lot; or
3) Sheep or goats: 6 animals per 40,000 sq.ft. lot; or
4) Fowl: 50 animals per 40,000 sq.ft. lot; or
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
56
5) Combinations of the above: The required lot size shall be determined by
the Planning Board and shall conform to the lot size for similar size animals.
b. Fences shall be constructed so as to prevent any animal from grazing on adjacent
property.
c. Manure shall be removed at least every two weeks during the summer months or
at such other periods so that odor and insect populations are not a nuisance.
M. Soils
All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or structures can be
established or maintained without causing adverse environmental impacts, including without
limitation, severe erosion, mass soil movement, improper drainage, and water pollution,
whether during or after construction. Proposed uses requiring subsurface waste disposal, and
commercial or industrial development and other similar intensive land uses, shall not be
approved absent a soils report based on an on-site investigation and shall be prepared by a
state-certified professional. Certified persons may include Maine Certified Site Evaluator,
Maine Certified Soil Scientists, Maine Registered Professional Engineers, Maine State
Certified Geologists and other persons who have training and experience in the recognition
and evaluation of soil properties. The report shall be based upon the analysis of the
characteristics of the soil and surrounding land and water areas, maximum ground water
elevation, presence of ledge, drainage conditions, and other pertinent data which the evaluator
deems appropriate. The soils report shall include recommendations for a proposed use to
counteract soil limitations where they exist.
N. Water Quality
No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or discharge to the waters of the State any
pollutant that, by itself or in combination with other activities or substances, will impair
designated uses or the water classification of the water body.
O. Archaeological Sites
Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil disturbance on or
adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places,
as determined by the permitting authority shall be submitted by the applicant to the Maine
Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment, at least 20 days prior to action
being taken by the permitting authority. The permitting authority shall consider comments
received from the Commission prior to rendering a decision on the application and shall
require preservation or other appropriate actions to preserve the archaeological sites when
identified.
P. Septic Waste Disposal
1. All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in conformance with the State
of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules (Rules); and
2. Before the Building Permit is issued for construction, a soil suitability report shall be
prepared by a Maine Licensed Site Evaluator showing full compliance with the
requirements of the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
Q. Campgrounds
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
57
Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under State licensing
procedures and the following:
1. Campgrounds shall contain a minimum of 5,000 sq.ft. of land, not including roads and
driveways, for each site. Land supporting wetland vegetation and land below the
normal high-water line of a water body shall not be included in calculating land area
per site.
2. The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or shelter, and utility and
service buildings shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from the normal high-water
line of a great pond and 75 feet from the normal high-water line of other water bodies,
tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.
R. Swimming Pools
1. Swimming pools installed after the effective date of this Ordinance shall require a
permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
2. All swimming pools shall meet setback requirements for the district they are to be
located in.
3. Enclosures of swimming pools shall comply with the provisions of Title 22, M.R.S.A.
Section 1632.
4. All electrical connections to the swimming pool and to electrical fixtures or outlets
shall meet the requirements of the national electrical code Article 680, as amended.
S. Signs
1. Purposes. The purposes of these standards are to encourage the effective use of signs
as a means of communication in the Town of Turner; to maintain and enhance the
aesthetic environment of the Town of Turner; to create and maintain an attractive
business climate in the Town of Turner; to improve and maintain pedestrian and traffic
safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private
property; and implement the intent of the Turner Comprehensive Plan.
2. Except as provided in Section 3.a-s, no sign may be erected, enlarged, illuminated or
substantially altered without a Sign Permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
after he/she finds that the sign is in accordance with the provisions of this section.
3. The following types of signs are permitted, except where otherwise prohibited by law
and shall not require a Sign Permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
a. All permanent on-premise signs erected prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance, (ordinary maintenance and upkeep shall be allowed).
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
58
b. Any sign approved by the Planning Board, as an element of Site Plan Review,
prior to the effective date of this Ordinance or as proposed in a pending
application.
c. One sign not exceeding two (2) square feet used to display the street number
and/or name of the occupants of the premises.
d. One non-illuminated non-internally lit sign not exceeding six (6) square feet used
to describe a home occupation.
e. One sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet on the premises of public or
semi-public buildings, and charitable or religious institutions. These signs may
incorporate a bulletin board.
f. Temporary signs displayed for thirty (30) days or less to advertise school, nonprofit,
civic, church and like events and garage sales, auctions and like events.
g. One real estate sign not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet relating to the sale,
rental or lease of the premises. Such sign shall be removed within one (1) week
after the property transaction.
h. One sign each for a building contractor, architect or engineer; each sign shall not
exceed sixteen (16) square feet relating to construction projects. Such sign shall
be removed within one (1) week after construction is complete.
i. One sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet identifying the name of a
farm.
j. Sign(s) not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in total describing farm
products for sale on the premise.
k. Signs erected by growers of fresh fruit and vegetable crops advertising those
fresh fruits and vegetable crops when crops are offered for sale on premises
where those crops are grown from June 15th to November 1st of each year.
Signs may advertise only those fruits and vegetables that are available for
immediate purchase. A grower may not erect more than 4 signs. A sign may not
exceed 8 square feet in size and must be located within 5 miles of the farm stand.
The signs must be erected on private property with the landowner's written
consent except that the signs may be erected within but at the edge of the rightof-
ways of highways that receive no federal aid.
l. Political signs, not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in total area for single
faced signs, or sixteen (16) square feet on each side of double-faced signs,
provided that:
1) Such signs shall not be erected more than thirty (30) days prior to the
election to which they pertain; and
2) Such signs are removed within seven (7) days after the election to which
they refer.
m. Subdivisions may have one non-internally lit sign at each public entrance to the
development not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per sign.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
59
n. Any sign(s) placed by the State or Federal Governments or Town of Turner that
comply with the Department of Transportation standards.
o. Outdoor signs identifying restrooms, parking, entrance and similar information.
p. Four (4) or less Flags or insignia per commercial lot or business. Flags or
insignia in excess of four per commercial lot or use shall comply with the
provisions of this section.
q. Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of construction, or historic
markers when cut into masonry, bronze or other permanent material affixed
to the structure or placed on the property.
r. Signs relating to trespassing and hunting shall be permitted without restriction as
to number provided that no such sign shall exceed two (2) square feet in area.
s. Signs not exceeding eight (8) square feet per sign which identify entrances and
exists to parking and service areas.
4. Prohibited Signs: The following signs are prohibited in all areas of the Town of
Turner.
a. Signs, other than barber poles, time, and weather devices, that have visible moving
parts or blinking, moving or glaring illuminations except for changeable message
signs provided for in Section 4.S.7.a.8.
b. No permanent sign except traffic and similar public safety signs, official business
directional signs shall be located in the public right-of-way of any street or
highway except as may be provided for in Section 4.S.3.
c. No sign shall protrude beyond the property line of the lot on which it is placed.
d. No sign shall be located so that it interferes with the view necessary for motorists
to proceed safely through intersections or to enter onto or exit public streets or
private roads.
e. Signs painted on or attached to stationary-vehicles except for signs relating to the
sale of the vehicle. For the purpose of this section, a stationary vehicle means
any vehicle not registered and inspected as required by Maine law.
f. Inflatable signs, tethered balloons and pennants except associated with special
events or sales for a duration not to exceed seven (7) days in any calendar year.
g. Signs relating to any businesses which has been out of business for more than
365 days. The owner of the property or his agent shall be responsible for
removing such signs.
h. Temporary movable signs are not permitted except for the following uses with
the issuance by the Code Enforcement Officer of a no fee temporary sign permit.
1) To call attention to and/or to advertise the name of a new business and the
products sold or activities to be carried on in connection with a new business.
In such cases, no sign shall remain at a premises for more than 90 days in
any calendar year.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
60
2) To advertise a special sale or sales. In such cases, a sign shall be allowed
for a period not to exceed 90 days in any calendar year.
3) To promote community or civic activities. In such cases, no sign shall
remain in place for more than ninety (90) days in any calendar year.
5. Nonconforming Signs. Nonconforming signs that were otherwise lawful on the
effective date of this Ordinance may continue except as provided below.
a. No nonconforming sign may be enlarged or altered in such a manner as to
aggravate the nonconforming condition.
b. No illumination may be added to any nonconforming sign except if such
illumination complies with the provisions of this section.
c. A nonconforming sign may not be moved except for maintenance, change in
message or repair or replaced except to bring the sign into conformity with this
section.
d. The message of a nonconforming sign may be changed so long as this does not
create any new nonconformities.
6. General Provisions
a. Signs must be kept clean, legible and free from all hazards such as, but not
limited to, faulty wiring, loose fastenings, or deterioration, and must be
maintained at all times in such condition so as not to be detrimental to the public
health or safety, detract from the physical appearance and the natural beauty of
the community, or constitute a distraction or obstruction that may impair traffic
safety.
b. Except for banners, flags, temporary signs and window signs conforming in all
respects with the requirements of this ordinance, all signs shall be constructed of
permanent materials, and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building,
or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame or structure.
c. All signs shall meet the following setback standards:
1) A minimum of twenty (20) feet from the outside edge of the paved portion
of any public way with more than two travel lanes and/or a total paved
portion in excess of twenty-four (24) feet in width.
2) A minimum of five (5) feet from the right-of-way of any public or private
street.
3) All signs shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet from side and rear lot
lines.
d. Area and height of signs shall be computed as follows.
1) Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face (which is
also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be
computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or
combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing,
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
61
representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or
color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is
placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing or decorative
fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning ordinance
regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself.
2) Computation of area of multi-faced signs. The sign area for a sign with
more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all
sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are
placed back to back, so that both are part of the same sign structure, the
sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces.
3) Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the
distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest
attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be constructed to be
the lower of (1) existing grade prior to construction or (2) the newly
established grade after construction exclusive of any filling, berming,
mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In
cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign
height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal
grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of
the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance
to the principal structure on the zone lot, whichever is lower.
7. Specific Standards
a. Commercial I, Commercial II and Agricultural/Industrial Districts: The following
standards apply to the Commercial I, Commercial II, and Agricultural/Industrial
Districts.
1) In the case of a multi-tenant or condominium development, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner or property manager of such premises to allocate
sign space upon the premises, under the terms of this section.
2) On each premise, there shall be allowed one wall or roof sign affixed to the
exterior of the structure or for each occupancy under common ownership
operation or control therein. Such signs shall not occupy more than thirty
(30) percent of the wall to which is attached or is above. For the purpose
of this section, wall is defined as the facade of the building up to the roof
line excluding windows, doors and architectural features.
3) Window and door signs are allowed without regard to the percentage of the
window or door in which they are displayed.
4) Projecting Signs: One projecting sign is permitted per structure. Such sign
shall extend no lower than ten (10) feet above ground level, project from
the wall at an angle of ninety (90) degrees and be no nearer than fifteen
(15) feet from any property line. No projecting sign shall exceed thirtytwo
(32) square feet.
5) Free Standing Signs:
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
62
a) One free standing sign per lot is permitted except for each additional
200 feet of street frontage per lot above the minimum frontage
requirement for that district; an additional free standing sign is
permitted provided it complies with Subsections b) and c) below.
No free standing sign shall exceed eighty (80) square feet in area, the
top edge shall not be higher than twenty (20) feet vertical measure
above average ground level from the base.
b) For lots with 200 feet of frontage or less, or lots that meet the criteria
in Section a.) above, no free standing sign shall exceed eighty (80)
square feet in surface area.
c) For lots with linear street frontage of more than 200 feet, the size of a
single free standing sign maybe increased by 0.4 square feet in surface
area for every linear foot of street frontage above 200 feet.
d) Lots fronting on two or more public streets are allowed the permitted
signage for each street frontage, but signage cannot be accumulated
and used on a single street in excess of that allowed for lots with
only one street frontage.
e) Multi-tenant or unit commercial development which lacks street
frontage and is served by a right-of-way may have one free standing
sign not to exceed 160 square feet.
6) Illumination: Signs shall be illuminated only by the following means:
a) A steady, stationary light(s) of single color shielded and directed
solely at the sign and not casting light off the premises;
b) Interior or surface mounted, non-exposed, white lights of reasonable
intensity; and
c) Neon tube illumination may be only used for window signs that do
not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the window area in which
they are located.
7) Awning and canopy signs: Awning and canopy signs are permitted.
Canopies over fuel island shall only advertise fuel and fuel products.
b. Village District. The following standards apply to the Village District, except
that for those lots with frontage on Route 4, and the primary sign is located
adjacent to Route 4 and which the primary vehicle and/or visual access is from
Route 4, signs shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 4.S.7.a.,
above.
1) In the case of a multi-tenant or condominium development, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner or property manager of such premises to allocate
sign space upon the premises under the terms of this section.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
63
2) On each premise, there shall be allowed one wall or roof sign affixed to the
exterior of the structure for each occupancy under common ownership
operation or control therein. Such sign shall not occupy more than twenty
(20) percent of the wall to which it is attached or is above. For the purpose
of this section, wall is defined as the facade of the building up to the roof
line excluding windows, doors and major architectural features.
3) Window and door signs are allowed without regard to the percentage of the
window or door in which they are displayed.
4) Projecting signs: One projecting sign is permitted per structure. Projecting
signs shall extend no lower than ten (10) feet above ground level, project
from the wall at an angle of ninety (90) degrees and be no nearer than eight
(8) feet from any property line. No projecting sign shall exceed twentyfour
(24) square feet.
5) Free Standing Sign: One free standing sign is permitted per lot. No free
standing sign shall exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area. The top
edge shall not be higher than twelve (12) feet vertical measure above
average ground level from the base.
6) Awning and canopy signs: Awning and canopy signs are permitted.
Canopies over fuel islands shall only advertise fuel and fuel products.
7) Illumination: Signs shall be illuminated only by the following means:
a) A steady, stationary light(s) of single color shielded and directed
solely at the sign and not casting light off the premises.
b) Interior, non exposed, white lights of reasonable intensity.
c) Neon to be illuminated may be only used for window signs that do
not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the window area in which it is
located.
c. General Residential I and General Residential II Districts
1) In the case of a multi-tenant or condominium development, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner or property manager of such premises to allocate
sign space upon the premises under the terms of this section.
2) All signs shall be mounted flat on the wall or free standing.
3) Illumination: Signs shall be illuminated only by a steady stationary light(s)
of single color shielded and directed solely at the sign not casting light off
the premises.
4) Total Signage: The permitted total signage shall not exceed twenty-four
(24) square feet.
d. Rural I and Rural II Districts
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
64
1) In the case of a multi-tenant or condominium development, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner or property manager of such premises to allocate
sign space upon the premises under the terms of this section.
2) All signs shall be mounted flat on the wall or be free standing.
3) Illumination: Signs shall be illuminated only by a steady stationary light(s)
of single color shielded and directed solely at the sign not casting light of
the premises.
4) Total Signage: The permitted total signage shall not exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet.
e. Shoreland and Resource Protection Districts
1) In the case of a multi-tenant or condominium development, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner or property manager of such premises to allocate
sign space upon the premises under the terms of this section.
2) All signs shall be mounted flat on the wall or be free standing.
3) Illumination: Signs shall be illuminated only by a steady stationary light(s)
of single color shielded and directed solely at the sign not casting light off
the premises.
4) Signs shall not exceed two (2) per lot and not be larger than six (6) square
feet in area.
8. Changeable Message Signs. Changeable message signs are permitted provided that
each message remains fixed on the display surface, but "which may be changed at
reasonable intervals by electronic process or remote control," and do not "include any
flashing, intermittent or moving lights in accordance with Title 23 MRSA Section
1914.11-A. For the purpose of this section, signs whose text/numeric messages change
by mechanical or electronic means are not prohibited as long as the intermitted lighting
is used to change messages and not solely to attract attention and comply with the
following.
a) Static display with a eight (8) second hold rate of change minimum between
changes including the use of subtle transitions such as fade, dissolve, travel and
scrolling transitions and with frames that appear to move or change in size, or be
revealed sequentially rather than at one including the movement of illumination
or scintillation or varying of light intensity. Time and temperature signs are
allowed to change a display with a two (2) second message hold rate.
b) In no event shall a display on a changeable message sign flash or display
continuous streaming of information or video animation.
c) In no event shall a display on a changeable message sign obscure or interfere
with traffic control devices.
Notification: Upon adoption of this section the Town shall notify in writing the Maine
Department of Transportation.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
65
T. Shoreland Areas
The following provisions shall apply only to the land areas within 250 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high water line of any great pond and river; within 250 feet, horizontal
distance, of the upland edge of a non-forested freshwater wetland; within 75 feet, horizontal
distance of the normal high water mark of a stream; in the 100 year floodplain, as designated
on the Federal Emergency Agency's Flood Boundary maps and as depicted on the Official
Zoning Map.
1. If more than one residential dwelling unit or more than one principal commercial,
governmental, institutional or industrial structure or use, or combination thereof, is
constructed or established on a single parcel, all dimensional requirements shall be met
for each additional dwelling unit, principal structure, or use.
2. Principal and Accessory Structures
a. All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back at least one hundred
(100) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of great ponds,
and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line
of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland except
that in the Village District the setback from the normal high-water line shall be
not less than twenty-five (25) feet horizontal distance,. In addition:
1. The water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback provision shall neither
apply to structures which require direct access to the water body or wetland
as an operational necessity, such as piers, docks and retaining walls, nor
to other functionally water-dependent uses.
2. The Planning Board may increase the required setback of a proposed
structure, as a condition to permit approval, if necessary to accomplish the
purposes of this section. Instances where a greater setback may be
appropriate include, but are not limited to, areas of steep slope; shallow or
erodible soils; or where an adequate vegetative buffer does not exist.
3. On a non-conforming lot of record on which only a residential structure
exists, and it is not possible to place an accessory structure meeting the
required water body, tributary stream or wetland setbacks, the code
enforcement officer may issue a permit to place a single accessory
structure, with no utilities, for the storage of yard tools and similar
equipment. Such accessory structure shall not exceed eighty (80) square
feet in area nor eight (8) feet in height, and shall be located as far from the
shoreline or tributary stream as practical and shall meet all other applicable
standards, including lot coverage and vegetation clearing limitations. In no
case shall the structure be located closer to the shoreline or tributary stream
than the principal structure.
b. Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing structures which are
permitted shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. This provision shall not
apply to structures such as transmission towers, windmills, antennas, and similar
structures having no floor area.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
66
c. The lowest floor elevation or openings of all buildings and structures including
basements shall be elevated at least one foot above the elevation of the 100 year
flood, the flood of record, the flood as defined by soil types identified as recent
flood plain soils or by local information and knowledge. A development with
100 year flood plains must comply with the Flood Plain Management Ordinance.
d. The total footprint area of all structures, parking lots and other non-vegetated
surfaces, within the Shoreland and Resource Protection Districts shall not exceed
twenty (20) percent of the lot or a portion there of, located within the shoreland
area, including land area previously developed, except in the Village, Commercial
I and Commercial II and Agricultural/Industrial Districts where maximum
Impervious Surface Ratios shall not exceed those contained in the Space and
Bulk Standards as set forth in Section 3.
e. Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or similar structures
may be allowed with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer to provide
shoreline access in areas of steep slopes or unstable soils provided; that the
structure is limited to a maximum of four (4) feet in width; that the structure does
not extend below or over the normal high-water line of a water body or upland
edge of a wetland, (unless permitted by the Department of Environmental
Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, Title 38, Section
480-C); and that the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative
exists on the property.
f. Retaining walls that are not necessary for erosion control shall meet the structure
setback requirement, except for low retaining walls and associated fill provided
all of the following conditions are met:
1. The site has been previously altered and an effective vegetated buffer does
not exist;
2. The wall(s) is (are) at least 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a
wetland;
3. The site where the retaining wall will be constructed is legally existing
lawn or is a site eroding from lack of naturally occurring vegetation, and
which cannot be stabilized with vegetative plantings;
4. The total height of the wall(s), in the aggregate, are no more than 24
inches;
5. Retaining walls are located outside of the 100-year floodplain on rivers,
streams, and tributary streams, as designated on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency’s (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood
Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in the absence of these,
by soil types identified as recent flood plain soils.
6. The area behind the wall is revegetated with grass, shrubs, trees, or a
combination thereof, and no further structural development will occur
within the setback area, including patios and decks; and
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
67
7. A vegetated buffer area is established within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of
the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland
edge of a wetland when a natural buffer area does not exist. The buffer
area must meet the following characteristics:
a. The buffer must include shrubs and other woody and herbaceous
vegetation. Where natural ground cover is lacking the area must be
supplemented with leaf or bark mulch;
b. Vegetation plantings must be in quantities sufficient to retard erosion
and provide for effective infiltration of stormwater runoff;
c. Only native species may be used to establish the buffer area;
d. A minimum buffer width of 15 feet, horizontal distance, is required,
measured perpendicularly to the normal high-water line or upland
edge of a wetland;
e. A footpath not to exceed the standards in Section 15(P)(2)(a), may
traverse the buffer;
3. Piers, Docks, Wharfs, Bridges, and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High-Water Line of a Water Body or Within a Wetland.
a. Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such use and
constructed so as to control erosion.
b. The location shall not interfere with existing developed or natural beach areas.
c. The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects on fish habitat.
d. The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to carry on the activity
and be consistent with the surrounding character and uses of the area. A
temporary pier, dock or wharf shall be no wider than six feet for non-commercial
uses.
e. No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other
structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within
a wetland unless the structure requires direct access to the water body or wetland
as an operational necessity.
f. No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock, wharf or other
structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within
a wetland shall be converted to residential dwelling units in any district. Except
in the Village District structures built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or
other structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a Water body or
within a wetland shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height above the pier,
wharf, dock or other structure.
g. New permanent piers and docks shall not be permitted unless it is clearly
demonstrated to the Planning Board that a temporary pier or dock is not feasible,
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
68
and a permit has been obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection, pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act.
4. Individual Private Campsites
Individual, private campsites not associated with campgrounds are allowed provided
the following conditions are met:
a. One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this Ordinance or thirty
thousand (30,000) square feet of lot area within the shoreland zone, whichever is
less, may be permitted.
b. Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a recreational
vehicle or tent platform, shall be set back one hundred (100) feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of a great pond, and seventy-five (75)
feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of other water bodies,
tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.
c. Only one recreational vehicle shall be allowed per campsite. The recreational
vehicle shall not be located on any type of permanent foundation except for a
gravel pad, and no structure except a canopy shall be attached to the recreational
vehicle.
d. The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational vehicle, tent or similar
shelter in a Resource Protection District shall be limited to one thousand (1000)
square feet.
e. A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and location of
sewage disposal shall be required for each campsite and shall be approved by the
Local Plumbing Inspector. Where disposal is off-site, written authorization from
the receiving facility or land owner is required.
f. When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed on-site for more than
one hundred and twenty (120) days per year, all requirements for residential
structures shall be met including the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal
system in compliance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
Rules unless served by public sewage facilities.
5. Parking Areas
a. Parking areas shall meet the shoreline and tributary stream setback requirements
for structures for the District in which such areas are located. The setback
requirement for parking areas serving public boat launching facilities, in Districts
other than the Village District shall be no less than fifty (50) feet, horizontal
distance, from the shoreline or tributary stream if the Planning Board finds that
no other reasonable alternative exists further from the shoreline or tributary stream.
b. Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed use and shall be designed
to prevent stormwater runoff from flowing directly into a water body, tributary
stream or wetland and where feasible, to retain all runoff on-site.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
69
6. Roads and Driveways
The following standards shall apply to the construction of roads and/or driveways and
drainage systems, culverts and other related features.
a. Roads and driveways shall be set back at least one-hundred (100) feet , horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of a great pond, and seventy-five (75)
feet , horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of other water bodies,
tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland unless no reasonable
alternative exists as determined by the Planning Board. If no other reasonable
alternative exists, the road and/or driveway setback requirement shall be no less
than fifty (50) feet, horizontal distance, upon clear showing by the applicant that
appropriate techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the water body,
tributary stream or wetland. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to,
the installation of settling basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch
relief culverts and turnouts placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the water body,
tributary stream, or wetland.
On slopes of greater than twenty (20) percent the road and/or driveway setback
shall be increased by ten (10) feet, , horizontal distance, for each five (5) percent
increase in slope above twenty (20) percent.
This paragraph does not apply to approaches to water crossings or to roads or
driveways that provide access to permitted structures, and facilities located nearer
to the shoreline or tributary stream due to an operational necessity, excluding
temporary docks for recreational use. Roads and driveways providing access to
permitted structures within the setback areas shall comply fully with the
requirements of subsection 6.a except for that portion of the road or driveway
necessary for direct access to the structure.
b. Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right-of-way
regardless of their setback from a water body, tributary stream or wetland.
Increases in the travel way width of privately owned streets which are less than
100 feet from the normal high water line of a great pond or 75 feet from the
normal high water line of other water bodies shall not further encroach or reduce
the existing setback.
c. New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection District except
to provide access to permitted uses within the district or as approved by the
Planning Board upon a finding that no reasonable alternative route or location is
available outside the districts in which case the road or driveway shall be set back
as far as practicable from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary
stream, or upland edge of a wetland.
d. Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two (2) horizontal to
one (1) vertical, and shall be graded and stabilized in accordance with the
provisions for erosion and sedimentation control contained in subsection 14.
e. Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than ten (10) percent except for
short segments of less than two hundred (200) feet.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
70
f. In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from directly entering
water bodies, tributary streams or wetlands, roads and driveways shall be
designed, constructed, and maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip at
least (50) feet plus two times the average slope, in width between the outflow
point of the ditch or culvert and the normal high-water line of a water body,
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland. Surface drainage which is directed
to an unscarified buffer strip shall be diffused or spread out to promote
infiltration of the runoff and to minimize channelized flow of the drainage through
the buffer strip.
g. Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnouts shall be
installed in a manner effective in directing drainage onto unscarified buffer strips
before the flow gains sufficient volume or head to erode the road, driveway or
ditch. To accomplish this, the following shall apply:
1. Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water turnouts shall be
spaced along the road or driveway at intervals no greater than indicated in
the following table:
Grade Spacing
(percent) (feet)
0-2 250
3-5 200-135
6-10 100-80
11-15 80-60
16-20 60-45
21+ 40
2. Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only where the
grade is ten (10) percent or less.
3. On sections having slopes greater than ten (10) percent, ditch relief culverts
shall be placed at approximately a thirty (30) degree angle down slope
from a line perpendicular to the centerline of the road or driveway.
4. Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and property installed in
order to allow for effective functioning, and their inlet and outlet ends shall
be stabilized with appropriate materials.
h. Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other storm water runoff
control installations associated with roads and driveways shall be maintained on
a regular basis to assure effective functioning.
7. Storm Water Runoff
a. All new construction and development shall be designed to minimize storm water
runoff from the site in excess of the natural pre-development conditions. Where
possible, existing natural runoff control features, such as berms, swales, terraces
and wooded areas shall be retained in order to reduce runoff and encourage
infiltration of storm waters.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
71
b. Storm water runoff control systems shall be maintained as necessary to ensure
proper functioning.
8. Essential Services
a. Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited to existing
public ways and existing service corridors.
b. The installation of essential services, other than road-side distribution lines, is not
permitted in a Resource Protection District except to provide services to a
permitted use within said district or except where the applicant demonstrates that
no reasonable alternative exists. Where permitted, such structures and facilities
shall be located so as to minimize any adverse impacts on surrounding uses and
resources including visual impacts.
c. Damaged or destroyed public utility transmission and distribution lines, towers
and related equipment may be replaced or reconstructed without a permit.
9. Mineral Exploration
Mineral exploration to determine the nature or extent of mineral resources shall be
accomplished by hand sampling, test boring, or other methods which create minimal
disturbance of less than one hundred (100) square feet of ground surface. A permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer shall be required for mineral exploration which
exceeds the above limitation. All excavations including test pits and holes shall be
immediately capped, filled or secured by other equally effective measures to restore
disturbed areas and to protect the public health and safety.
10. Agriculture
a. All spreading or disposal of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with
the Manure Utilization Guidelines published by the Maine Department of
Agriculture on November 1, 2001, and the Nutrient Management Law (7
M.R.S.A. sections 4201-4209).
b. Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within one hundred (100) feet,
horizontal distance, of a great pond classified GPA, or within seventy-five (75)
feet horizontal distance, of other water bodies, tributary streams, or wetlands. All
manure storage areas within the shoreland area must be constructed or modified
such that the facility produces no discharge of effluent or contaminated storm
water.
c. Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than forty thousand
(40,000) square feet in surface area, within the shoreland area shall require a
Conservation Plan. Nonconformance with the provisions of said plan shall be
considered to be a violation of this Ordinance.
d. There shall be no new tilling of soil within one-hundred (100) feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA; within
seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from other water bodies; nor within
twenty-five feet, horizontal distance, of tributary streams, and freshwater
wetlands. Operations in existence on the effective date of this ordinance and not
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
72
in conformance with this provision may be maintained.
e. Newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted within one
hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a great
pond classified GPA; within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance of other
water bodies, nor, within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, of tributary
streams, and freshwater wetlands. Livestock grazing associated with ongoing
farm activities, and which are not in conformance with the above setback
provisions may continue provided that such grazing is conducted in accordance
with a Conservation Plan.
11. Reserved
12. Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting
a. In a Resource Protection District abutting a great pond, there shall be no cutting
of vegetation within the strip of land extending 75 feet, horizontal distance,
inland from the normal high-water line, except to remove safety hazards.
Elsewhere, in any Resource Protection District the cutting or removal of
vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for uses expressly
authorized in that district.
b. Except in areas as described in paragraph a, above, and except to allow for the
development of permitted uses, within a strip of land extending one-hundred
(100) feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal high-water line of a great
pond or a river flowing to a great pond, and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal
distance, from any other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a
wetland, a buffer strip of vegetation shall be preserved as follows:
1. There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet in the forest
canopy (or other existing woody vegetation if a forested canopy is not
present) as measured from the outer limits of the tree or shrub crown.
However, a footpath not to exceed six (6) feet in width as measured between
tree trunks and/or shrub stems is allowed provided that a cleared line of
sight to the water through the buffer strip is not created.
2. Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is allowed provided that a
well distributed stand of trees and other natural vegetation is maintained.
For the purposes of Section a "well-distributed stand of trees" adjacent to a
great pond or a river or stream flowing to a great pond, shall be defined as
maintaining a rating score of 24 or more in each 25-foot by 50-foot
rectangular (1250 square feet) area as determined by the following rating
system.
Diameter of Tree at 4-1/2 feet Above Points
Ground Level (inches)
2 - < 4 in. 1
4 – <8 in. 2
8-< 12 in. 4
12 in. or greater 8
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
73
Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands, a "welldistributed
stand of trees" is defined as maintaining a minimum rating
score of 16 per 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular area.
The following shall govern in applying this point system:
i. The 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular plots must be established where
the landowner or lessee proposes clearing within the required buffer;
ii. Each successive plot must be adjacent to, but not overlap a previous
plot;
iii. Any plot not containing the required points must have no vegetation
removed except as otherwise allowed by this Ordinance;
iv. Any plot containing the required points may have vegetation
removed down to the minimum points required or as otherwise
allowed by is Ordinance;
v. Where conditions permit, no more than 50% of the points on any 25-
foot by 50-foot rectangular area may consist of trees greater than 12
inches in diameter.
For the purposes of Section 2.b above “other natural vegetation” is defined
as retaining existing vegetation under three (3) feet in height and other
ground cover and retaining at least five (5) saplings less than two (2)
inches in diameter at four and one half (4 ½) feet above ground level for
each 25-foot by 50-foot rectangle area. If five saplings do not exist, no
woody stems less than two (2) inches in diameter can be removed until 5
saplings have been recruited into the plot.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than 40% of the total volume
of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured at 4 1/2 feet above
ground level may be removed in any ten (10) year period.
3. In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing vegetation
under three (3) feet in height and other ground cover, including leaf litter
and the forest duff layer, shall not be cut, covered, or removed, except to
provide for a footpath or other permitted uses as described in Section 12.b
and 12.b.1 above.
4. Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is allowed.
5. In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the removal of
storm-damaged, diseased, unsafe, or dead trees results in the creation of
cleared openings, these openings shall be replanted with native tree species
unless existing new tree growth is present.
Paragraph 2 above does not apply to those portions of public recreational facilities
adjacent to public swimming areas as long as cleared areas are limited to the
minimum area necessary.
c. At distances greater than one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, from a
great pond or a river flowing to a great pond, and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of any other water body,
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
74
tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland, there shall be allowed on any
lot, in any ten (10) year period, selective cutting of not more than forty (40)
percent of the volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured 4
1/2 feet above ground level. Tree removal in conjunction with the development
of permitted uses shall be included in the forty (40) percent calculation. For the
purposes of these standards volume may be considered to be equivalent to basal
area.
In no event shall cleared openings for any purpose, including but not limited to,
principal and accessory structures, driveways, lawns and sewage disposal areas,
exceed in the aggregate, 25% of the lot area within the shoreland zone or ten
thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is greater, including land previously
cleared.
d. Legally existing nonconforming cleared openings may be maintained, but shall
not be enlarged, except as allowed by this Ordinance.
e. Fields and other cleared openings which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees,
or other woody vegetation shall be regulated under the provisions of this section.
13. Erosion and Sedimentation Control
a. All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation, or other similar activities
which result in unstabilized soil conditions and which require a permit shall
require a written soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. The plan shall be
submitted to the permitting authority for approval and shall include, where
applicable, provisions for:
1. Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
2. Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt fencing or
diversion ditches.
3. Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or riprap.
4. When an excavation contractor will perform the activities,
compliance with the following will be required:
i. A person certified in erosion control practices by the Department of
Environmental Protection shall be responsible for management of
erosion and sedimentation control practices on the site. This person
shall be present at the site each day earth moving activity occurs for a
duration that is sufficient to ensure that proper erosion and
sedimentation practices are followed. This is required until erosion
and sedimentation control measures have been installed, which will
either stay in place permanently or stay in place until the area is
sufficiently covered with vegetation necessary to prevent soil erosion.
ii. Include on the required plan or permit application, the name and
certification number of e person who will oversee activities causing or
resulting in soil disturbance.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
75
This section does not apply to:
Activities resulting in less than one cubic yard of earth material being
added or displaced;
A person or firm engaged in agriculture or timber harvesting if best
management practices for erosion and sedimentation control are used;
and
Municipal, state and federal employees engaged in projects associated
with that employment.
b. In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall be designed to
fit with the topography and soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes where high
cuts and fills may be required shall be avoided wherever possible, and natural
contours shall be followed as closely as possible.
c. Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all aspects of the
proposed project involving land disturbance and shall be in operation during all
stages of the activity. The amount of exposed soil at every phase of construction
shall be minimized to reduce the potential for erosion.
d. Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently stabilized within
one (1) week from the time it was last actively worked by use of riprap, sod,
seed, and mulch, or other effective measures. In all cases permanent stabilization
shall occur within nine (9) months of the initial date of exposure in addition:
1. Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one (1) bale per
five hundred (500) square feet and shall be maintained until a catch of
vegetation is established.
2. Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable method
may be required to maintain the mulch cover.
3. Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to avoid
siltation into the water. Such measures may include the use of staked hay
bales and/or silt fences.
e. Natural and manmade drainage ways and drainage outlets shall be protected from
erosion from water flowing through them. Drainage ways shall be designed and
constructed in order to carry water from a twenty-five (25) year 24-hour storm or
greater, and shall be stabilized with vegetation or lined with riprap.
14. Septic Waste Disposal
All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in conformance with the State
of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and the following: a) clearing or
removal of woody vegetation necessary to site a new system and any associated fill
extensions, shall not extend closer than seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from
the normal high-water line of a water body or the upland edge of a wetland and b) a
holding tank is not allowed for a first-time residential use in the shoreland zone
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
76
15. Archaeological Site.
Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil disturbance on
or adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic
Places, as determined by the permitting authority, shall be submitted by the applicant to
the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment, at least twenty
(20) days prior to action being taken by the permitting authority. The permitting
authority shall consider comments received from the Commission prior to rendering a
decision on the application.
U. Temporary Dwellings
1. Purpose: The purpose of these standards is to provide for the habitation of one dwelling
during the construction or renovation of a second dwelling on lots that do not comply
with Section 3.1.6 of this Ordinance.
2. General Requirements: The Code Enforcement Officer may issue a Temporary
Dwelling Permit for the purpose of the owner residing in one dwelling while a new
dwelling is constructed or an existing dwelling is renovated if all the following are met:
a. The structure to be resided in during the construction or renovation of the second
structure shall be connected to an approved subsurface sewage disposal system.
b. All zoning setbacks and lot coverage requirements of this ordinance shall be met.
c. The owner must reside in one of the structures during construction or
renovations.
d. The structure which is not to be the principle residence shall be resided in for not
more than sixteen (16) months from the date of the issuance of the permit for the
construction of primary residence.
e. Within sixteen (16) months from the date of the issuance of a permit or sixty (60)
days from the issuance of an occupancy permit, whichever is less, the owner
shall comply with the following: (1) in the case of a mobile home, it shall be
removed from the lot. (2) Other structures shall be converted to an accessory
structure or removed.
f. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction and renovation on a
lot where a temporary residential structure will be located the owner shall sign a
binding agreement with the Town of Turner that the provisions of this section
shall be complied with.
V. Non-Residential Accessory Structures
Accessory structures to commercial, manufacturing and industrial structures and uses of
greater than 1,000 square feet in total floor area shall require review and approval of
compatibility by the Code Enforcement Officer. Before making a determination of
compatibility the Code Enforcement Officer shall make a positive written finding that the
proposed accessory structure meets the following criteria:
1. The proposed structure shall be related harmoniously to the terrain and to existing
buildings in the vicinity that have a visual relationship to the proposed accessory
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
77
structure so as to have minimal adverse affect on the environment and aesthetic qualities
of the developed and neighboring areas.
2. Materials shall have good architectural character and shall be selected for harmony of
the building with adjoining buildings.
3. Colors shall be harmonious and shall use compatible accents. and
4. Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept.
W. Commercial Telecommunications Towers and Related Facilities
1. Purpose
The Town of Turner finds that the regulation of the placement, spacing, installation,
location and number of both wireless and conventional commercial telecommunications
towers and related facilities, consistent with federal and state policies and law, is in the
public interest:
a. In order to reduce the potential adverse impacts of such towers and related
facilities upon the unique natural assets of the Town of Turner including the
scenic views and its rural environment according to the Turner Comprehensive
Plan;
b. In order to minimize the number, avoid congestion in their location and lessen
their intrusive effect;
c. In order to conserve and enhance property values; and
d. In order to ensure the optimum location of telecommunications towers and related
facilities.
2. Intent
In compliance with federal regulations and Section 5 Site Plan Review, of this
Ordinance, the Town of Turner does not intend to create barriers to the ability to
provide interstate or intrastate telecommunications services or to discriminate against
or favor providers of commercial telecommunications facilities and services.
3. Guidance Standards
The purposes of these standards shall be as follows:
a. To preserve the authority of the Town of Turner to regulate the siting of
commercial telecommunications towers and related facilities and to determine
the optimum location for such towers and facilities in order to provide
commercial telecommunications services to the Town of Turner effectively and
efficiently;
b. To enable the Town to take such steps as may be needed to reduce any adverse
impacts such facilities may create, including, but not limited to, impacts upon
aesthetics, scenic resources, environmentally sensitive areas, recreational uses,
safety, property values, and areas or sites of historic significance;
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
78
c. To encourage the use of innovative siting and configuration options, including
siting possibilities within or attached to existing structures or beyond the
municipal jurisdiction of the Town and to require cooperation and collocation
between competitors and the exhaustion of all other reasonable alternatives before
the construction of new towers is permitted;
d. To ensure that there is an adequate assumption of responsibility for maintenance,
repair, and safety inspections of operational facilities, for the prompt and safe
removal of abandoned telecommunications towers and related facilities and for
the removal and upgrade of facilities that are technologically outdated; and
e. Encourage personal wireless commercial telecommunications services to provide
a blanket of coverage for the Town of Turner, not just nearby corridors, to ensure
that the facilities constructed will provide the best possible service and benefits to
the community.
4. Specific Standards
a. Except to the extent of any inconsistency with federal or state law, and subject to
the standards contained in this Section and Section 5, Site Plan Review, the
siting, establishment, erection, installation or operation of a commercial
telecommunications tower facility within the Town of Turner shall be considered
to be a principal use.
b. For the purpose of this Ordinance Commercial telecommunications towers and
related facilities shall not be considered infrastructure, essential services or public
utilities and the siting of such facilities shall constitute a use of the land to be
regulated by this Ordinance.
c. Towers, antennas or other commercial telecommunications facilities shall be
located and designed so as to preserve the ability of the public to enjoy the scenic
views as defined in the Turner Comprehensive Plan;
d. Use of alternative technologies and of colocation shall be thoroughly studied, and
determined to be infeasible before the construction of any new towers are
approved;
e. Commercial telecommunication towers, antennas, and other electrical and
mechanical equipment shall be made with a neutral finish or color or otherwise
be treated so as to reduce visual impact;
f. Towers shall only be lighted if required by the FAA and such lighting shall be
designed so as to cause the least impact upon the surrounding properties or
abutting communities;
g. Towers shall be located on sites where the topography and tree cover of the
surrounding land shall be utilized to minimize any adverse visual impact;
h. Existing mature vegetation and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible;
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
79
i. Towers shall not contain any permanent or temporary signs, writing, symbols or
other graphic representation of any kind, except as may be allowed or required by
the Turner Planning Board in the interest of public safety;
j. The minimum land area for a commercial telecommunications tower and related
facilities shall be 125% of the of the area required for the fall zone which may be
by ownership, lease or easement;
k. The minimum distance from a commercial telecommunications tower to any
property line, road, structure, dwelling, recreational or institution use shall be
125% of the fall zone of the tower, including any antennas or other
appurtenances, which may be by ownership, lease or easement;
l. Towers shall be enclosed by security chain-link fencing a minimum of 6 feet in
height and shall be equipped with appropriate anti-climbing devices;
m. Access for motorized vehicles to tower compound shall reflect the access
performance standards of this ordinance and minimize the impact upon the
surrounding environment;
o. The tower compound shall be landscaped and maintained with a vegetative buffer
that effectively screens the view of the tower base and support facilities; and
p. All towers, antennas and other telecommunications facilities and equipment shall
meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, FCC and any other
agency of the federal or state governments having controlling regulatory
authority. If such standards or regulations are changed, the owners or operators of
such facilities or equipment shall insure that it complies with the revised
standards or regulations within six (6) months of the effective dates of any
revisions unless the controlling authority mandates a more stringent compliance
schedule.
NOTE: Items W.4.j-o may not apply when the telecommunication equipment is attached
to or within an existing structure and the Planning Board determines that there will be
no adverse impact on the subject or adjacent properties.
5. Abandonment
Failure to comply in accordance with the applicable schedule shall constitute
abandonment and shall be grounds for the removal of such facilities or equipment at the
owner’s expense through the execution of the posted security.
a. The owner of a tower, antenna, or other commercial telecommunications related
facilities and equipment shall be responsible for insuring that such facilities and
equipment at all times conform to applicable industry standards, as such
standards may be amended from time to time. If upon inspection the Planning
Board or their designee determines that such regulations or standards are not
being met, or that the facilities or equipment pose a danger to persons, property,
or the community they shall notify the owner of the facility in writing and the
owner shall within thirty (30) days, remedy such defects. Failure to do so shall
constitute abandonment and shall be grounds for the removal of the facilitates
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
80
and equipment at the owner’s expense through the execution of the posted
security.
b. Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12)
months shall be considered abandoned and hazardous to the public health and
safety, and such antenna or tower shall be removed in accordance with the
following procedure:
1. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing after due notice to abutters
and to the last known owner/operator of the antenna or tower;
2. If at such hearing, the Planning Board determines that the antenna or tower
is, in fact, abandoned, it shall issue a declaration of abandonment to the
owner/operator;
3. Within ninety (90) days after issuance of such declaration, the owner shall
remove the abandoned structure and, if the owner/operator shall not, the
town may execute the security and have the tower removed at the owners
expense; and
4. If there are two or more users of a single tower, the provisions of this
subsection shall not become effective until all users cease using such tower.
6. Security Bonds
a. Before, and as a condition of the approval of a Site Plan filed in connection with
the installation of any commercial telecommunications tower and related
facilities, the Planning Board shall require the developer or installer to file with
the Town a bond in an amount adequate to cover the costs of removing the
facility together with any structures or equipment appurtenant thereto and of
returning the site to its condition prior to such installation. This performance
bond shall remain on file with the town and shall not be released unless the
installation has been decommissioned, dismantled, and removed.
b. The Planning Board shall require the owner/operator of any antenna or tower to
annually provide the Town office proof that it is maintaining a certificate of
liability insurance covering accident or damage.
X. Individual Lot Phosphorous Management
1. Purpose
The purposes of these standards are to maintain the water quality of lakes and ponds in
Turner and those it shares with adjacent communities by controlling the transport of
phosphorous from their direct watersheds.
2. Applicability of Standards
a. The following development activities shall require a Phosphorous Management
Control Permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer whenever located within
the direct watershed of a lake or pond. For the purposes of this standard, Gulf
Island Pond shall not be considered a pond.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
81
1. New commercial, retail, industrial, institutional and recreational structures
and uses that have not received approval by the Planning Board that included
a Phosphorous Export Analysis.
2. New residential structures and uses that have not received approval by the
Planning Board that included a Phosphorous Export Analysis.
3. Expansions in any five (5) year period of any residential, commercial,
retail, industrial, institutional or recreational structures and uses that will
result in more than six hundred twenty-four (624) square feet of
impervious surface that have not received approval by the Planning Board
that included a Phosphorous Export Analysis.
b. The following are exempt for this Section:
1. Legally existing buildings and uses as they existed on April 8, 2006; and
2. Land development activities related to Subdivision and Site Plan Review
activities when they are in conformance with an approved application by
the planning Board to limit phosphorous export pursuant to Phosphorous
Control in Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide to Evaluating New
Development, (Maine Department of Environmental Protection et al.,
September 1989 with revisions to Chapter 4, May 1990 and as amended).
3. Application Procedure
Before issuing a Building or Use Permit, the Code Enforcement Officer shall review
and approve an application for Phosphorous Management Control.
a. Submission Requirements
1. The tax map and lot number of the lot and the name of the direct lake/pond
watershed in which it is located.
2. A Site Map of the proposed activity drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals
fifty (50) feet unless otherwise approved by the Code Enforcement Officer
showing:
i. The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures
and driveways;
ii. Existing ground cover (woods, fields, lawns, etc.);
iii. Areas to be cleared for construction or landscaping;
iv. Present or proposed location of Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
System;
v. Drainage Patterns.
3. A photograph of the project site.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
82
b. Application Review
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and approve a Phosphorous
Management Control Permit based on one of the following methods.
1. Point System
The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a Phosphorous Management
Control Permit if the applicant meets or exceeds thirty (30) points based on the
following schedule.
i. 10 points for correcting an existing erosion problem on the project
site.
ii. 10 points for a clearing limitation of 15,000 square feet and less.
iii. 15 points for a clearing limitation of 10,000 square feet and less.
iv. 15 points for the installation of rock-lined drip edges or other
infiltration system to serve the new construction.
v. 20 points for a 50-foot wide buffer located downslope of the
developed area.
vi. 25 points for a 75-foot wide buffer located downslope of the
developed area.
vii. 30 points for a 100-foot wide buffer located downslope of the
developed area.
2. Technical Analysis
The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a Phosphorous Export Transport
Permit if the applicant does not exceed the Phosphorous Export Per Acre as
identified in Section 5.E.8.
4. Performance Standards
a. Erosion. Existing erosion problems shall be corrected according to the Maine Erosion
and Control Hand Book for Construction Best Management Practices (March 1991
and as amended).
b. Clearing Limitations. Clearing limitations shall be determined based on the area where
the natural vegetations is to be removed and converted to structures, gravel or paved
surfaces and lawns.
c. Rock-lined Drip Edges and/or Gutter Drains. A trench 6 to 8 inches in depth and 12 to
16 inches in width, filled with ¾ inch crushed stone, centered beneath the roof edge
drip line and/or gutter drain.
d. Other Infiltrations Systems. Other infiltrations systems shall be designed according
to the Maine Erosion and Control Hand Book for Construction Best Management
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
83
Practices (March 1991 and as amended).
e. Buffers
i. Natural Occurring. The natural occurring buffer shall be created by
allowing the natural progressing of vegetation to develop by the lack of
mowing.
ii. Planted Buffers. Any planting or revegetation required must be in
accordance with a written plan drafted by a qualified professional, be
implemented at the time of construction, and be designed to meet the rating
scores contained in paragraph 4.T.12.b.2 and the ground cover
requirements of paragraph 4.T.12.b.3 when the vegetation matures within
the fifty- (50) foot strip. At a minimum, the plan must provide for the
establishment of a well-distributed planting of saplings spaced so that there
is at least one sapling per eighty (80) square feet of newly established
buffer. Planted saplings may be no less than three (3) feet tall for coniferous
species and no less than six (6) feet tall for deciduous species. The planting
plan must include a mix of at least three (3) native tree species found
growing in adjacent areas with no one species making up more than fifty
(50) percent of the number of saplings planted unless otherwise approved by
the Planning Board or its designee based on adjacent stand comparison.
All aspects of the implemented plan must be maintained by the applicant
and future owners.
iii. Ground Cover. Where natural ground cover is lacking, the area must be
supplemented with leaf or bark mulch and plantings of native shrubs, and
other woody and herbaceous vegetation in quantities sufficient to retard
erosion and provide for effective infiltration of stormwater while area is
returning to its natural state.
Y. Farm Enterprise
1. Purpose
The purpose of Farm Enterprise is to assist in the implementation of the policies of the
Comprehensive Plan relating to encouraging the presence of an agricultural land base
for production agriculture and to encourage use of prime agriculture land for farming
by providing farm owners and or operators to conduct business not otherwise permitted
in the Rural I and Rural II Districts to supplement income from traditional farm
operations. The Planning Board shall find in addition to the Provisions of Section 5,
Site Plan Review, of this Ordinance that all of the following criteria will be met.
a. The farm enterprise shall be owned by the owner of the farm.
b. The farm enterprise is located on property owned by the owner of the farm.
c. Should the farm enterprise not be conducted in an existing structure, new
structure(s) constructed for the sole purpose of conducting a farm enterprise shall
not exceed a total of 10,000 square feet of ground area.
d. The owner of the farm enterprise shall provide the Planning Board with a legally
binding statement that should his or her farm operation cease, the farm enterprise
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
84
shall also cease within 60 days unless the use is permitted in the district or, for
those uses not permitted, the farm owner can provide proof by easement, lease, or
other binding legal agreement that the usable farm land will continue to be
farmed by others or has been set aside for conservation, recreational, or other
open space uses. With such documentation, the Planning Board can allow the
farm enterprise use to continue.
Z. Storage Tanks
All above or below ground storage tanks, of any size, used for the storage of fuels, hazardous
substances, chemicals, industrial wastes, and flammable or combustible liquids shall be
designed and installed in accordance with all applicable rules or standards set by the State of
Maine, Maine State Fire Marshal’s Office, or the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection.
AA. Rental Cabins
Rental cabins are permitted with Planning Board approval providing the following conditions
are met.
1. Density – one cabin per 30,000 square feet of lot area. Land supporting wetland
vegetation and land below the normal high water line of a water body shall not be
included in calculating land area per cabin.
2. Cabins/structures shall be set back 100’ from the normal high water line of a great pond
and 75’ from the normal high water line of other waterbodies, tributary streams, or the
upland edge of a wetland.
3. Cabins/structures shall be set back 100’ from any public road and 50’ from any lot line.
Setbacks from a private road shall be 100’ except setbacks from private roads or
driveways located on the same parcel can be reduced to 25’ by the Planning Board.
4. Cabins/structures can be constructed on permanent foundations or support posts set on
the existing ground.
5. The clearing of vegetation for siting of the cabin/structure in a Shoreland District shall
be limited to 1,000 square feet per unit. Clearing of vegetation in other districts shall
be limited by the Planning Board to the minimum necessary for the practical use of the
property.
6. A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and location of sewage
disposal shall be required for each cabin/structure. Installation of subsurface sewage
disposal systems shall be in compliance with the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules.
7. The applicant shall demonstrate the availability of adequate supply and quality of water
for both domestic and firefighting purposes.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
85
8. The owner of the rental cabin shall provide the Planning Board with a legally binding
statement that should his or her facility cease operations, the rental cabins/structures
will be removed within 60 days unless the rental cabins/structures meet all dimensional
requirements for residential dwelling units contained in this ordinance. The Planning
Board may also approve the continued use of the rental cabins/structures as residential
dwelling units with new application and approvals under the Open Space Subdivision
provisions of this ordinance.
BB. Shorefront Common Areas
Shorefront Common Areas used for more than one residential dwelling unit or family unit or
other legal entity shall meet the following criteria:
1. Shorefront Common Areas shall have a minimum of 250’ of shore frontage and a
minimum of 100’ of lot depth for the first 10 residential dwelling units or rights of use
granted and there shall be an additional 25’ of shore frontage with a minimum of 100’
of lot depth for each additional residential dwelling unit or rights of use granted.
2. Use of common areas within a subdivision shall be limited to residential dwelling units
contained within said subdivision.
3. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to municipal beach facilities.
4. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all new uses located within the shoreland
zone.
5. Shorefront common areas established before April 8, 2006 are exempt from the
preceding criteria if there has been no increase in rights of use granted since said date.
CC. Apartments Accessory to Commercial Uses
1. Purpose. The purpose of these standards is to allow the development of residential
dwelling units as an accessory use in commercial structures while ensuring a suitable
residential environment.
2. General Requirements. The Code Enforcement Office may issue a permit for one and
the Planning Board may issue a permit for two residential dwelling units, in a
commercial structure provided the following are met. Three or more residential
dwelling units in a commercial structure shall require subdivision approval.
a. The residential dwelling units shall be clearly incidental to the principal
commercial nature of the structure.
b. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a private, outdoor yard space adjacent
to the unit.
c. Each dwelling unit shall be provided two off-street parking spaces separate from
customer parking.
d. Subsurface sewage disposal shall be provided that complies with the State of
Maine Subsurface Sewage Disposal Rules.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
86
e. Each dwelling unit shall have access to and use of a minimum of 400 cubic feet
of private storage space within the individual dwelling unit or in common storage
facilities.
f. No access to the residential dwelling unit shall be via commercial space.
g. All provisions of the Building Code administered and enforced by the Town of
Turner and the National Life Safety Code shall be met.
DD. In-law Apartments
An in-law apartment meeting the following standards shall be considered to be part of a singlefamily
detached dwelling and shall not be considered to be a dwelling unit in terms of space and
bulk standards of Section 3.I. Apartments not meeting the standards for in-law apartments shall be
considered as a separate dwelling unit and shall meet all applicable standards of this Ordinance and
all other Ordinances and Codes.
1. The in-law apartment shall be accessory to the use of the premises as a single-family
detached dwelling and only one in-law apartment shall be created as part of a singlefamily
dwelling.
2. The in-law apartment shall be created within or attached to a single-family dwelling.
3. The person(s) occupying the in-law apartment must be a relative (a parent, grandparent,
brother, sister, child or grandchild related by blood, marriage, adoption or domestic
partner) of the principal occupant(s) of the single family dwelling and the burden of
proof of this relationship shall be on the home owner.
4. The creation of the in-law apartment unit shall not alter the single-family character of
the property. The following shall be met in creating the unit.
a. The in-law apartment must have a door that opens into the main dwelling and the
in-law apartment shall have separate front, rear or side entrance from the outside
to comply with applicable Code standards for egress.
b. Provisions for one additional parking space shall be made. No additional curb
cuts or driveways may be created to facilitate the in-law apartment.
c. Subsurface sewage disposal shall comply with all provisions of the State of
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
5. One of the units must be owner occupied.
6. Prior to the issuance of a permit for the creation of an in-law apartment by the Code
Enforcement Officer, the owner of the property shall sign a binding agreement limiting
the approval of in-law apartment unit for the purposes set forth in this subsection.
7. On each anniversary date of a permit issued under this Section the owner of the
property shall provide the Code Enforcement officer with a sworn Statement that the
person(s) residing in the in-law apartment meet the requirements in Section 3 above.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 87
SECTION 5. Site Plan Review
A. The purposes of this section are:
1. To provide municipal review of projects that potentially could affect the
environment and community;
2. To promote and protect the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the
Town of Turner;
3. To provide local protection from those particular nuisances which are not
governed by State law or regulation;
4. To balance the rights of landowners to use their land with the corresponding
right of abutting and neighboring landowners to live without undue disturbance
from noise, smoke, fumes, dust, odor, glare, traffic, storm water runoff or the
pollution of ground or surface waters;
5. To reduce the off-site external problems created by developments thereby
decreasing the cost of maintaining or improving municipal services;
6. To conserve the Town's natural beauty and visual character by ensuring that
structures, signs and other improvements and uses of land are sited and
developed with due regard to the aesthetic qualities of the natural terrain and
that proper attention is given to exterior appearances of structures, signs, other
improvements and uses of land; and
7. To implement the policies of the comprehensive plan.
B. Applicability
1. Site Plan Review by the Planning Board in conformity with the criteria and
standards of this section shall be required for the following:
a. Uses in each district which require site plan review as identified in Section
3.H.
b. A change in use when the new use is subject to Site Plan Review.
c. New uses of existing structures or land or existing uses that require Site
Plan Review as identified in Section 3.H. when such uses would alter
normal traffic patterns, or which would employ new materials and/or
processes.
d. Existing uses that require Site Plan Review as defined in Section 3.H
which seek to expand within any five (5) year period, with regard to floor
space, seating capacity or outdoor storage area, unless the expansion is
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 88
less than 30% and the Code Enforcement Officer makes written findings
that (1) the new use will comply with the standards in Section 5.E and
F,(2), the hours of operation of the new use will be similar to those
approved by the Planning Board for the previous use,and (3) traffic
volumes will not increase from a low volume generator to a medium or
high volume generator, or from a medium generator to a high volume
generator as defined in Section 5.E.4.d.
e. Resumption of conforming uses which have been abandoned for at least
five years which would require review if being newly established.
f. The initial placement of above or below ground storage tank(s) used for
fuels, hazardous substances or flammable and combustible liquids which
contain 10,000 gallons or more in total or in combination.
2. Site plan approval is not required for the following:
a. The normal and customary practices and structures associated with
agriculture as defined in Section 8.
b. Sand and gravel pits approved or established prior to March 10, 1990
including the expansion of those pits approved or established on the same
or adjacent parcels.
c. A new use of a structure and/or land area that has previously undergone
Site Plan Review and approval by the Planning Board, when the Code
Enforcement Officer makes written findings that (1) the new use will
comply with the standards in Section 5.E and F, (2) the structure or land
area will not be enlarged beyond what is permitted in Section 5.B.1.d.(3),
the hours of operation of the new use will be similar to those approved by
the Planning Board for the previous use, and (4) traffic volumes will not
increase from a low volume generator to a medium or high volume
generator, or from a medium generator to a high volume generator as
defined in Section 5.E.4.d.
C. Administration
1. Agenda. In order to avoid unnecessary delays in processing applications, the Planning
Board shall prepare an agenda for each regularly scheduled meeting. Applicants shall
request to be placed on the Planning Board's agenda no less than twenty-eight (28) days
in advance of a regularly scheduled meeting by contacting the Chair or the Planner.
Applicants who attend a meeting but who are not on the agenda may be heard but only
after all agenda items have been completed and then only if a majority of the Planning
Board so votes.
2. Preapplication Meeting. Applicants are encouraged to schedule a meeting with
the Planning Board prior to formal submission, to present a sketch plan and make a
verbal presentation regarding the site and the proposed project.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 89
a. Submission. The Preapplication Sketch Plan shall show, in simple sketch
form, the proposed development area, and other features in relation to
existing conditions. The Sketch Plan, which may be a free- hand
pencilled sketch, should be supplemented with general information to
describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed
development. It is recommended that the sketch plan be superimposed on
or accompanied by a copy of the Assessor's Map(s) on which the land is
located.
b. Contour Interval and On-Site Inspection. Within 30 days of the preapplication
meeting, the Planning Board shall determine and inform the
applicant, in writing, of the required contour interval on the development
plan nd conduct an on-site inspection of the property.
c. Ownership Interest. The applicant will furnish written evidence showing
his right, title or interest (option, contract for sale, etc.) in the property to
be developed to the Planning Board.
3. Application Procedure
a. Applications in Writing. All applications for site plan approval shall be
made in writing on forms provided for this purpose. Applications shall be
received by the Planning Board in order filed and when the Board agenda
permits.
All applications shall be made by the owner in the property or his agent, as
designated in writing or person which shows evidence of right, title or
interest.
b. Development Plan. A Development Plan meeting the standards of this
section shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Planning Board and
shall be approved by the Planning Board before any building permit may
be issued. In the case of proposed resumptions of uses which have been
abandoned for at least two years, Planning Board approval shall be required
before such uses may be resumed if such a use requires review if being
newly established.
c. The applicant, or his duly authorized representative, shall attend the
meeting of the Planning Board to discuss the Development Plan. The
Planning Board shall provide the applicant a dated receipt of a Site Plan
Review application at the Planning Board meeting where the application is
first presented.
d. At the first meeting held, the Board shall notify the applicant whether or not
the application is complete, and what, if any, additional submissions are
required for a complete application. The Planning Board may request the
applicant to provide additional information necessary for the Planning Board
review after a determination that a complete application has been received.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 90
e. The Board shall hold a public hearing on each application at the first meeting
the application is presented and shall publish notice of the date, time and
place of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality at least two times, the date of the first publication to be at least
seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be
mailed to all abutters of the proposed development at least seven (7) days
prior to the hearing by the Town of Turner.
Within 30 days of receipt of a complete application, or within another time
limit as may be otherwise mutually agreed to by the Planning Board and the
applicant, the Planning Board shall issue an order and approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the development plan. The Planning Board shall specify,
in writing, its findings of facts and reasons for any conditions or denial.
4. Additional Studies. The Planning Board may require the applicant to under- take
any study which it deems reasonable and necessary to demonstrate that the
requirements of the Ordinance are met. The costs of all such studies shall be borne
by the applicant.
5. Financial Guarantee. Prior to final approval or any Site Plan Review application,
the Planning Board may require the posting of a bond, escrow agreement or
letter of credit in such amount as is approved by the Planning Board. This
amount shall be sufficient to ensure completion of all improvements required as
conditions of approval of such plan in such form as approved by the Planning
Board and Town Selectmen. The Town shall have access to the site at all times to
review the progress of the work.
6. Conditions. The Planning Board may attach reasonable conditions to the Site Plan
Review approvals to ensure conformity with the standards and criteria of this
Ordinance.
7. Duration of Site Plan Review Approval: Construction or occupancy if no
construction is involved shall commence within two (2) years of the date of the
site plan review application approval and a certificate of occupancy issued within
three (3) years from the date of approval. If construction or occupancy is not
commenced or a certificate of occupancy issued within these limits, the site plan
review approval shall be null and void. A statement of this effect must appear in
the approval findings of facts and conclusion of law. Upon good cause shown and
the project complies with current zoning requirements, the Board may extend the
approval for additional two year period. The extension request must be made to the
Board at least sixty (60) days prior to the time of expiration. Upon determining that
a site plan review approval has expired under this paragraph, the Board shall have
a notice placed in the Registry of Deeds to that effect.
8. Minor Changes to Approved Plans. Minor changes in approved plans necessary
to address field conditions or structure orientation may be authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer provided that any such change does not affect the standards of
this Ordinance or alter the intent of the approval. A request for a minor change to an
approved plan shall be in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer. In making the
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 91
determination to approve a minor change to an approved plan the Code Enforcement
Officer shall consult with the Planning Board Chair or the Chair’s designee. All
approvals for minor changes to approved plans shall be in writing by the Code
Enforcement Officer. A copy of the written approval and revised site plan shall be
filed with the Planning Board within thirty (30) days from the date of the written
approval.
9. Approvals of site plans are dependent upon and limited to the proposals and
plans contained in the application and supporting documents submitted and
affirmed by the applicant. Any variation from the plans, proposals and supporting
documents, except minor changes as permitted in 9 above, is subject to review and
approval by the Planning Board.
10. Inspections. The Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer may require the
applicant to pay for professional oversight or inspections during construction of site
or building improvements proposed under this ordinance. If required, at least five
(5) days prior to commencing construction, the applicant shall:
a. Notify the Code Enforcement Officer in writing of the time when (s)he
proposes to commence construction so that the municipal officers can
arrange for inspection to be made. The inspecting official shall assure that all
municipal specifications, requirements and conditions of approval shall be met
during the construction and shall assure the satisfactory completions of
improvements required by the Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer.
b. Deposit with the municipal officers a check for the amount of 2% of the
estimated costs of construction and improvements to pay for the costs of
inspection. If upon satisfactory completion of construction and cleanup there
are funds remaining, the surplus funds shall be refunded to the applicant within
30 days. If the inspection account shall be drawn down by 90%, the applicant
shall deposit an additional 1% of the estimated costs of construction and
improvements.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 92
D. Site Plan Review Application Requirements
Applications for Site Plan Review shall be submitted on application forms provided
by the Town. Ten (10) copies of the completed application form, required plans, and
related information shall be submitted to the Planning Board no less than twenty-eight
(28) days prior to the regular scheduled meeting.
The Planning Board shall make available at Town Hall documents for review by the
Fire Department, Rescue Chief, Road Commissioner, and Superintendent of
Schools. The Planning Board can request that the Fire Chief, Rescue Chief, The
Road Commissioner and Superintendent of Schools provide the Planning Board
with official comments upon the adequacy of their department's existing capacity to
service the proposed development.
The submission shall contain at least the following exhibits and information:
1. The Development Plan shall consist of one or more reproducible, stable base
transparent original, to be filed at the Town Office, drawn at a scale of not
smaller than 50 feet to the inch or other scale as determined by the Planning
Board. Space shall be provided on the Development Plan for the signatures of
the Board and date with the following words. Approved: Town of Turner
Planning Board
2. A fully executed and signed copy of the application for Site Plan Review.
3. General information:
a. Name of owner(s) of record and address and applicant's name and address,
if different;
b. The name of the proposed development;
c. Names and addresses of all property owners within 100 feet of the edge of
the property line;
d. Sketch map showing general location of the site within the Town;
e. Boundaries of all contiguous property under the control of the owner or
applicant regardless of whether all or part is being developed at this time;
f. The tax map and lot number of the parcel or parcels;
g. A copy of the deed to the property, option to purchase the property or
other documentation to demonstrate right, title or interest in the property
on the part of the applicant; and
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 93
h. The name, registration number and seal of the land surveyor, architect,
engineer and/or person who prepared the plan.
4. Every application shall be accompanied by the written certificate of the Town's
Code Enforcement Officer that the applicant is not in violation of any Town
Ordinance regulating land use. No application shall be considered complete,
nor shall any application be in order for review or approval, unless accompanied
by this written certificate. The Planning Board shall not waive this requirement.
5. Existing Conditions
a. Zoning classification(s) of the property and the location of Zoning District
boundaries if the property is located in two or more Zoning Districts or
abuts a different district;
b. The bearings and distances of all property lines of the property to be
developed and the source of this information. The Planning Board may
require a formal boundary survey when sufficient information is not
available to establish, on the ground, all property boundaries;
c. Location and size of any existing sewer and water mains, culverts and
drains on the property to be developed and of any that will serve the
development from abutting streets or land;
d. Location, names and present widths of existing streets and rights-of-way
within or adjacent to the proposed development;
e. The location, dimensions and ground floor elevations of all existing
buildings on the site;
f. The location and dimensions of existing driveways, streets and parking
and loading areas and walkways on the site;
g. Location of intersecting roads or driveways within 200 feet of the site;
h. The location of open drainage courses, wetlands, significant wildlife
habitat, known or potential archaeological resource, historic buildings and
sites, significant scenic areas, mapped sand and gravel aquifers, rare and
endangered, other important natural features with a description of how
such features will be maintained or impacts upon them minimized;
i. The direction of existing surface water drainage across the site, if existing
condition contours are not provided;
j. If any portion of the property is in the 100-year floodplain, its elevation
shall be delineated on the plan;
k. The location and dimensions of existing and proposed signs; and
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 94
l. Location and dimensions of any existing easements and copies of existing
covenants or deed restrictions.
6. Proposed Development Activity
a. The location, dimensions, exterior elevations designed by a licensed
architect or licensed professional engineer, and exterior materials of all
proposed buildings and structures.
b. All existing and proposed setback dimensions.
c. The size, location and direction and intensity of illumination and method
of installation of all major outdoor lighting apparatus.
d. The type, size and location of all incineration devices.
e. The type, size and location of all machinery likely to generate appreciable
noise at the lot lines.
f. An on-site soils investigation report by a Maine Department of Human
Services licensed Site Evaluator. The report shall identify the types of
soil, location of test pits, and proposed location and design for the
subsurface waste water disposal system.
g. The type and location of water supply to be used.
h. The amount and type of any raw, finished or waste materials to be stored
outside of roofed buildings including their physical and chemical
properties, if appropriate,
i. All existing contours and proposed finished grade elevations of the entire
site and the system of drainage proposed to be constructed. Contour
intervals shall be specified by the Board.
j. The location, type and size of all curbs, sidewalks, driveways, fences,
retaining walls, parking space areas, and the layouts thereof, together with
their dimensions.
k. Landscape plan indicating all landscaped areas, fencing and size and type
of plant material proposed to be retained or planted with special emphasis
placed on front setback areas.
l. All existing or proposed rights-of-way, easements and other legal
restrictions which may affect the premises in question.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 95
m. The property lines of all properties abutting the proposed development,
including those properties across the street, with the names and addresses
of the owners as disclosed on the tax maps on file in the Town Office as of
the date of the development plan review application.
n. Traffic Data: Traffic data shall include the following:
1) The estimated peak-hour traffic to be generated by the proposal.
2) Existing traffic counts and volumes on surrounding roads.
3) Traffic accident data covering the most recent three-year period for
which such data is available.
4) The capacity of surrounding roads and any improvements which may
be necessary on such roads to accommodate anticipated traffic
generation.
5) The need for traffic signals and signs or other directional markers to
regulate anticipated traffic.
o. A storm water drainage and erosion control plan prepared by a Licensed
Professional Engineer.
p. A ground water impact analysis prepared by ground water hydrologist for
projects involving shared on-site water supply or sewage disposal facilities
with a capacity of 2,000 gallons or more per day.
q. A utility plan showing, in addition to provisions for water supply and
waste water disposal, the location and nature of electrical, telephone and
any other utility services to be installed on the site.
r. The location, width, typical cross-section, grades and profiles of any
proposed streets and sidewalks.
s. Construction drawings for streets, sanitary sewers, water and storm
drainage systems, designed and prepared by a professional engineer
registered in the State of Maine.
t. The estimated cost of the project and a written statement of the applicant’s
technical and financial capacity to carry out the project as proposed to
include:
1. Technical Ability
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 96
a. The applicant shall demonstrate the qualifications of the
contractors and consultants who will supervise, construct and
inspect the improvements associated with the proposed street.
b. In determining the applicant's technical ability the Board
shall consider the applicant's previous experience, the
experience and training of the applicant's consultants and
contractors, and the number and nature of any violations of
previous approvals granted to the applicant.
2. Financial Capacity.
The applicant shall demonstrate the availability of financial resources
sufficient to implement the proposed plan. In determining the
applicant’s financial capacity, the Board shall consider cost estimates
for implementation of the plan, letters from prospective sources of
financing, the proposed time frame for construction, and performance
guarantees required of the applicant.
u. If located in the direct watershed of a great pond, a phosphorous control
plan prepared in accordance with Section 5.E.8.
v. A copy of the approved Driveway or Entrance permit issued by the Maine
Department of Transportation if a driveway or entrance will enter onto
Route 4, Route 117, Route 219, Center Bridge Road, Upper Street or
Weston Road.
E. General Review Standards
The following criteria and standards shall be utilized by the Planning Board in
reviewing applications for Site Plan Review approval. The standards are not intended
to discourage creativity, invention and innovation. The Board shall approve the
Development Plan unless the Board finds that the applicant has not satisfied one or
more of the following criteria provided that the criteria were not first waived by the
Planning Board in accordance with Subsection G.
1. Preservation of Landscape. The landscape will be preserved in its natural
state, insofar as practical, by minimizing tree and soil removal, retaining
existing vegetation where desirable, and keeping any grade changes in character
with the general appearance of neighboring areas. If the site contains a scenic
site and/or view as identified in the Town of Turner Comprehensive Plan,
special attempts should be made to preserve the natural environment of the
skyline and view.
Environmentally sensitive areas which include wetlands, significant wildlife
habitat areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes greater than
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 97
20 percent, unique natural features and archaeological sites as identified in the
Town of Turner Comprehensive Plan shall be conserved to the maximum extent.
The Board shall assess the proposed activities impact upon scenic areas and
views as identified in the Town of Turner Comprehensive Plan. Where the
Board finds that the proposed activity would have an undue adverse effect on
identified scenic views, the Board shall require the applicant to minimize such
effects.
2. Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architectural Design Standards.
Turner encourages a greater sense of continuity and identity throughout its
commercial and village areas. Its Comprehensive Plan states that commercial
development will be encouraged to have landscaping and trees, pitched roofs
and a New England Village building character. The Planning Board shall
consider the following criteria in making a determination that this standard will
be met.
a. Architectural style must relate to the New England Village vernacular.
Evaluation of the appearance of a building shall be based on the quality of
its design, compatibility, and relationship to surroundings. In making the
determination that this criteria has been met the Planning Board shall find
that applicable sections of Appendix 1, Turner, Maine Design Standards
Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture, are complied with.
Appendix 1 is an adopted part of this Ordinance.
b. The Planning Board, in making the determination if this standard will be
met, shall consider the visibility of the proposed building(s) from public
ways and adjacent properties.
c. Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground or
buildings shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious
with the building, or they shall be located so visibility from any public
way is minimized.
d. Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept. Fixtures,
standards and all exposed accessories shall be harmonious with building
design.
e. Refuse and waste removal areas, service yards, storage yards, and exterior
work areas shall be screened from view from public ways, using materials
as stated in criteria for equipment screening.
3. Vehicular Access: The proposed development shall provide safe vehicular
access to and from public and private streets. When conflicts exist between this
section and a Driveway Permit or Entrance Permit onto Route 4, Route 117,
Route 219, Center Bridge Road, Upper Street or Weston Road, issued by the
Maine Department of Transportation, the most stringent or restrictive shall apply.
The applicant for a development to be located on a parcel of land of ten
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 98
(10) acres or greater or five hundred (500) feet or more of frontage on a public
street shall file a conceptual Access Master Plan with the Planning Board. The
conceptual Access Master Plan shall address the overall use of the parcel, the
overall vehicular circulation system within the parcel, and the coordination of
access into and out of the site. The conceptual Access Master Plan shall
demonstrate how the requirements for access as contained in this section will be
met.
After the conceptual master plan has been filed with the Planning Board, any
application for approval shall be consistent with the plan unless a revised plan is
filed.
a. Vehicular access to the site shall be on roads which have adequate capacity
to accommodate the additional traffic generated by the development.
Inter-sections on major access routes to the site within one half (1/2) mile
of any entrance road which are functioning at a Level of Service of C
or better prior to the development must function at a minimum at Level
of Service C after development. If any intersection is functioning at a
Level of Service D or lower prior to the development, the project must
not reduce the current level of service.
The geometrics of intersections that will serve the proposed development
shall be of such design to provide for safe turning movements.
The Planning Board may approve a development not meeting these
requirements if the applicant demonstrates improvements will be
consistent with the Maine Department of Transportation Highway Design
Guide, January 1994 Revision, and as may be revised and that:
1) A public agency has committed funds to construct the improvements
necessary to bring the level of access to this standard, or
2) The applicant shall assume financial responsibility for the
improvements necessary to bring the level of service to this standard
and will guarantee the completion of the improvements within one
(1) year of approval of the project.
b. Any exit driveway or driveway lane shall be so designed in profile and
grading and so located as to provide the following minimum sight distance
measured in each direction. The measurements shall be from the drivers
seat of a vehicle standing on that portion of the exit driveway from
distances between 10 and 15 feet behind the curbline or edge of shoulder,
with the height of the eye 3.5 feet to the top of an object 4.25 feet above
the pavement.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 99
Posted Speed Limit Sight Distance
(Standard Vehicle)
Sight Distance
(Larger Vehicle)
25 mph
30 mph
35 mph
40 mph
200'
250'
305'
360'
300'
375'
455'
540'
45 mph
50 mph
55 mph
425'
495'
570'
635'
740'
855'
If more than 30% of the traffic projected to use the entrance will be larger
vehicles the sight distances shown in the right hand column apply. Height
of the eye should be six (6) feet with height of object no more than 4.25
feet above the pavement.
c. Where more than one business or structure is located on a single parcel, all
vehicular access to and from a public or private road shall be via a common
access or entrance way(s) serving all business and structures except
as provided for herein.
d. The grade of any exit driveway or proposed street for a distance of fifty
(50) feet from its intersection with any existing street shall be a maximum
of three (3) percent.
e. The intersection of any access drive or proposed street must function at a
Level of Service of C following development if the project will generate
400 or more vehicle trips per 24-hour period or a level which will allow
safe access into and out of the project if less than 400 trips are generated.
f. Projects generating 400 or more vehicle trips per 24-hour period must
provide two or more separate points of vehicular access into and out of the
site.
g. Where a proposed development is to be located at the intersection of
Route 4, 117 or 219 and a minor or collector road, entrance(s) to and
exit(s) from the site shall be located only on the minor or collector road
provided that this requirement maybe waived where the applicant
demonstrates that existing site conditions preclude the location of a
driveway on the minor or collector road, or that the location of the
driveway on the minor or collector road would interfere with a
predominately residential neighborhood. In addition, this requirement
may be waived when an analysis conducted by a traffic engineer, retained
by the Planning Board, finds that the operation or safety at an intersection
of Route 4, 117 or 219 and a minor or collector road would be improved
with an entrance or exit from or onto Route 4, 117 or 219. Any such
entrance or exit shall be a restricted entrance or exit point to supplement
the primary entrance and exit from the minor or collector road. The
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 100
entrance or exit will maintain traffic carrying functions and minimize
congestion and crash potential.
h. Curb cuts or access points shall be limited to one per lot for all lots with
less than 200 linear feet or less of road frontage. For lots with greater than
200 feet of frontage, a maximum of one curb cut per 200 feet of frontage
shall be permitted to a maximum of three, provided the Planning Board
makes a finding that (a) the driveway design relative to the site
characteristics and site design provides safe entrance and exit to the site
and (b) no other practical alternative exists.
i. The maximum number of curbcuts to a particular site shall be governed by
the following:
1) No low volume traffic generator shall have more than one two-way
access onto a single roadway.
2) No medium or high volume traffic generator shall have more than
two two-way accesses or three accesses in total onto a single
roadway.
j. Curb cut widths and design shall conform to the following standards:
1) Low volume driveways: Defined as driveways with less than 50 vehicle
trips/day based on the latest edition of the Institute of Traffic Engineers' Trip
Generation Report, as the same may be amended from time to time shall:
a) have two-way operation;
b) intersect the road at an angle as close to 90 degrees as site conditions
permit, but at no less than 60 degrees;
c) not require a median;
d) slope from the gutter line on a straight slope of 3 percent or less for
at least 50 feet, with a slope no greater than 8 percent except where
unique site conditions permit a waiving of the slope standard to 10
percent; and
e) provide a geometric design suitable for the proposed vehicle use for the
project.
NOTE: The Planning Board may vary these standards due to unique
factors such as a significant level of truck traffic.
2) Median volume driveways with more than 50 vehicle trips/day but fewer
than 200 peak hour vehicle trips, based on the latest edition of the Institute
of Traffic Engineers' Trip Generation Report, as the same may be amended
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 101
from time to time, and generally including all land uses not in the low or high
volume groups, shall:
a) have either two-way or one-way operation;
b) intersect the road at an angle as close to 90 degrees as site conditions
permit, but at no less than 60 degrees;
c) not require a median;
d) slope from the gutter line on a straight slope of 3 percent or less for at
least 50 feet and a slope of no more than 6 percent thereafter, with the
preferred grade being a 4 1/2 percent, depending on the site; and
e) provide a geometric design suitable for the proposed vehicle use for
the project. If one-way driveways, the maximum width shall be 24
feet; if two-way, the maximum width shall be 36 feet.
NOTE: The Planning Board may vary these standards due to unique
factors such as a significant level of truck traffic.
3) High volume driveways defined as driveways with more than 200 peak
hour vehicle trips shall:
a) have two-way operations separated by a raised median of 6 to 10 feet
in width and a 50 to 100 feet length depending upon necessary
storage length for queued vehicles;
b) intersect with the road at an angle as close to go degrees as possible,
but at no less than 60 degrees;
c) be striped for 2 to 4 lanes with each lane 12 feet wide;
d) slope from the gutter line on a straight slope of 3 percent or less for at
least 75 feet and a slope of no more than 5 percent thereafter;
e) have a "STOP" sign control and appropriate "Keep Right" and "Yield"
sign controls for channelization; signalization may be required. Level
of service and traffic signal warrants should be conducted for all high
volume driveways; and provide a geometric design suitable for the
proposed vehicle use for the project. If one-way driveways, the
maximum width shall be 24 feet; if two-way, the maximum width shall
be 36 feet. However, if separate left and right exit lanes are required,
the maximum width may be greater.
NOTE: The Planning Board may vary these standards due to unique
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 102
factors such as a significant level of truck traffic.
Driveway
Minimum Corner Clearance (feet)
Intersection
Signalization
Intersection
Unsignalization
Low Volume <50-100 trips/day
150
50
Medium Volume >50-100 trips/day
<200 trips/hour
150
50
High Volume >200 trips/hour
500
250
f) Minimum distances between driveways serving the same parcel,
measured from point of tangency to point of tangency by type of
driveway, should be as follows:
Driveway Type
Minimum Spacing to Adjacent
Driveway by Driveway Type
Medium
(feet)
High w/o RT
(feet)
High w/RT
(feet)
Medium Volume
75
High Volume W/O RT
(without right-turn
channelization)
75
150
High Volume W/RT (with
right-turn channelization)
75
250
500
g) The minimum distance between driveway to property line, as
measured from point of tangency, should be:
Driveway Type
Minimum Spacing to
Property Line (ft.)
Low Volume
Medium Volume
High Volume (without right-turn
channelization)
High Volume (with right-turn channelization)
10
20
75
75
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 103
For lots with shared access, the driveway may be located along the
property line. The minimum spacing to property line may be varied if (1)
the safest point of access to the site is closer to the property line and (2)
there are at least 20 feet of separation between low volume driveways
serving adjacent parcels, 40 feet of separation between medium volume
driveways, and 150 feet of separation between high volume driveways.
h) When the proposed development is to be located on the opposite side of
an existing development, the driveway shall be directly opposite of the
existing driveway or separated from the opposite driveway by a minimum
of seventy-five (75) feet whenever possible.
i) When a conversion or expansion of an existing use is proposed at a
property with known traffic issues, access shall be upgraded to comply
with these standards. This requirement may be waived upon a written
finding that (a) the need to demolish or relocate an existing building on
the site or (b) denial of full access to Route 4, 117 or 219 where full
access presently exists and cannot be provided by Route 4, 117 or 21 9
or adjacent side street.
4. Pedestrian and Trail Access
The proposed development shall provide safe pedestrian access within the
project parcel and interconnection with existing facilities on abutting properties
including connection and/or preservation of existing snowmobile trails with
easements to maintain a multi-use trail system within the Town of Turner. To
preserve these opportunities, the Planning Board may require the applicants to
record easements or require conditions of approval which define future access
rights between properties to accomplish the goals of the Zoning Ordinance.
5. Off-Street Parking
a. A use shall not be extended and no structure shall be constructed or
enlarged unless sufficient off-street automobile parking space is provided.
The location of parking to the side or rear of buildings is encouraged.
b. Parking areas with more than two parking spaces on all nonresidential
uses shall be arranged so that it is not necessary for vehicles to back into
the street.
c. Where the development will abut an existing or potential parking area
provisions shall be made for internal vehicular connections.
d. Required off-street parking for all land uses shall be located on the same
lot as the principal building or facility. In the Village District, the Planning
Board may allow the required or provided off-street parking to be located
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 104
within 300 feet measured along lines of public access. Such off-lot
parking areas shall be held in fee simple by the owner of the use served
or in such other tenure as assures continued availability for parking as long
as the particular land will be needed for such use provided that if tenure
is other than ownership in fee simple, the form of tenure shall be approved
by the Selectmen before the request is considered by the Board. Evidence
of fee simple ownership or approved tenure shall be required.
e. The joint use of a parking facility by two or more principal buildings or
uses may be approved by the Planning Board where it is clearly
demonstrated that said parking facilities would substantially meet the intent
of the requirements by reason of variation in the probable time of
maximum use by patrons or employees of such establishments.
f. Access to parking stalls should not be from major interior travel lanes, and
shall not be immediately accessible from any public way.
g. Parking areas shall be designed to permit each motor vehicle to proceed to
and from the parking space provided for it without requiring the moving of
any other motor vehicles.
h. Parking aisles should be oriented perpendicular to stores or businesses for
easy pedestrian access and visibility.
i. In paved parking painted strips shall be used to delineate parking stalls.
Stripes should be a minimum of 4 inches in width.
j. In aisles utilizing diagonal parking, arrows should be painted on the
pavement to indicate proper traffic flow.
k. Off-street parking spaces shall comply with the following standards:
1) Except as provided below, each parking space shall contain a
rectangular area at least eighteen (18) feet long and nine (9) feet
wide. Lines demarcating parking spaces may be drawn at various
angles in relation to curbs or aisles, so long as the parking spaces so
created contain within them the rectangular area required by this
section.
2) Up to twenty (20) percent of required parking spaces may contain a
rectangular area of only eight (8) feet in width by fifteen (15) feet in
length. If such spaces are provided, they shall be conspicuously
designated as reserved for small or compact cars only.
l. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided to conform with the number
required in the following schedule.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 105
Activity Minimum Required Parking
Residential
with 2 or more bedrooms
with 1 bedroom
2 spaces per dwelling unit
1 ½ spaces per dwelling unit
Elderly Housing 1 ½ space per dwelling unit
Tourist home, boarding, lodging house,
motel, hotel, inn, bed & breakfast
1 space per room/unit rental and for each employee on the
largest shift
Church 1 space per three seats based upon maximum seating capacity
Schools
Primary
Secondary
Post-Secondary
1.5 spaces per classroom
8 spaces per classroom
1 space for each student and 1 space for
each faculty and staff member
Child care facility 1 space for every 4 children facility is licensed to care for
Private clubs or lodges 1 space per every 75 sq.ft. of floor space
Theater, auditoria, public assembly 1 space per three seats based upon maximum seating capacity
Funeral homes 1 space for every 100 sq.ft. of floor space
Medical care facilities 1 space for every 3 beds and every 2 employees on the
maximum working shift
Offices, banks 1 space for every 150 sq.ft. of floor space
Medical offices 1 space per employee and 5 spaces per physician
Veterinarian clinic 5 spaces/veterinarian
Retail and service businesses 1 space for every 250 sq.ft. of floor space
Barber/beauty shop 3 spaces/chair
Restaurant 1 space per 3 seats based upon maximum seating capacity
Industrial businesses 1 space/employee on maximum working shift
Warehouse, wholesale 1 space/500 sq.ft. of floor area
Flea market 3 spaces/table
Mixed use total of individual uses
Automobile repair garages and
gasoline filling stations
5 spaces for each bay or area used for repair work
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 106
Activity Minimum Required Parking
Library, museum, art gallery 1 space for 150 sq.ft. of floor space
Commercial recreation facility 1 space for each 100 sq.ft. of floor area
Motor vehicle sales 2 spaces- 25 or less vehicles displayed
3 spaces- 26-50 vehicles displayed
4 spaces- 51-75 vehicles displayed
5 spaces- 76-100 vehicles displayed
6 spaces- 101-150 vehicles displayed
1space- for each employee in the maximum working shift
NOTES:
1. Where the calculation of the aforementioned parking spaces results in a
fractional part of a complete parking space, the parking spaces required
shall be construed to be the next highest number.
2. The above are minimum standards, and additional parking spaces shall be
required by the Planning Board if necessary to provide off street parking.
3. Where floor space is to be used in calculating the number of required
parking stalls, gross floor area shall be used unless otherwise noted.
6. Surface Water. The proposed activity will not result in undue
surface water pollution. In making this determination, the Board
shall at least consider the elevation of land above sea level and its
relation to the floodplains, the nature of soils and subsoils and, if
necessary, their ability to adequately support waste disposal
and/or any other approved licensed discharge; the slope of the land
and its effect on effluent.
a. All stormwater improvements for any proposed site construction shall
be designed to be in compliance with the most current standards of the
Stormwater Management Law as administered by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection.
b. All proposed construction that fall below the minimum thresholds of
the Stormwater Management Law shall comply with the Conservation,
Erosion and Sediment Control standards outlined below.
7. Conservation, Erosion and Sediment Control. Erosion soil
and sedimentation of water-courses and water bodies shall be
minimized. The following measures shall be included, where
applicable, as part of any Site Plan Review and approval.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 107
a. Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall
be done in such a way as to minimize erosion.
b. Development shall keep cut-fill operations to a minimum and
ensure conformity with topography so as to create the least
erosion potential and so as to adequately handle surface water
runoff.
c. The disturbed area and the duration of exposure of the
disturbed area shall be kept to a practical minimum.
d. Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practical.
e. Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be used to protect exposed
critical areas during development.
f. The permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control
measure shall be installed as soon as practical on the site.
g. Until the disturbed area is stabilized, sediment in the runoff water
shall be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins,
silt traps or other acceptable methods.
h. Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation,
regrading or other development, it shall be the responsibility of
the developer causing such sedimentation to remove it from all
adjoining surfaces, drainage systems and watercourses and to
repair any damage at his or her expense as quickly as possible.
i. Maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses originating
and completely on private property is the responsibility of the
owner to the point of open discharge at the property line or at a
communal watercourse within the property.
j. The standards set forth in the Maine Erosion and Sediment Control
Handbook for Construction, Best Management Practices (March
1991 and as amended) shall be employed.
k. The most current standards set forth in the Stormwater
Management Law administered by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection shall be employed.
8. Phosphorous Export. Projects proposed within the direct watershed of a lake
or pond listed below shall be designed to limit phosphorus runoff to the levels
defined below. The Board shall keep an accurate record of permits issued by
watershed using an appropriate record keeping system, and shall review actual
development rates and recommend adjustments to the table at five year
intervals, subject to a reasonable appropriation by the Town to conduct such a
reassessment, or the availability of adequate State or regional grant programs or
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 108
technical assistance programs. Adjustments shall be made by amendment of
this ordinance and the town's comprehensive plan.
Lake
Protection
Level
Phosphorus
Loads
Allowable
Phosphorus
Export Per Acre
(pounds)
Bear Pond High 2.31 0.035
Blacksnake Pond High 0.13 0.024
Crystal Pond High 3.04 0.035
Lake Auburn High 3.74 0.0.82
Lard Pond High 0.85 0.034
Lily Pond High 2.16 0.0.39
Little Wilson Pond High 7.27 0.031
Mud Pond(1)
High 8.11 0.025
Mud Pond(2)
High 0.39 0.037
Mud Pond(3)
High 0.39 0.042
Pleasant Pond High 8.48 0.045
Round Pond High 0.35 0.038
Sandy Bottom Pond High 0.74 0.037
The Basin High 0.13 0.020
(1) North of Little Wilson Pond
(2) Mud Pond in Buckfield
(3) North of Sandy Bottom Pond
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 109
a. Phosphorus export from a proposed development shall be calculated
according to the procedures defined in "Phosphorus Control in Lake
Watersheds: A Technical Guide for Evaluating New Development"
(Maine DEP et.al., September 1989 with revision in 1992 and as may be
amended). Upon request, copies of all worksheets and calculations shall
be made available to the Planning Board.
b. Phosphorus control measures shall meet the design criteria contained in
"Phosphorus Control in Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide for
Reviewing Development" (Maine DEP et al., September 1989 with
revisions in 1992 or as may be amended). The Planning Board shall
require the reasonable use of vegetative buffers, limits on clearing, and
minimizing road lengths, and shall encourage the use of other nonstructural
measures prior to allowing the use of high-maintenance
structural measures such as infiltration systems and wet ponds.
9. Site Conditions
a. During construction, the site shall be maintained and left each day in a
safe and sanitary manner. Site area shall be regularly sprayed with an
environmentally safe product to control dust from construction activity.
b. Developed areas shall be cleared of all stumps, litter, rubbish, brush, weeds,
dead and dying trees, roots and debris, and excess or scrap building
materials shall be removed or destroyed immediately upon the request and
to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer prior to issuing an
occupancy permit.
c. Changes in elevation. No significant change shall be made in the elevation
or contour of any lot or site by the removal of earth to another lot or site
other than as shown on an approved Site Review Plan. Any non-permitted
removal of greater than 1,000 cu.yds. in a 12-month period must be
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board according
to Section 3.G.
10. Signs: All signs shall comply with standards set forth within this Ordinance.
11. Special Features. Exposed storage areas, exposed machinery installations,
service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings and structures, and similar
accessory areas and structures, shall be subject to such setbacks, plantings or
other screening methods as shall reasonably be required to prevent their being
incompatible with the existing or contemplated environment and the
surrounding properties.
12. Exterior Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be designed to encourage energy
efficiency, to ensure safe movement of people and vehicles, and to minimize
adverse impact on neighboring properties and public ways. Adverse impact is
to be judged in terms of hazards to people and vehicle traffic and potential
damage to the value of adjacent properties. Lighting shall be arranged to
minimize glare and reflection on adjacent properties and the traveling public.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 110
13. Emergency Vehicle Access. Provisions shall be made for providing and
maintaining convenient and safe emergency vehicle access to all buildings and
structures.
14. Municipal Services. The development will not have an unreasonable adverse
impact on the municipal services including municipal roads systems, fire
protection, police department, emergency medical unit, solid waste disposal,
schools, open spaces, recreational programs and facilities and other municipal
services and facilities. The Planning Board shall consider the input from the
Town's Department Heads and Superintendent of Schools in making a
determination of an unreasonable adverse impact. If the Board makes a finding
of unreasonable adverse impacts, the Planning Board, as a condition of
approval, may require the applicant to make or pay for required upgraded
municipal services necessitated by the development.
15. Water Supply. The development has sufficient water available for the intended
use. When the location of the water supply source will be a public water supply
as defined in Title 22 M. M.R.S.A. Section 2601, its location shall not restrict
the location of a subsurface sewage disposal system on adjacent parcels. If
subsurface sewage disposal will be restricted, the applicant shall obtain an
easement.
16. Ground Water. The proposed development shall not result in undue affect of
the quality or quantity of ground water. In making this determination, the Board
shall consider the location of aquifers and aquifer recharge areas, the nature of
the proposed development and its potential threat to ground water resources.
The Board may place conditions upon an application to minimize potential
impacts to the Town's ground water resources.
a. The development will not result in the existing ground water quality
becoming inferior to the physical, biological, chemical, and radiological
levels for raw and untreated drinking water supply sources specified in the
Maine State Drinking Water Regulations, pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A.,
Section 601. If the existing ground water quality is inferior to the State
Drinking Water Regulations, the development will not degrade the water
quality any further.
b. For above ground tanks used for storage of fuels, hazardous substances,
chemicals, industrial wastes and flammable or combustible liquids or other
potentially harmful raw materials, an impermeable diked area shall be
provided; the diked area must be sized to contain 110 percent of the
volume of the largest tank; roofed to prevent accumulation of rainwater in
the diked area and shall be property vented. There shall be no drains in
the facility. All concrete, whether walls or pads, shall be reinforced concrete
and shall be designed by a Professional Engineer Registered in the State
of Maine when required by the Planning Board.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 111
c. All above or below ground storage tank(s) used for the storage of fuels,
hazardous substances, chemicals, industrial wastes and flammable or
combustible liquids shall be designed and installed in accordance with all
applicable rules or standards set by the State of Maine, Maine State Fire
Marshal’s Office or the Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
17. Air Emissions. No emission of dust, ash, smoke or other particulate matter or
gases and chemicals shall be allowed which can cause damage to human or
animal health, vegetation or property by reason of concentration or toxicity,
which can cause soiling beyond the property boundaries, or which fail to meet
or cannot meet the standards set by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection.
18. Odor Control. The proposed development shall not produce offensive or
harmful odors perceptible beyond their lot lines either at ground or habitable
elevation. For the purpose of this subsection, when land of the applicant is
divided by a public way, the lot line shall not be considered to be the edge of the
right-of-way.
19. Noise. The proposed development shall not raise noise levels to the extent that
abutting or nearby residents are adversely affected.
a. The maximum permissible sound pressure level of any continuous, regular
or frequent or intermittent source of sound produced by any activity shall
be limited by the time period and land use which it abuts listed below.
Sound levels shall be measured at least 4 feet above ground at the property
boundary of the source.
Sound Pressure Level Limits Using the Sound Equivalent Level of
One Minute (Ieq 1) (measured in dB(a) scale)
7 a.m.10 p.m. 10 p.m.-7 a.m.
Residential 55 45
Commercial 65 55
Industrial 70 60
b. Noise shall be measured by a meter set on the A-weighted response scale,
fast response. The meter shall meet the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI 81 4-1961) "American Standard Specification for General
Purpose Sound Level Meters."
c. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the sound pressure
level regulations:
1. Noises created by construction and temporary maintenance activities
between 6:30 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 112
2. The noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency
reassure relief valves and any other emergency activity.
3. Traffic noise on public roads.
20. Sewage Disposal. The development shall provide for a suitable sewage
disposal.
a. All individual on-site systems will be designed by a licensed soil evaluate
in full compliance with the Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
b. The Planning Board may require an analysis and evaluation including
nitrate-nitrogen concentrations of the impacts of the subsurface sewage
disposal system on ground water. The Planning Board shall base its
determination for the need for an analysis and evaluation on density,
designed flows and nature of wastewater.
21. Waste Disposal. The proposed development will provide for adequate disposal
of solid wastes and hazardous wastes.
a. All solid waste will be disposed of at a licensed disposal facility having
adequate capacity to accept the project's wastes.
b. All hazardous waste will be disposed of at a licensed hazardous waste
disposal facility and evidence of a contractual arrangement with the
facility shall be submitted.
22. Buffer Areas. No industrial or commercial buildings or uses shall be
established in, or adjacent to, a residential use, or an existing agricultural use
unless a landscaped buffer strip is provided to create a visual screen between the
uses. Where no natural vegetation can be maintained or due to varying site
conditions, the landscaping screen may consist of fences, walls, tree plantings,
hedges or combinations thereof. The buffering shall be sufficient to minimize
the impacts of any kind of potential use such as: loading and unloading
operations, outdoor storage areas, vehicle parking, mineral extraction, waste
collection and disposal areas. Where a potential safety hazard to small children
would exist, physical screening or barriers shall be used to deter entry to such
premises. The buffer areas shall be maintained and vegetation replaced to
insure continuous year-round screening.
23. The applicant has adequate financial and technical capacity to meet these
standards.
24. The proposed activity is in conformance with the comprehensive plan.
25. Prior to issuance of a Building Permit by the Code Enforcement Officer of any
project which has received Site Plan Review approval, the applicant shall
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 113
provide proof to the Code Enforcement Officer that all necessary permits
required by the Natural Resource Protection Act, Site Location of Development
Act and Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act have been
obtained. Such proof of permits shall be placed in the Planning Board
application record.
F. Specific Standards
1. Sand and Gravel Pits
a. Any gravel pit which requires a permit from the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection under the Site Location of Development Act
shall obtain written approval from the Department of Environmental
Protection and approval by the Planning Board under the Site Plan Review
procedures of this Ordinance. In addition to the submissions requirements
contained in Section 5.D., the application and development plan shall
include items 1-15 in Section 5.F. I.e. below.
b. Any gravel pit or mineral extraction activity which will remove more than
5,000 cubic yards of product in 12 successive months or which does not
require a permit from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection
under the Site Location of Development Act shall require a permit from
the Planning Board. In addition to the submissions requirements
contained in Section 5.D., the application and development plan shall
include items 1-12 in Section 51.1.c. below.
c. Submission Requirements
1. The existing and proposed limits of excavation clearly delineated.
2. Location, function and ground area of all structures, facilities,
parking lots, roads, and mud runoff areas.
3. Entrance and exit layout.
4. Gates or other means for controlling access.
5. Pre- and post-development topography using an interval of ten foot
contours for pits of less than five (5) acres and no greater than 10
foot contours for pits of five (5) acres or more if deemed necessary
by the Planning Board.
6. Location of topsoil stockpile areas.
7. Areas where natural vegetation will be left and where plantings will
be made to screen the operation from view.
8. Slopes and vegetation for protecting adjacent structures.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
114
9. Location of any test pits or borings and observation wells
documenting the seasonal high water table.
10. Proposed disposal method of stumps and grubbings.
11. Plans and schedule for reclamation.
12. A spill preventing countermeasure plan to control spills of petroleum
products and other hazardous materials.
13. The phases of excavation and reclamation.
14. Surface drainage and watersheds on parcel, pre- and post-excavation.
15. For pits of five (5) acres or more, at least one cross section along the
long axis of the pit and another cross section at a right angle to it.
The cross section diagrams should show the existing grade, the
proposed final grade including maximum depth of elevation, depth
to ground water and the stratigraphy of the surficial deposits at the
site.
c. Review Criteria and Standards
1. A buffer strip of not less than 50 feet shall be maintained between
the location of any extraction of materials and all property lines.
This buffer strip may be reduced to 25 feet with written consent from
abutting property owners. The Planning Board may reduce the front
setback to twenty five feet from the right-of-way of a public road, if
in the opinion of the Planning Board, suitable buffers and fencing are
provided.
2. Buffers may be eliminated between abutting properties containing
pits provided the Planning Board is shown proof of written
permission of the abutting pit owners.
3. All petroleum products shall be kept out of the pit and no refueling
or oil changes shall be conducted in the pit unless such activities
comply with applicable standards promulgated by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection and a spill prevention and
countermeasure plan is provided.
4. There shall be no storage or dumping on the pit of any substances
that could produce harmful leachate unless such substances are
placed under cover and on impermeable, spill-proof base. Such
potentially deleterious substances include, but are not limited to salt,
rubbish, creosoted timber and petroleum products.
5. No oiling of access and haul roads is permitted.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
115
6. No gravel shall be excavated below a position that is 2 feet above the
seasonally high water table without approval of the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection and the Planning Board.
7. No ditches, trenches, pumping or other methods shall be used to
lower the water table to permit more gravel extraction than could
occur under natural conditions unless a plan for such activities has
been approved by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection and the Planning Board.
8. Access to the pit shall be strictly controlled.
9. All final reclaimed slopes shall not exceed a horizontal to vertical
ratio of 2:1.
10. Reclamation of the pit shall not be made with any substance that
could either have a harmful leachate or create an impermeable base.
11. Stumps and grubbings shall be disposed of in a manner approved by
the Planning Board and in conformance with all applicable State of
Maine regulations.
12. Suitable traffic control measures shall be made available by the
operator at all access points to public streets. Truck routes shall be
restricted to collector and arterial streets. When direct access is not
possible to a collector or arterial street, the Planning Board shall
designate a suitable route to such a street.
13. Upon cessation of the extraction of materials or upon the expiration
of the Planning Board approval, the site shall be rehabilitated in
accordance with a plan approved by the Board.
14. No part of any extraction operation including drainage and runoff
control features shall be permitted within one hundred (100) feet of
the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA, and within
seventy-five (75) feet of the normal highwater line of any other
water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland as
defined.
2. Ground Water Protection
a. In addition to the standards contained in Section 5. E. 16., the following
standards shall be utilized by the Planning Board for reviewing
development applications located on a mapped sand and gravel aquifer.
b. The boundaries of sand and gravel aquifers shall be as delineated on the
Sand and Gravel Aquifer Map prepared by the Maine Geological Survey
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
116
labeled Map 16 and identified as Open-File Report No. 85-82d, Plate 3 of
5.
c. When the boundaries of the sand and gravel aquifer are disputed due to
lack of sufficient detail on available maps, the applicant or agent may
submit hydro geologic evidence prepared by a geologist certified in the
State of Maine which identifies actual field locations of the aquifer
boundaries within the project area. The Planning Board may require actual
field identification if they believe the Maine Geological Survey Maps
are incorrect.
d. Hydrogeologic Study. Based on the size, location, surrounding uses or
other characteristics of the proposed use or site to determine compliance
with the requirements of this section and the water quality criteria of the
Site Plan Review, the Planning Board may require submittal by the
applicant of a hydro geologic impact study. The impact study shall be
prepared by a State of Maine Certified Geologist with experience in hydro
geology. The study shall contain the following components unless waived
by a specific vote of the Board.
1. A map showing: (1) soil types; (2) surficial geology on the property;
(3) the recommended sites for individual subsurface waste water
disposal systems and wells in the development; and (4) direction of
ground water flow. (The Planning Board expects the detail of this
study to vary with the intensity of the development.)
2. The relationship of surface drainage conditions to ground water
conditions.
3. Documentation of existing ground water quality for the site.
4. A nitrate nitrogen analysis or other contaminant analysis as
applicable including calculation of levels of the property line(s) and
well(s) on the property.
5. A statement indicating the potential sources of contamination to
ground water from the proposed use and recommendations on the
best technologies to reduce the risks.
6. For water intensive uses, analysis of the effects of aquifer drawdown
on the quantity and quality of water available for other water
supplies or potential water supplies.
7. The Planning Board may require installation and regular sampling of
water quality monitoring wells for any use or proposed use deemed
to be a significant actual or potential source of pollutants or
excessive drawdown. The number, location and depth of monitoring
wells shall be determined as part of the hydro geologic study, and
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
117
wells shall be installed and sampled in accordance with "Guidelines
for Monitoring Well Installation and Sampling" (Tolman, Maine
Geologic Survey, 1983). Water quality sample results from
monitoring wells shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer
with evidence showing that contaminant concentrations meet the
performance standard for pollution levels.
8. A list of assumptions made to produce the required information.
d. Conditions/Standards
In addition to the standards contained in Section 5.D. 16, the following
standards shall be met:
1. No use including home occupations shall dispose of other than
normal domestic waste water on-site without approval of the permit
granting authority. Disposal of waste water shall be in strict
compliance with the Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules
and other relevant State and local laws, rules and ordinances.
2. Indoor use or storage facilities where hazardous materials, wastes or
other liquids with the potential to threatened ground water quality
are used or stored shall be provided with containment which is
impervious to the material being stored and have the capacity to
contain 10 percent of total volume of the containers, or 110 percent
of the volume of the largest container, whichever is larger.
3. Petroleum and Other Hazardous Material or Waste Transfer. A Spill
Control and Countermeasure Plan shall be submitted and approved
by the Planning Board.
4. In those areas identified as sand and gravel aquifers as defined in
Section 5.F.2.b. The following land uses are prohibited unless the
Planning Board finds that no discharges will occur such that water
quality at the property line will fall below State Drinking Water
Standards and all provisions of this ordinance are met.
dry cleaners
photo processors
printers
auto washes
Laundromats
meat packers/slaughter houses
salt piles/sand-salt piles
wood preservers
leather and leather products
electrical equipment manufacturers
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
118
plastic/fiberglass fabricating
chemical reclamation facilities
industrial waste disposal/impoundment areas
landfills/dumps/transfer stations
junk and salvage yards
graveyards
chemical manufacturing
pesticide/herbicide stores
metal platers
concrete/asphalt/tar/coal companies
3. Motor Vehicle Sales
Except where so indicated, motor vehicle sales shall be subject to and comply with the following
standards in addition to all applicable standards contained in Sections 5.B and 5.E.
a. All new or expanding motor vehicle sales businesses shall provide for buffering
along roadways and abutting residential boundary lines. All areas within a buffer not
covered by trees and shrubs shall be planted with grass or other suitable ground
cover.
b. Parking for outdoor motor vehicle display, required customer and employee parking
shall be designated on the site plan.
c. The entire motor vehicle display area and off street parking area shall be paved and a
perimeter curb or barrier provided to prevent encroachment of the vehicle for sale
into the required setback and landscape areas.
d. There shall be a minimum area of 10 feet x 20 feet designated for each motor vehicle
to be displayed outdoors. The 10 foot x 20 foot designated display area shall not
include parking areas for employees and customers, entrances, exists, aisles, or
unloading and loading areas. The Planning Board may vary the size of the designated
display area if sales will be primarily larger vehicles.
e. Adequate employee and customer parking must be provided in off street parking
spaces in accordance with Section 5.E.5.m. The employee and customer parking shall
be clearly designated and shall not be used for parking, storage or display of motor
vehicles for sale, rent, or hire.
f. The project site shall be designed so all loading and unloading of motor vehicles
from vehicle carriers are on-site.
g. The lot must contain a permanent building, containing a foundation and meeting
applicable Building Code Standards.
h. There shall be no outdoor storage of part vehicles and vehicle parts.
i Vehicles and equipment must be in operational condition.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
119
j. Any legally established motor vehicle sales business that is in compliance with this
section shall be allowed to expand on its current site and/or extend the use onto a
contiguous parcel of land and shall be required to comply with section d above in
regards to the display area requirement added only. This provision is not applicable
to the pre-existing portion of the sales lot.
k. Any legally established motor vehicle sales business that is not in compliance with
this section shall be allowed to expand on its current site and/or extend the use onto a
contiguous parcel of land and shall be required to comply with sections a- i above.
This provision is not applicable to the pre-existing portion of the sales lot.
4. Medical Marijuana Establishments
In addition to the review standards contained in Section E, General Review Standards,
Medical Marijuana Establishments shall be subject to the following provision.
a. Authority. This section is enacted pursuant to authority granted under 30-A
M.R.S. § 3001 and under 22 M.R.S. § 2423-A(14) and 22 M.R.S. § 2429-D. The
Town of Turner having approved a warrant article adopting new, and amending its
existing, ordinances allowing registered caregiver retail stores, marijuana testing
facilities and manufacturing facilities to operate within the municipality.
b. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide procedures and standards
relating to the operation of medical marijuana establishments and to require their
annual licensing.
c. Registered Dispensaries. The Town has intentionally omitted any regulation
relating to Registered Dispensaries because the Town has not adopted or amended
an ordinance or approved a warrant article allowing registered dispensaries to
operate within the municipality.
d. Site Plan Review and License Required. No person shall operate a medical
marijuana establishment, nor shall any property owner permit the use of his or her
premises to be operated as a medical marijuana establishment, without completing a
site plan review, and receiving approval from the Planning Board. Additionally, the
Applicant must obtain a license from the Board of Selectmen prior to commencing
operations pursuant to the Medical Marijuana Establishment License for Registered
Caregivers Ordinance.
e. Location of Medical Marijuana Establishments. Medical Marijuana
Establishments may be located in zoning districts pursuant to Section 3(H) of this
Ordinance.
i. In addition to the zoning district restrictions, Medical Marijuana
Establishments shall not be located within five-hundred (500) feet of an
existing public or private school, certified family child care provider facility,
park, playground, and/or church, as measured from the Medical Marijuana
Establishments’ actual structure or controlled area to the property line of the
existing public or private school, certified family child care provider facility,
park, playground, and/or church.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
120
f. Additional Site Plan Review Documentation. In addition to an applicant’s site plan
review application, an applicant for a Medical marijuana establishment shall provide
the Planning Board, with the following supporting materials:
i. A statement as to the precise nature of the business with a description of
the nature of all products and services offered to its customers.
ii. A description of the premises for which the approval is sought, including a
plan of the premises and a list of all equipment, parts and inventory used in
the operation of the medical marijuana establishment.
iii. Evidence of an interest in the premises in which the medical marijuana
establishment will be located, together with the written consent of the
owner of the premises for such use, if the applicant is not the owner.
iv. Evidence of all land use approvals or conditional land use approvals
required to operate the medical marijuana establishment, or applications
that have been filed and are pending for the required approvals, such as,
conditional or special use approval, change of use permits or approvals,
approvals may be applied for as part of the site plan review.
v. An operator of a Medical Marijuana Establishment shall prepare an
Operations Manual and Safety Plan and be submitted with the application.
The Operations Manual and Safety Plan shall describe, at a minimum,
production and building security, hours of operation, provisions and
maintenance of ventilation and odor control, storage and use of hazardous
materials, including but not limited to, chemicals and gases, waste
management, and contamination protocols. The Operations Manual and
Safety Plan shall be maintained at the facility and the Town of Turner Fire
and Rescue Departments.
g. Operating Requirements. In addition to normal site plan review requirements, the
applicant shall demonstrate to the Planning Board that the applicant has the
knowledge, skill, and ability to comply with the following operation requirements.
i. Fixed location. The premises shall be fixed, permanent locations. Applicant
shall not operate the Medical marijuana establishments in other than the
permitted premises, such as at farmer’s markets, farm stands or kiosks.
ii. Security.
1. A Medical marijuana establishment shall have lockable doors and windows and
shall be served by an alarm system.
2. Additional security requirements for Registered caregiver retail store, Marijuana
Manufacturing facility, and Marijuana testing facility.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
121
(a) A Registered caregiver retail store, Marijuana Manufacturing facility, or
Marijuana testing facility shall have video surveillance capable of
covering the exterior and interior of the facility. The video surveillance
system shall be operated with continuous recording twenty-four hours
per day, seven days per week and video shall be retained for a minimum
duration of thirty (30) days. Such records shall be made available to law
enforcement agencies when investigating a criminal complaint.
(b) A Registered caregiver retail store, Marijuana Manufacturing facility, or
Marijuana testing facility shall have exterior spot lights with motion
sensors covering the full perimeter of the building(s), subject to other
ordinances and the Planning Board’s discretion.
i. Ventilation.
1. A Medical marijuana establishment shall comply with all odor and air
pollution standards established by statute or ordinance, or as a condition
of approval by the Planning Board.
2. A Medical marijuana establishment shall have an odor mitigation system
installed that has been approved by a Maine licensed engineer,
indicating that the system will provide odor control sufficient to ensure
that no odors are perceptible off the premises.
ii. Waste disposal. A Medical marijuana establishment shall not dispose of waste
and/or residue from the growth, cultivation, processing, and storage of medical
marijuana in an unsecured waste receptacle not in its possession and control.
iii. Loitering. The Medical marijuana establishment’s owner/operator shall make
adequate provisions to prevent patrons or other persons from loitering on the
premises. It shall be the permit holder’s obligation to ensure that anyone found to
be loitering or using marijuana or marijuana products in the parking lot or other
outdoor areas of a permitted premises is ordered to leave.
iv. Compliance with requirements of state and local law. A medical marijuana
establishment shall meet all operating and other requirements of state and local law.
To the extent the state has adopted or adopts in the future any law or regulation
governing medical marijuana establishments that conflicts in any way with the
provisions of this ordinance, the more restrictive shall control.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
122
G. Waivers
Any requests for waivers from submission requirements and/or review standards shall
be in writing. Waiver requests shall indicate the requirements requested to be waived
and shall indicate what special circumstances exist that the required improvements or
standards are not necessary to provide for the public health, safety, or welfare, or are
inappropriate because of inadequate or lacking connecting facilities adjacent to or in
proximity of the proposed development.
Where the Board finds, based on written justification by the applicant, and makes
written findings of fact that due to extraordinary and unnecessary hardships that may
result from strict compliance of this Ordinance, or where there are special
circumstances of a particular application, certain required improvements or review
standards are not necessary to provide for public health, safety or welfare, or are
inappropriate because of inadequate or lacking connecting facilities adjacent to or in
proximity of the proposed development, it may waive this requirement, subject to
appropriate conditions provided that the performance standards of this ordinance have
been or will be met. Waivers may not be granted if the waiver will have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of the Comprehensive Plan, this Ordinance, or any
other ordinance or law, or if this ordinance expressly does not allow a waiver from the
requirement a waiver is sought. In granting waivers, the Planning Board shall require
such conditions as will assure the purpose of this ordinance is met.
H. Performance Guarantees
1. Types of Guarantees: With submittal of the application for a street approval, the
applicant shall indicate one of the following performance guarantees that will be
provided for an amount adequate to cover the total construction costs taking into
account the time-span of the construction schedule and the inflation rate for
construction costs.
a. Either a certified check payable to the Town or a savings account or
certificate of deposit naming the Town as owner for the establishment of
an escrow account;
b. A performance bond payable to the Town issued by a surety company
approved by the Municipal Officers;
c. An irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution establishing
funding for the construction from which the Town may draw if
construction is inadequate approved by the Municipal Officers; or
d. An offer of conditional agreement.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
123
The conditions and amount of performance guarantee shall be determined by the
Board with the advice of the Town Engineer, Road Commissioner and Municipal
Officers.
2. Contents of Guarantee: The performance guarantee shall contain a construction
schedule, cost estimates for each major phase of construction taking into account
inflation, provisions for inspections of each phase of construction, provisions for
the release of part or all of the performance guarantee to the developer, and a date
after which the developer will be in default, and the Town shall have access to
the funds to finish construction.
3. Escrow Account: A cash distribution to the establishment of an escrow account
shall be made by either a certified check made out to the municipality, the direct
deposit into a savings account, or the purchase of a certificate of deposit. For any
account opened by the applicant, the municipality shall be named as owner or coowner,
and the consent of the municipality shall be required for a withdrawal.
Any interest earned on the escrow account shall be returned to the applicant
except for any portion of the interest earned which was needed in addition to the
principal of the escrow account to pay for completion of the required
improvements.
4. Performance Bond: A performance bond shall detail the conditions of the bond,
the method for release of the bond or portions of the bond to the applicant, and
the procedures for collection by the municipality. The bond documents shall
specifically reference the project for which approval is sought.
5. Letter of Credit: An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other lending
institution shall indicate that funds have been set aside for the construction of the
street and may not be used for any other project or loan.
6. Conditional Agreement. The Board, at its discretion may permit for the
applicant to enter into a binding agreement with the municipality in lieu of the
other financial performance guarantees. Such an agreement shall provide for
approval of the application on the condition that building permits be issued until
either:
a. It is certified by the Board, or its agent, that all of the required
improvements have been installed in accordance with this Ordinance
regulations and the regulations of the appropriate utilities; or
b. A performance guarantee, acceptable to the municipality, is submitted in
an amount necessary to cover the completion of the required
improvements at an amount adjusted for inflation and prorated for the
portions of the required improvements already installed.
Notice of the agreement and any conditions shall be recorded by the applicant
subdivider at the Registry of Deeds. Release from the agreement shall follow
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
124
the procedures for release of the performance guarantees contained in Section 7.
Proof of recording shall be provided by the applicant to the Board.
7. Release of Guarantee: Prior to the release of any part of the performance
guarantee, the Board shall determine to its satisfaction that the proposed
improvements meet or exceed the design and construction requirements for that
portion of the improvements for which the release is requested.
8. Default: If, upon inspection, it is found that any of the required improvements
have not been constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications filed
as part of the application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall so report in writing
to the Municipal Officers, the Board, and the applicant or builder. The Municipal
Officers shall take any steps necessary to preserve the Town’s rights.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
125
SECTION 6. Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
A. Administering Bodies and Agents
1. Code Enforcement Officer
a. Appointment. A Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed or reappointed
annually by July 1st by the Municipal Officers.
b. Powers and Duties. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the following
powers and duties:
1. Enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. Act upon permit application that the Code Enforcement Officer is
authorized to approve, refer permits requiring Site Plan Review approval to
the Planning Board, and refer requests for variances and administrative
appeals to the Board of Appeals.
3. Enter any property at reasonable hours with the consent of the property
owner, occupant or agent, to inspect the property or structure for
compliance with the laws or ordinances set forth in this section.
4. Investigate complaints and reported violations.
5. Keep written inspection reports and thorough records.
6. Issue violation notices.
7. Participate in appeals procedures.
8. Appear in court when necessary.
9. Confer with citizens in the administration and enforcement of this
Ordinance.
2. Planning Board. The municipal Planning Board shall be responsible for reviewing
and acting upon applications for Site Plan Review approval and as may be required by
other provisions of this Ordinance. Following site plan review approval, applicants
shall return to the Code Enforcement Officer for a building permit.
3. Board of Appeals. A Board of Appeals shall be created in accordance with the
provisions of Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 2691.
B. Permits Required
1. After the effective date of this Ordinance, no person shall engage in any activity or use
of land requiring a permit in the district in which such activity or use would occur
without first obtaining a permit. Notwithstanding the issuance of a permit or permits,
no person shall engage in any activity or use of land in violation of this or any other
ordinance of the Town of Turner. A person who is issued a permit pursuant to this
Ordinance in the Shoreland Area shall have a copy of the permit on site while work
authorized by the permit is performed.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
126
2. Applications for permits shall be submitted in writing. The Code Enforcement Officer
or Planning Board may require the submission of information which is necessary to
determine conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
3. All building permits for permitted uses shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement
Officer.
4. No building permit shall be issued for any structure or use involving the construction,
installation or alteration of plumbing facilities unless a plumbing permit for such facilities
has first been secured by the applicant or his authorized agent, according to the
requirements of this Ordinance.
5. Permits shall not be denied if the proposed use is found to be in conformance with the
provisions of this Ordinance. All permits shall either be approved or denied within 60
days of receipt of a completed application, including all information required except as
otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
6. Except for the Shoreland Area, all permits and approvals issued by the Planning Board
or Code Enforcement Officer shall expire if a start to construction of the building or
structure, or commencement of the use is not begun within two (2) years after the date
on which the permit or approval was issued except as may be provided for in other
sections. Upon good cause shown, the person or board issuing the original permit or
approval may extend its effectiveness for an additional six months. Any permits issued
prior to July 1, 1992, will have one year from the effective date of this Ordinance in
which to commence building or use. After the expiration of the time periods set forth
above, permits shall lapse and become void.
In the Shoreland Area, permits shall expire one year from the date of issuance if a
substantial start is not made in construction or in the use of the property during that
period. If a substantial start is made within one year of the issuance of the permit, the
applicant shall have one additional year to complete the project, at which time the
permit shall expire.
7. In addition to the standards contained elsewhere in the Ordinance, the Planning Board
shall consider the following in the Shoreland Area as defined.
a. Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
b. Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to surface waters;
c. Will adequately provide for disposal of all wastewater,
d. Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird, or
other wildlife habitat;
e. Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points of access to inland
waters;
f. Will protect archaeological and historic resources as designated in the
comprehensive plan;
g. Will avoid problems associated with flood plain development and use.
8. Inspections. The Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer may require the applicant
to pay for professional oversight or inspections during construction of site or building
improvements proposed under this ordinance. If required, at least five (5) days prior
to commencing construction, the applicant shall:
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
127
a. Notify the Code Enforcement Officer in writing of the time when (s)he proposes
to commence construction so that the municipal officers can arrange for
inspection to be made. The inspecting official shall assure that all municipal
specifications, requirements and conditions of approval shall be met during the
construction and shall assure the satisfactory completions of improvements
required by the Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer.
b. Deposit with the municipal officers a check for the amount of 2% of the estimated
costs of construction and improvements to pay for the costs of inspection. If upon
satisfactory completion of construction and cleanup there are funds remaining, the
surplus funds shall be refunded to the applicant within 30 days. If the inspection
account shall be drawn down by 90%, the applicant shall deposit an additional
1% of the estimated costs of construction and improvements.
9. Installation of Public Utility Service. A public utility, water district, sanitary district
or any utility company of any kind may not install services to any new structure located
in the Shoreland Area unless written authorization attesting to the validity and currency
of all local permits required under this or any previous Ordinance has been issued by
the appropriate municipal officials or other written arrangements have been made
between the municipal officials and the utility.
C. Fees
All applications for a permit, appeal, variance, Site Plan Review or petition for an ordinance
text or map amendment shall be accompanied by the following fee: The Selectmen, upon
recommendation of the Planning Board, shall have the authority to revise the fee schedule
after holding a public hearing.
1. Permits issued by Code Enforcement Officer: not requiring a building permit: $25.00.
No fee is required for a permit for Timber Harvesting in the Resource Protection
District.
2. Site Plan Review: An application for site plan approval shall be accompanied by a fee
of $50.00 plus $10.00 per 1,000 sq.ft. or portion thereof of gross floor area. For mining
operations and outdoor based uses such as but not limited to parking, storage areas,
cemeteries, golf course, sludge spreading, (not associated with production agriculture),
septic disposal sites, recreation areas and campgrounds and for structures without floor
areas such as communication towers, there shall be a fee of $150.00. This application
fee shall be paid by check payable to the Town of Turner, Maine. This fee shall not be
refundable.
There shall be an additional payment of $150.00 per 2,000 sq.ft. or portion thereof of
gross floor area, parking and storage area. For mining operations and outdoor based
uses such as but not limited to cemeteries, golf courses, sludge spreading, (not
associated with production agriculture), septage disposal sites, recreation areas and
campgrounds and for structures without floor areas such as communication towers,
there shall be an additional payment of $500.00. This portion of the application fee
shall be known as the Planning Board Review Escrow Account. The initial payment
into the Planning Board Review Escrow Account shall in no case exceed $3,000.00.
The monies shall be made by check payable to the Town of Turner, Maine. These
funds or portion thereof may, from time to time, be used by the Town, at the request of
the Planning Board, for purposes to be determined by the Planning Board in order to
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
128
make payments for reasonable costs, expenses and services incurred by, or contracted
for by the Town through the Planning Board at its discretion which relates directly to
the review of the Site Plan Review Application. Such services may include, but need
not be limited to, consulting engineering fees, architectural fees, land use planner fees
and attorney fees. All such fees must relate to the review of the application pursuant to
the review criteria of the Town of Turner Ordinances and the laws of the State of
Maine. If the balance in the applicant's portion of the Planning Board Review Escrow
Account shall be drawn down by 75 percent, the Planning Board shall require that an
additional 50 percent of the original Planning Board Review Escrow Account Fee be
deposited. The Planning Board shall continue to notify and require an additional 50
percent of the original Planning Board Review Escrow Account Fee be deposited as
necessary whenever the balance of the account is drawn down by 75 percent of the
original deposit. The Town, at the request of the Planning Board shall refund all the
remaining monies in the account upon payment of all costs and services related to the
Planning Board review. Such payment of remaining monies shall be made no later
than thirty (30) days after the approval of the application, denial of application, or
approval with condition of the application. Such refund shall be accompanied by a
final accounting of expenditures from the fund. The monies in such fund shall not be
used by the Planning Board for any enforcement purposes.
3. Permits except Site Plan Review Issued by the Planning Board: $25.00
4. Administrative Appeal: $75.00
5. Variance Appeal: $75.00
6. Signs
a. Permanent Signs $25.00
plus $0.25 per square foot of area
b. Temporary Signs No fee
7. Zoning Ordinance Text and/or Map Amendments $100.00
8. Site Plan Review Amendment for projects approved but not constructed or changes to
the approved application where there will be no increase in project size. $25.00
+ $200.00 for Planner review
9. Site Plan Review Amendment for projects approved but not constructed where there
will be an increase in the project size. All fees required above for the areas to be
increased in size.
10. A change in use that involves no enlargement of structures, addition of parking area
and/or outdoor storage when the new use is subject to Site Plan Review.
$100.00
+$200.00 of Planner Review
D. Procedure for Administering Non-Site Plan Review Permits
Within 30 days of the date of receiving a written application, the Planning Board or Code
Enforcement Officer, as indicated in Section 3. H., shall notify the applicant in writing either
that the application is a complete application, or, if the application is incomplete, that specified
additional material is needed to make the application complete. The Planning
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
129
Board or the Code Enforcement Officer, as appropriate, shall approve or deny all permit
applications in writing within 60 days of receiving a completed application. However, if the
Planning Board has a waiting list of applications such approval or denial shall occur within
60 days after the first available date on the Planning Board's agenda following receipt of the
completed application, or within 30 days of the public hearing, if one is held. Permits shall
be approved if the proposed use or structure is found to be in conformance with the purposes
and provisions of this Ordinance. Permits may be made subject to reasonable conditions to
insure conformity with the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance, and the permittee shall
comply with such conditions. If a permit is either denied or approved with conditions, the
reasons as well as conditions shall be stated in writing. No approval shall be granted for an
application involving a structure if the structure would be located in an unapproved
subdivision or would violate any other local ordinance or regulation or any State law which
the municipality is responsible for enforcing.
The burden of proof that a proposed land use activity is in conformity with the purposes and
provisions of this Ordinance shall lie with the applicant.
E. Enforcement
1. Enforcement Procedure
a. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of
this Ordinance. If the Code Enforcement Officer shall find that any provision is
being violated, he or she may notify in writing the person responsible for such
violation indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary
to correct it which may without limitation include discontinuance of illegal use of
land, buildings or structures, or work being done, removal of illegal buildings or
structures, and abatement of nuisance conditions. A copy of such notices shall be
submitted to the municipal officers and be maintained as a permanent record.
The failure of the CEO to follow the notice procedure set forth in this subsection
shall not prevent the Municipal Officers from taking legal action to enforce this
ordinance and to pursue all available legal remedies, including without limitation,
injunctive relief, fines and attorneys fees.
b. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete record of all essential
transactions of the office, including applications submitted, permits granted or
denied, variances granted or denied, revocation actions, revocation of permits,
appeals, court actions, violations investigated, violations found, and fees
collected..
2. Consent Agreements: The municipal officers, or their authorized agent, are hereby
authorized to enter into administrative consent agreements for the purpose of
eliminating violations of this Ordinance and collecting fines without court action.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
130
3. Legal Actions: When the above action does not result in the complete correction or
abatement of the violation or nuisance condition, the Municipal Officers, upon notice
from the Code Enforcement Officer, are hereby directed to institute any and all actions
and proceedings, either legal or equitable, including seeking injunctions of violations
and the imposition of fines, that may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions
of this Ordinance in the name of the municipality.
4. Fines: Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowners agent or a
contractor, who orders or conducts any activity in violation of this Ordinance shall be
penalized in accordance with Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 4452. Each day the violation
exists shall be considered a separate violation.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
131
SECTION 7. Appeals
A. Establishment
A Board of Appeals is hereby created in accordance with the provisions of Title 30-A,
M.R.S.A. Section 2691. The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, recording
the vote of each member on all matters coming before the Board. The minutes of the Board,
and all correspondence, shall be a public record. Three members of the Board shall constitute
a quorum for conducting a meeting and taking action.
B. Powers and Duties
1. Administrative Appeals: To hear and decide administrative appeals, on an appellate
basis, where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by, or failure to act by, the Planning Board in the administration of
this Ordinance, provided the Board of Appeals shall have no jurisdiction to review the
merits of an approval or denial by the Planning Board nor to consider the imposition of
conditions of approval or the failure to impose one or more conditions and to hear and
decide administrative appeals on a de novo basis where it is alleged by an aggrieved
party that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made
by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer in his or her review of and action
on a permit application under this Ordinance. Any order, requirement, decision or
determination made, or failure to act, in the enforcement of this ordinance is not
appealable to the Board of Appeals.
When the Board of Appeals reviews a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer, the
Board of Appeals shall hold a “de novo” hearing. At this time the Board may receive
and consider new evidence and testimony, be it oral or written. When acting in a “de
novo” capacity, the Board of Appeals shall hear and decide the matter afresh,
undertaking its own independent analysis of evidence and the law, and reaching its own
decision.
When the Board of Appeals hears a decision of the Planning Board, it shall hold an
appellate hearing, and may reverse the decision of the Planning Board only upon
finding that the decision was contrary to specific provisions of the Ordinance or contrary
to the facts presented to the Planning Board. The Board of Appeals may only review
the record of the proceedings before the Planning Board. The Board Appeals shall not
receive or consider any evidence which was not presented to the Planning Board, but
the Board of Appeals may receive and consider written or oral arguments. If the Board
of Appeals determines that the record of the Planning Board proceedings are inadequate,
the Board of Appeals may remand the matter to the Planning Board for additional fact
finding.
2. Variance Appeals: To authorize variances upon appeal within the limitations set forth
in this Ordinance.
a. Dimensional variances may be granted only from dimensional requirements
including but not limited to frontage (including shore frontage), lot area, lot
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
132
width, height, percent of lot coverage, impervious surfaces and setback
requirements.
b. Variances shall not be granted for establishment of any use.
c. The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds that:
1) The proposed structure or use would meet the performance standards of
this Ordinance except for the specific provision which has created the
nonconformity and from which relief is sought; and
2) The applicant has proved to the Board that strict application of the terms of
this Ordinance would result in undue hardship.
To prove "undue hardship" the applicant must prove all of the following:
i) That the land in question cannot Yield a reasonable return unless a
variance is granted;
ii) That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the
property and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
iii) That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character
of the locality; and
iv) That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or
a prior owner.
d. Notwithstanding section 7.B.2.c above the Code Enforcement Officer may grant
a variance to an owner of a dwelling for the purpose of making that dwelling
accessible to a person with a disability who is living in the dwelling or regularly
uses the dwelling. The Code Enforcement Officer shall restrict any variance
granted under this subsection solely to the installation of equipment or the
construction of structures necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling by
the person with the disability. The Code Enforcement officer may impose
conditions on the variance including without limitation the variance to the
duration of the disability or to the time that the person with the disability lives in
the dwelling.
The term "structures necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling" shall
include ramps and associated railings, wall or roof systems necessary for the
safety or effectiveness of the ramps.
e. Notwithstanding section 7.B.2.c above the Board of Appeals may grant a
variance to an owner of a dwelling who resides in the dwelling and who is a
person with a permanent disability for the construction of a place of storage and
parking for a noncommercial vehicle owned by that person and no other purpose.
The width and length of the structure may not be larger than 2 times the width
and length of the noncommercial vehicle. The owner shall submit proposed plans
for the structure with the request for the variance pursuant to this paragraph to the
Board. The person with the permanent disability shall prove by a preponderance
of the evidence that the person's disability is permanent.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
133
For purposes of this section, "noncommercial vehicle" means a motor vehicle as
defined in Title 29-A, section 101, subsection 42 with a gross vehicle weight of
no more than 6,000 pounds, bearing a disability registration plate issued pursuant
to Title 29-A, section 521 and owned by the person with the permanent
disability.
The board may impose conditions on the variance granted pursuant to this
subsection.
f. The Board of Appeals shall limit any variances granted as strictly as possible in
order to insure conformance with the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance
to the greatest extent possible, and in doing so may impose such conditions to a
variance as it deems necessary. The party receiving the variance and all
subsequent owners or occupants shall comply with any conditions imposed.
3. Setback Reduction Appeals: To hear and decide upon appeal in specific cases for a
reduction from the standard setback requirements for residential uses and their
accessory structures. The Board may reduce setbacks as authorized by Subsection
7.B.3.j.(1-6) of this section, provided that the Board finds that the appeal meets the
requirements stated below. If that criteria is not met, a variance under Section 7.B.2.
may be requested.
Upon granting a setback reduction which complies with the standards in subsection j.
below, the Board of Appeals may attach reasonable conditions which it finds necessary
to protect the privacy of abutting property owners and neighbors. These conditions are
limited to specifications for landscaping, fencing, parking, construction materials and
construction design. The Board shall grant a setback reduction as provided herein if
the Board finds that the applicant has proved that the reduction, if granted, will meet
the following criteria:
a. The setback reduction will not encroach upon or further reduce a non-conforming
setback from the normal high water mark of the shoreland area as defined;
b. The lot in question was created before the effective date of this ordinance as
evidenced by a recorded deed or subdivision plan;
c. The lot is in single-family residential use or within a district where single family
use is permitted and is the primary year-round residence of the applicant;
d. The setback reduction will not allow construction or renovation which will create
additional new dwelling units;
e. The setback reduction is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not
the general conditions in the neighborhood;
f. The setback reduction will not alter the essential character of the locality;
g. The hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner;
h. The granting of the variance will not substantially reduce or impair the use of
abutting property; and
i. That the granting of a set back reduction is based upon demonstrated need, not
convenience, and no other feasible alternative is available.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
134
j. Setback reductions shall be subject to the following:
1) The maximum encroachment areas for garage, decks, additions and
swimming pool structures in front, side or rear yards shall be:
Front: 30 percent
Side: 30 percent
Rear: 30 percent
2) A detached garage shall be no more than one story in height, not to exceed
20 feet in height, and shall contain no habitable living space.
3) There shall be no more than one garage per lot which does not meet
setback requirements.
4) The addition shall not allow the creation of more than one (1) kitchen in
any dwelling.
5) Any addition which extends the footprint of the principal structure must
not exceed the height of the principal structure except where the principal
structure height is also increased as part of the addition project to the same
height as the addition.
6) Only one setback reduction shall be allowed per lot after the effective date
of this Ordinance. Whenever the Board grants a setback reduction under
this section, a certificate indicating the name of the current property owner
identifying the property by reference to the last recorded deed in the chain
of title indicating the fact that a setback reduction including any conditions
on the setback has been granted and the date of the granting shall be
prepared in a recordable form and shall be recorded by the applicant in the
Androscoggin County Registry of Deeds within 90 days of final approval
or the setback reduction shall be void. No rights may accrue to the setback
reduction recipient or his/her heirs, successors or assigns unless and until
the recording is made within 90 days.
C. Appeal Procedure
1. Time Limit: An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of
Appeals by an aggrieved party from any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or
the Planning Board subject to the jurisdictional limits set forth elsewhere in this
ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the date of the decision.
2. Written Notice: Such appeal shall be made by filing with the Chairman of the Board
of Appeals a written notice of appeal which includes:
a. A concise written statement indicating what relief is requested and why it should
be granted.
b. A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of existing buildings and
structures and other physical features of the lot pertinent to the relief requested.
3. Record of Case: Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer or
Planning Board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all of the papers
constituting the record of the decision appealed from.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
135
4. Public Hearing: The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within
35 days of its receipt of an appeal request.
5. Decision by Board of Appeals
a. Quorum: A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of
deciding an appeal. A member who abstains shall not be counted in determining
whether a quorum exists.
b. Majority Vote: The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board
of Appeals present and voting shall be necessary to reverse an order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the Code Enforcement Officer or
Planning Board, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter which it is
required to decide under this Ordinance, or to effect any variation in the
application of this Ordinance from its stated terms.
c. Burden of Proof. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
d. Action of Appeal: Following the public hearing on an appeal, the Board may
affirm, affirm with conditions, remand, or reverse the decision, or failure to act,
of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board only upon a finding that the
decision, or failure to act, was clearly contrary to specific provisions of this
Ordinance.
e. Time Frame: The Board shall decide all appeals within 35 days after the close of
the hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all appeals.
f. All decisions shall become a part of the record and shall include a statement of
findings and conclusions as well as the reasons or basis therefore, and the
appropriate order, relief or denial thereof.
g. Shoreland Area Variances: The following shall be undertaken when the Board
of Appeals receives a request for variance in the Shoreland Area.
1) A copy of the variance application and all supporting information provided
by the applicant shall be mailed to the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection by the Code Enforcement Officer at least twenty
(20) days prior to action by the Board of Appeals.
2) Any comments received from the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection, prior to final action, shall be made part of the
variance record and considered by the Board of Appeals.
6. Appeal to Superior Court:
a. Except as provided by 30-A M.R.S.A. section 2691(3)(F), any aggrieved party
who participated as a party during the proceedings before the Board of Appeals
may take an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State laws within fortyfive
(45) days from the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
136
b. An appeal may be taken by any aggrieved party to Superior Court in accordance
with State laws within 30 days from the date of any order, requirement, decision
or determination made, or failure to act, in the enforcement of this ordinance.
c. An appeal may be taken by any aggrieved party to Superior Court in accordance
with State laws within 30 days from the date of any approval or denial by the
Planning Board or the imposition of conditions of approval or the failure to
impose one or more conditions.
7. Reconsideration: In accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. section 2691(3)(F), the Board of
Appeals may reconsider any decision within forty-five (45)days of its prior decision. A
request to the Board to reconsider a decision must be filed within ten (10) days of the
decision that is being reconsidered. A vote to reconsider and the action taken on that
reconsideration must occur and be completed within forty-five (45) days of the date of
the vote on the original decision. Reconsideration of a decision shall require a positive
vote of the majority of the Board members originally voting on the decision, and proper
notification to the landowner, petitioner, planning board, code enforcement officer, and
other parties of interest, including abuttors and those who testified at the original
hearing(s). The Board may conduct additional hearings and receive additional evidence
and testimony.
Appeal of a reconsidered decision to Superior Court must be made within fifteen (15)
days after the decision on reconsideration.
8. All variances granted shall be recorded by the applicant in the Registry of Deeds as
required by Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 4353.5. Any variance not so recorded shall be
void.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 137
SECTION 8. Definitions
A. Construction of Language
In the interpretation and enforcement of this Ordinance, all words other than those
specifically defined in the various ordinances shall have the meaning implied by their context
or their ordinarily accepted meaning. In the case of any difference of meaning or implication
between the text of this Code and any map, illustration or table, the text shall control.
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or
corporation as well as an individual or any other legal entity.
The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the
plural numbers includes the singular.
The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, the word "may" is permissive.
The word "lot" includes the word "plot" and "parcel."
The word "structure" includes the word "building."
The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to
include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be sued or occupied."
The words "Town" or "municipality" means the Town of Turner, Maine.
Abandoned Activity, Use, or Business: An activity, use, or business (1) that has stopped, and (2) from
which the major portion of the materials, goods, equipment, or facilities necessary for its operation has
been removed.
Accessory Structure or Use: A use or structure which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use
or structure. Accessory uses, when aggregated, shall not subordinate the principal use of the lot. A deck
or similar extension of the principal structure or a garage attached to the principal structure by a roof or a
common wall is considered part of the principal structure.
Adjacent Grade: Means the natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Aggrieved Party: An owner of land whose property is directly affected by the granting or denial of a
permit or variance; or a person whose land abuts or is across a road or street or body of water from land
for which a permit or variance has been granted; or any other person or group of persons who have
suffered particularized injury as a result of the granting or denial of such permit or variance.
Agricultural/Sales/Services: The use of buildings or land for the sale of equipment or products or
services to those engaged in agriculture.
Agriculture: The production, keeping, or maintenance, for sale or lease, of plants and/or animals,
including but not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy
products; poultry and poultry products; livestock; fruits and vegetables; and ornamental and green house
products. Agriculture does not include the growing of marijuana for resale, forest management, and
timber harvesting activities, or confined feeding operations.
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019 138
Agriculture Products, Processing and Storage: Establishments engaged in the manufacturing
processing and/or packaging foods, dairy products, commercial composting and storage of such products.
Airport: An area of land or water that is used or intended to be used commercially for the landing and
takeoff of aircraft and includes its buildings and facilities, if any. This definition is not intended to
include private landing strips used for ultra light aircrafts or personal planes associated with a residential
use or agricultural use.
Alteration: Any change or modification in construction, or change in the structural members of a
building or structure such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders or in the use of a building.
The term shall include change, modification, or addition of a deck, dormer, staircase, or roof of the
building.
Amusement Facility: Any indoor private, commercial premises which are maintained or operated
primarily for the amusement, patronage, or recreation of the public containing four (4) or more table
sports, pinball machines, video games, or similar mechanical or electronic games, whether activated by
coins, tokens or discs, or whether activated through remote control by the management.
Animated Sign: Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special
effect or scene.
Antenna: Any system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission
or reception of radio or electromagnetic frequency signals.
Aquaculture: The growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater, estuarine, or marine plant or
animal species.
Arterial Street: A major thoroughfare which serves as a major traffic way for travel between and through
the municipality.
Authorized Agent: An individual or a firm having written authorization to act on behalf of a property
owner or applicant. The authorization shall be signed by the property owner or applicant.
Auto Repair: An establishment primarily engaged in major maintenance and repair of automobiles.
Maintenance and repair include but not limited to engine overhauls, transmission repair brake work and
the like.
Automobile Body Shop: A business establishment engaged in body, frame or fender straightening and
repair or painting and undercoating.
Automobile Graveyard: A yard, field or other outdoor area used to store 3 or more unregistered or
uninspected motor vehicles, as defined in Title 29-A, section 101, subsection 42, or parts of the vehicles.
"Automobile graveyard" includes an area used for automobile dismantling, salvage and
recycling operations.
1. "Automobile graveyard" does not include:
a. An area used for temporary storage of vehicles or vehicle parts by an establishment or place of
business that is primarily engaged in doing vehicle repair work to make repairs to render a motor
vehicle serviceable. In order for a vehicle's storage to be considered temporary, it must be
removed from the site within 180 calendar days of its receipt;
139
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
b. An area used by an automobile hobbyist to store, organize, restore or display antique autos,
antique motorcycles, classic vehicles, horseless carriages, reconstructed vehicles, street rods or
parts of these vehicles as these vehicles are defined in Title 29-A, section 101 as long as the
hobbyist's activities comply with all applicable federal and state statutes and rules and municipal
ordinances, other than ordinances that are more restrictive than this subsection regarding the
storage of vehicles or vehicle parts that are collected by a hobbyist, except that a municipal
ordinance may require areas used by an automobile hobbyist to comply with the screening
requirements in section 3754-A, subsection 1, paragraph A and the standards in section 3754-A,
subsection 5, paragraph A, paragraph B, subparagraph (1) and paragraph C. For the purposes of
this subparagraph, an automobile hobbyist is a person who is not primarily engaged in the business
of selling any of those vehicles or parts from those vehicles;
c. An area used for the parking or storage of vehicles, vehicle parts or equipment intended for use
by a municipality, quasi-municipal entity or state or federal agency;
d. An area used for the storage of operational farm tractors and related farm equipment, log skidders,
logging tractors or other vehicles exempted from registration under Title 29-A, chapter 5;
e. An area used for the parking or storage of vehicles or equipment being offered for sale by a dealer,
equipment dealer, trailer dealer or vehicle auction business as defined in Title 29-A, section 851;
f. An area used for the storage of vehicles by an establishment or place of business that is
primarily engaged in business as a new vehicle dealer as defined in Title 29-A, section 851;
g. An area used for temporary storage of vehicles by an establishment or place of business that is
primarily engaged in business as an insurance salvage pool. In order for a vehicle's storage to
be considered temporary under this subparagraph, the vehicle must be removed from the site
within 180 days of receipt of title by the business; or
h. An area used for the parking or storage of operational commercial motor vehicles, special
equipment or special mobile equipment as defined in Title 29-A, section 101 that is temporarily out
of service but is expected to be used by the vehicle or equipment owner or by an operator designated
by the owner.
This subsection does not exempt an area used for the parking or storage of equipment or vehicles
that are not operational while stored or parked in the area.
Should the definition of Automobile Graveyard as contained in Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section be
changed, such change shall be reflected above.
Automobile Recycling: A business premises of a dealer or a recycler licensed under Title 29-A, sections
851 to 1112 who purchases or acquires salvage vehicles for the purpose of reselling the vehicles or
component parts of the vehicles or rebuilding or repairing salvage vehicles for the purpose of resale or for
selling the basic materials in the salvage vehicles, as long as 80% of the business premises specified in the
site plan in section 3755-A, subsection 1, paragraph C is used for automobile recycling operations.
"Automobile recycling business" does not include:
140
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
1. Financial institutions as defined in Title 9-B, section 131, subsections 17 and 17-A;
2. Insurance companies licensed to do business in the State;
3. New vehicle dealers, as defined in Title 29-A, section 851, licensed to do business in the
State; or
4. That portion of the business premises that is used for temporary storage of vehicles by an
establishment or place of business that is primarily engaged in business as an insurance
salvage pool. In order for a vehicle's storage to be considered temporary under this
subparagraph, the vehicle must be removed from the site within 180 days of receipt of
title by the business.
Should the definition of Automobile Recycling Business Graveyard as contained in Title 30-A M.R.S.A.
Section 3752.1-A be changed such change shall be reflected above.
Average Daily Traffic (ADT): The average number of vehicles per day that enter and exit the premises
or travel over a specific section of road.
Back Lot: Any lot or parcel of land that does not have frontage on a public road or privately-owned
street meeting the standards contained in Section VI.H. of the Town of Turner Street Construction
Ordinance or lacks the minimum frontage as required under Section 3.I of this Ordinance.
Banner: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is permanently mounted to a pole or
a building by a permanent frame at one or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or
the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners.
Basal Area: The area of cross-section of a tree stem at 4 1/2 feet above ground level and inclusive of bark.
Basement: Any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of six (6) feet or more and having
more than 50% of its volume below the existing ground level.
Bed and Breakfast: Any dwelling in which transient lodging or boarding and lodging are provided
and offered to the public for compensation for less than one week. This dwelling shall also be the fulltime,
permanent residence of its owner. There shall be no provisions for cooking in any individual guest
room.
Boarding, Lodging Facility: Any residential structure where lodging and with or without meals
are provided for compensation for a period of at least one week, and where a family residing in the
building acts as proprietor or owner. There shall be no provisions for cooking in any individual guest
room.
141
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
Boat Launching Facility: A facility designed primarily for the launching and landing of watercraft,
and which may include an access ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for vehicles and trailers.
Breeder Barn: A barn which houses more than 200 mature hens and roosters for the purpose of
production of fertilized hatchery eggs.
Brooder Barn: A barn used for the raising of more than 200 chickens prior to reaching egg laying age.
Building Coverage Ratio: The ratio derived by dividing the area covered by building(s) by the area
of the lot.
Building Envelope: That portion of the lot located within the prescribed front-, rear- and side-yard
setback distances.
Bulk Grain Storage: Establishments primarily engaged in the warehousing and storage of grain for
resale or own use other than normal storage associated with on-site consumption.
Business and Professional Offices: The place of business of doctors, lawyers, accountants, financial
advisors, architects, surveyors, real estate and insurance businesses, psychiatrists, counselors and the like
or in which a business conducts its administrative, financial or clerical operations including banks and
other financial services, but not retail sales nor activities utilizing trucks as part of the business operation.
Cabin/structure: Anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods
or property of any kind, together with anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in
the ground, exclusive of fences. The term includes structures temporarily or permanently located,
such as decks and satellite dishes.
Campground: Any area or tract of land to accommodate two (2) or more parties in temporary living
quarters, including, but not limited to tents, recreational vehicles or other shelters.
Canopy: The more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a wooded area.
Canopy Sign: Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or
structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area.
Caregiver: A person or an assistant of that person that provides care for a qualifying patient in accordance
with section 2423-A, subsection 2.
Cemetery: Property used for the interring of the dead.
Certificate of Compliance: A document signed by the Code Enforcement Officer stating that a structure
is in compliance with all of the provisions of the Floodplain Management Ordinance.
Changeable Copy Sign: A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters or illustrations that can be
changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message
changes more than eight times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy
sign for purposes of this Ordinance. A sign on which the copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical
indication of time or temperature shall be considered a "time and temperature" portion of a sign and not
a changeable copy sign for purposes of this Ordinance.
142
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
Changeable Message Sign: A sign capable of displaying words, symbols, figures or images that can be
electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means.
Church: A building or structure, or group of buildings or structures, designed primarily intended and
used for the conduct of religious services excluding Sunday School.
Clinic: An establishment where patients are accepted for treatment by a group of physicians practicing
medicine together but shall not offer domiciliary arrangements; medical and dental.
Club: Any voluntary association of persons organized for social, religious, benevolent, literary, scientific
or political purposes; whose facilities, especially a clubhouse, are open to members and guests only and
not the general public; and not engaged in activities customarily carried on by a business or for pecuniary
gain. Such term shall include fraternities, sororities and social clubs generally.
Club, Private: Any building or rooms, which serves as a meeting place for an incorporated or
unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, literary, political, recreational or like
activities, operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public.
Club, Recreational: Any building or land which serves as a meeting place or recreation area for an
incorporated or unincorporated association or group operated for the benefit of its members and guests
and not open to the general public, and not engaged in activities customarily carded on by a business for
pecuniary gain.
Code Enforcement Officer: A person appointed by the municipal officers to administer and enforce this
code.
Collector Street: A street with average daily traffic of 200 vehicles per day or greater, or streets which
serve as feeders to arterial streets and collectors of traffic from minor streets.
Colocation: The use of a wireless telecommunications facility by more than one wireless
telecommunications provider.
Commercial Composting: The processing and sale of more than 1,000 cubic yards of compost per year.
Commercial Hazardous Waste Facility: As defined in 38, M. M.R.S.A., Section 1303 as may
be amended.
Commercial Recreation: Any commercial enterprise which receives a fee in return for the provision
of some recreational activity including but not limited to: racquet and tennis clubs, health facility,
amusement parks, gymnasiums and swimming pools, sporting/recreational facilities and bowling alleys
but not including amusement facilities, as defined herein.
Commercial School: An institution which is operated for profit, but is not authorized by the State
to award baccalaureate or higher degrees, which offers classes in various skills, trades, professions or
fields of knowledge.
Commercial Telecommunications Tower and Related Facilities: Any structure, antenna, tower,
or other device which provides to the public for a fee radio/television transmission, commercial
mobile wireless services, unlicensed wireless services, cellular phone services, specialized mobile
radio communications (SMR), common carrier wireless exchange phone services and personal
communications service (PCS) or pager services. This definition does not include ham radio
towers/antenna, or towers/antenna used to provide communication for a single business.
143
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
Commercial Use: Commercial shall include the use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than home
occupations, the intent and result of which activity is the production of income from the buying and
selling of goods or services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings or dwelling units.
Common Driveway: A vehicle access way serving two dwelling units.
Community Center: A building which provides a meeting place for local, nonprofit community
organizations on a regular basis. The center shall not be engaged in activities customarily carried on by a
business.
Complete Application: An application shall be considered complete upon submission of the required
fee, a signed application and all information required by this Ordinance except as validly waived a vote
by the Planning Board to waive the submission of required information.
Comprehensive Plan: Comprehensive plan means a document or interrelated documents containing the
elements established under Title 30-A, M.R.S.A. Section 4326, subsection 1 to 4, including the strategies
for an implementation program which are consistent with the goals and guidelines established under
subchapter II.
Confined Feeding Operations: Specialized livestock production enterprises with confined beef cattle
and hog feeding and poultry and egg farms and accessory structures. These operations have large animal
populations restricted to small areas. For the purpose of this definition, breeder and brooder barns are not
considered confined feeding operations.
Conforming: A building, structure, use of land, or portion thereof, which complies with all the provisions
of this Ordinance.
Congregate Housing: Residential housing consisting of private apartments and central dining facilities
and within which a congregate housing supportive services program serves functionally impaired elderly
or disabled occupants; the individuals are unable to live independently yet do not require the constant
supervision or intensive health care available at intermediate care or skilled nursing facilities. Congregate
housing shall include only those facilities which have been certified by the State of Maine as meeting
all certification standards and guidelines for congregate housing facilities as promulgated by the
Department of Human Services pursuant to the provisions of Maine State Statutes.
Conservation Easement: A nonpossessory interest in real property imposing limitations or affirmative
obligations, the purposes of which include retaining or protecting natural, scenic or open space values
of real property; assuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational or open space use;
protecting natural resources; or maintaining air or water quality.
Constructed: Built, erected, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the
premises which are required for construction. Excavation, fill, drainage, and the like, shall be considered
a part of construction.
Cultivation Area: “Cultivation area” means a Registered Caregiver’s indoor or outdoor area used for
cultivation of marijuana for a qualifying patient that is enclosed and equipped with locks or other security
devices that permits access only to a person authorized to have access to the area as defined in Title 22
Chapter 558-C of the Maine Revised Statutes.
Day Camp: Homes and centers licensed as such by the Maine Department of Human Services.
144
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
Demolition/Waste Disposal: A facility including a landfill operated by a public, quasi-public or private
entity which purpose is to dispose of useless, unwanted or discarded solid material with insufficient liquid
content to be free flowing, including by way of example, and not by limitation to, rubbish, garbage, scrap
materials, junk, refuse, inert fill material, landscape refuse, and demolition debris. The definition does
not, however, include commercial hazardous waste disposal facilities or recycling of products.
Density: The number of dwelling units per area of land.
Developed Area: Any area on which a site improvement or change is made, including buildings,
landscaping, parking areas, and streets.
Development: Any manmade changes to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited
to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling
operations.
Dimensional Requirements: Numerical standards relating to spatial relationships including but not
limited to setback, lot area, shore frontage and height.
Direct Watershed: That portion of the watershed which does not first drain through an upstream lake.
Disability: 1. A physical or mental impairment that:
a. Substantially limits one or more of a person's major life activities;
b. Significantly impairs physical or mental health; or
c. Requires special education, vocational rehabilitation or related services;
2. Without regard to severity unless otherwise indicated: absent, artificial or replacement
limbs, hands, feet or vital organs; alcoholism; amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; bipolar
disorder; blindness or abnormal vision loss; cancer; cerebral palsy; chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease; Crohn's disease; cystic fibrosis; deafness or abnormal hearing loss;
diabetes; substantial disfigurement; epilepsy; heart disease; HIV or AIDS; kidney or
renal diseases; lupus; major depressive disorder; mastectomy; intellectual disability;
multiple sclerosis; muscular dystrophy; paralysis; Parkinson's disease; pervasive
developmental disorders; rheumatoid arthritis; schizophrenia; and acquired brain
injury;
3. With respect to an individual, having a record of any of the conditions in paragraph 1 or
2; or
4. With respect to an individual, being regarded as having or likely to develop any of
the conditions in paragraph 1 or 2.
Disqualifying Drug Offense: "Disqualifying drug offense" means a conviction for a violation of a state
or federal controlled substance law that is a crime punishable by imprisonment for one year or more, but
does not include (1) An offense for which the sentence, including any term of probation, incarceration or
supervised release, was completed 10 or more years earlier; or (2) An offense that consisted of conduct
that would have been permitted under the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act.
Dissolve: A mode of message transition on a changeable message sign accomplished by varying the light
intensity or pattern, where the first message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility
simultaneously with the gradual appearance and legibility of the second message.
145
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
District: A specified portion of the municipality, delineated on the Official Zoning Map within which
certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this
Ordinance.
Driveway (Shoreland Zoning): A vehicular access-way less than five hundred (500) feet in length
serving two single-family dwellings or one two-family dwelling, or less.
Duplex: A building containing only two dwelling units for occupation by not more than two families.
Dwelling: Any building or structure or portion thereof designed or used for residential purposes.
1. Single-family Dwelling: Any structure containing only one dwelling unit for occupation
by not more than one family.
2. Multi-family Dwellings: A building containing three or more dwelling units such buildings
being designed exclusively for residential use and occupancy by three or more families living
independently of one another with the number of families not exceeding the number
of dwelling units.
Dwelling Unit: A room or suite of rooms used by a family as a habitation which is separate from other
such rooms or suites of rooms, and which contains independent living, cooking, sleeping, bathing and
sanitary facilities but not including transient lodging facilities such as motels, hotels, inns, bed and
breakfasts, rental cabins, boarding houses and tourist homes.
"ECHO" Unit: A small (not more than 560 square feet of living space) residential structure placed
or constructed to the side or rear of an existing single family dwelling to be occupied by one or two
people who are (a) age is 62 or older or (b) disabled, who are related by birth, marriage, or adoption
to the occupants of one principal residence, and who benefit from living close to the family.
Elderly Housing: A multi-unit (three or more dwelling units per structure) development where each
dwelling unit is occupied by only persons 62 years of age or older (or in the case of couples at least one
of the two persons shall be 62 years of age or older) and/or handicapped persons as a residential
living environment with other persons 62 years of age or older and/or handicapped persons. Each
dwelling unit will be designed to meet the minimum standards for State and Federal elderly accessibility
requirements.
Emergency Operations: Operations conducted for the public health, safety or general welfare, such
as protection of resources from immediate destruction or loss, law enforcement, and operations to
rescue human beings, property and livestock from the threat of destruction or injury.
Essential Services: Electric power, or water transmission or distribution lines, towers, and related
equipment; telephone cables or lines, poles, and related equipment; municipal sewage lines, collection
or supply systems; and associated storage tanks. Essential services shall not include commercial
telecommunication towers and related facilities. Such systems may include towers, poles, wires, mains,
drains, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarms and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and similar
accessories, but shall not include service drops or buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of such
services.
146
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
Excavation Contractor: An individual or firm engaged in a business that causes the disturbance of soil,
including grading, filling and removal, or in a business in which the disturbance of soil results from an
activity that the individual or firm is retained to perform.
Expansion of a Structure: An increase in the floor area or volume of a structure including all extensions
such as, but not limited to attached: decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
Expansion of Use: The addition of one month to a use's operating season; or the use of more floor area
or ground area devoted to a particular use.
FAA: The Federal Aviation Administration, or its lawful successor.
Fade: A mode of message transition on a changeable message sign accomplished by varying the light
intensity, where the text message gradually reduces the intensity to the point of not being legible and the
subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility.
Fall Zone: The distance from the base of a tower that a tower would fall should a catastrophic failure
occur.
Family: One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit.
Farm Labor Housing: Dwelling units solely occupied by employees and their families, intended
to provide housing for help required to carry out agricultural uses and located on the farm itself.
Farm Enterprise: A use of land or structures intended to supplement the income of farm owners that
is compatible with agricultural uses but may not normally be allowed under the current zoning
designation of the land.
Farm Stand: A structure designed, arranged or used for the display and sale of agricultural products
primarily grown or produced on the premises upon which such stand is located. A farm stand may be
located on premises that the products are not grown upon provided such premises is owned by the grower.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission, or its lawful successor.
Filling: Depositing or dumping any matter on or into the ground or water.
Final Plan: The final drawings on which the applicant's plan of subdivision is presented to the Board
for approval and which, if approved, shall be recorded at the Registry of Deeds.
Flag: Any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as symbol
of a government, political subdivision or other entity.
Flood or Flooding: Means:
1. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
a. the overflow of inland or tidal waters; and
b. the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
147
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
2. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result
of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated
cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body
of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as
flash flood, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable even which results in flooding.
Floodplain or Flood Prone Area: Means land areas susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source (see "flooding").
Floodplain Management: Means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damage including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations: Means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building
codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain, grading or erosion control
ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in
any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
Floor Area: The sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by exterior walls, plus
the horizontal area of any unenclosed portions of a structure such as porches and decks.
Forested Wetlands: Freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six meters
(approximately 19.7 feet) tall or taller.
Forestry: The operation of timber tracks, tree farms, forest nurseries, the gathering of forest products,
or the performance of forest services.
Foundation: The supporting substructure of a building or other structure, excluding wooden sills and
post supports, but including basements, slabs, frostwalls, or other base consisting of concrete, block, brick
or similar material.
Frame: A complete, static display screen on a changeable message sign.
Frame Effect: A visual effect used on a changeable message sign to change from one message to
another.
Freeboard: Means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes
of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors, such as
wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed, that could
contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions.
Freestanding Sign: Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the
ground and that are independent from any building or other structure.
Freshwater Wetland: Freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas which are:
I. of ten or more contiguous acres; or of less than 10 contiguous acres and adjacent to a surface
148
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
water body excluding any river, stream or brook such that in a natural state, the combined
surface area is in excess of 10 acres; and
2. inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration sufficient
to support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils.
3. This definition does not include forested wetlands.
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not
conform to the criteria of this definition.
Should the definition of freshwater wetland be amended by statute or rule, this definition shall
be deemed amended to correspond to that statute or rule.
Frontage, Road: The linear distance between the sidelines of a lot measured along the lot line that
borders upon whatever right-of-way serves as legal access to the lot.
Functionally Water-Dependent Uses: Those uses that require, for their primary purpose, location on
submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location in, inland waters and that cannot be located
away from these waters. The uses include, but are not limited to recreational fishing and boating
facilities, excluding recreational boat storage, waterfront dock facilities, boat yards and boat building
facilities, navigation aides, retaining walls, industrial uses requiring large volumes of cooling or
processing water that cannot reasonably be located or operated at an inland site.
Garage: An accessory building, or part of a principal building, including a car port, used primarily for the
storage of motor vehicles as an accessory use.
Gasoline Service Station: Any place of business at which gasoline, other motor fuels or motor oil are
sold to the public for use in a motor vehicle, regardless of any other business on the premises.
Government Office: A building or complex of buildings that house municipal offices and services, and
which may include cultural, recreational, athletic, convention and entertainment facilities owned and/or
operated by a governmental agency.
Great Pond: Any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess of ten acres,
and any inland body of water artificially formed or increased which has a surface area in excess of thirty
(30) acres except where the artificially formed or increased inland body of water is completely
surrounded by land held by a single owner.
Gravel Pit: See mineral extraction.
Ground Cover: Small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the partially decayed organic matter
of the forest floor.
Group Home: A housing facility for mentally handicapped or developmentally disabled persons which
is approved, authorized, certified or licensed by the State. A group home may include a community
living facility, foster home or intermediate care facility.
Hazardous Waste: As defined in 38 M.R.S.A. Section 1303 as may be amended.
149
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
Heavy Manufacturing: A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or
products predominately from extracted or raw materials.
Height of a Structure: The vertical distance between the mean grade within the building footprint and
the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys, steeples, antennas, and similar appurtenances
which have no floor area.
High Intensity Soil Survey: A soil survey conducted by a Certified Soil Scientist meeting the standards
of the National Cooperative Soil Survey which identifies soil types down to 1/10 acre or less at a scale
equivalent to subdivision plan submitted. The mapping units shall be the soil series. Single soil test pits
and their evaluation shall not be considered to constitute high intensity soil surveys.
Historic Structure: Means any structure that is:
1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting
the requirements for individual listing on the National Register,
2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
3. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior, or
4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either: a) by an approved state program
as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or b) directly by the Secretary of the Interior
in states without approved programs.
Home Occupation: An occupation or business activity which results in a product or service and
is conducted in whole or in part in the dwelling unit or accessory structure.
Hospital: An institution providing, but not limited to, overnight health services, primarily for inpatients,
and medical or surgical care for the sick or injured including as an integral part of the institution such
related facilities as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central services facilities, and
staff offices.
Hotel/Motel: A commercial building or group of buildings built to accommodate for a fee travelers and
other transient guests who are staying for a limited duration with sleeping rooms without cooking
facilities, each rental unit having its own private bathroom and its own separate entrance leading either
to the outdoors or to a common corridor or hallway. A hotel may include restaurant facilities where food
is prepared and meals served to its guests and other customers.
Increase in the Nonconformity of a Structure: any change in a structure or property which causes
further deviation from the dimensional standard(s) creating the nonconformity. Property changes or
structure expansions which either meet the dimensional standard or which cause no further increase in the
linear extent of the nonconformance of the existing structure shall not be considered to increase the
150
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
nonconformity. For example, there is no increase in nonconformity if the expansion extends no further
into the required setback area than does any portion of the existing nonconforming structure.
Individual Private Campsite: An area of land which is not associated with a campground, but which
is developed for repeated camping by only one group not to exceed ten (10) individuals and which
involves site improvements which may include but not be limited to gravel pads, parking areas, fire
places, or tent platforms. The term individual private camp site does not include sites used by property
owners for infrequent cook-outs or "camping out."
151
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
Industrial Park or Development: A subdivision developed exclusively for industrial uses, or a
subdivision planned for industrial uses and developed and managed as a unit, usually with provision for
common services for the users.
Impervious Surface Ratio: A measure of the intensity of land use that is determined by dividing the total
area of all impervious surfaces on the site by the area of the lot. For the purpose of this ordinance,
impervious surfaces include buildings, structures, paved and gravel surfaces.
Industrial Use, Heavy: The use of real estate, building or structure, or any portion thereof, for
assembling, fabricating, manufacturing, packaging or processing operations.
Industrial Use, Light: The use of real estate, building or structure, or any portion thereof, which main
processes involve the assembly of prefabricated parts and which will not create a nuisance by noise,
smoke, vibration, odor or appearance.
In-law Apartment: A small accessory apartment containing not more than 540 square feet of living area
contained in a single-family dwelling that meet the standards of Section 4. DD.
Junkyard: A yard, field or other outside area used to store, dismantle or otherwise handle:
a. discarded, worn-out or junked plumbing, heating supplies, electronic or industrial
equipment, household appliances and furniture;
b. discarded, scrap and junked lumber; and
c. old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber or plastic debris,
waste and all scrap iron, steel and other scrap ferrous or non-ferrous material.
Kennel: An establishment in which more than four dogs or four cats are sold, housed, bred, boarded
or trained for a fee.
Land Management Road: Land Management Road - a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed
mineral soil, gravel, or other surfacing materials constructed for, or created by, the passage of motorized
vehicles and used primarily for timber harvesting and related activities, including associated log yards,
but not including skid trails or skid roads.
Landscape Ratio: The area of land devoted to pervious landscaping divided by the area of lot.
Larger Vehicle: A vehicle that has a larger length, width, or turning radius and/or lesser acceleration
capability than standard passenger vehicles or pickup trucks, including busses, commercial trucks,
construction equipment and forestry/timber harvesting equipment.
Level of Service: a description of the operating conditions a driver will experience while traveling on
a particular street or highway calculated in accordance with the provisions of the Highway Capacity
Manual, 1985 edition, published by the National Academy of Sciences, Transportation Research Board.
There are six levels of service ranging from Level of Service A with free traffic flow and no delays
to Level of Service F with forced flow and congestion resulting in complete failure of the roadway.
Larger Vehicle: A vehicle that has a larger length, width, or turning radius and/or lesser acceleration
capability than standard passenger vehicles or pickup trucks, including busses, commercial trucks, and
recreational vehicles.
152
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
Light Manufacturing: A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly only from previously prepared
materials, of finished products or parts, processing, fabrication, assembly, packaging, incidental storage,
sales and distribution of such products.
Line of Sight: The direct view of the object from the designated scenic resource.
Lot: An area of land in one ownership, or one leasehold, with ascertainable boundaries established
by deed or instrument of record, or a segment of land ownership defined by lot boundary lines on a
land subdivision plan duly approved by the Planning Board and recorded in the County Registry of Deeds.
Lot Area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines.
Lot, Corner: A lot at least two contiguous sides abutting upon a street or right-of-way.
Lot, Coverage: The percentage of a lot covered by all buildings, parking areas and impervious services.
Lot Lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined below:
1. Front Lot Line: Interior lots: the line separating the lot from a street or right-of-way. Comer
lot or through lot; the line separating the lot from either street or right-of-way.
2. Rear Lot Line: The lot line opposite the front lot line. On a lot pointed at the rear, the rear
lot line shall be an imaginary line between the side lot lines parallel to the front lot line, not
less than ten feet long, lying farthest from the front lot line. On a comer lot, the rear lot line
shall be opposite the front lot line at least dimension.
3. Side Lot Line: Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line.
Lot, Minimum Area: The required lot area within a district for a single use.
Lot of Record: A parcel of land, a legal description of which or the dimensions of which are recorded
on a document or map on file with the Androscoggin County Registry of Deeds on or before July 12,
1993, or other date set forth in the specific regulations of this Ordinance.
Lot, Shorefront: Any lot abutting a body of water.
Lot Width: The distance between the side boundaries of the lot measured at the front setback line.
Manufactured Housing/Mobile Home Unit: Means structures, transportable in one or two sections,
which were constructed in a manufacturing facility and are transported to a building site and designed
to be used as dwellings when connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating,
air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein and as otherwise defined in 30-A M.R.S.A.
section 4358(l).
Manufacturing: The making of goods and articles by hand or machinery. Manufacturing shall include
assembling, fabricating, finishing, packaging or processing operations.
153
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
Marijuana: The leaves, stems, flowers and seeds of all species of the plant genus cannabis, whether
growing or not. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil
or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture
or preparation of the mature stalks, fiber, oil or cake or sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable
of germination.
Marijuana Manufacturing Facility: “Marijuana Manufacturing facility” means a Marijuana
Manufacturing facility authorized under state law to manufacture marijuana products for medical use or
to engage in marijuana extraction for medical use.
Marijuana Testing Facility: “Marijuana testing facility” means a public or private laboratory authorized
under state law to test medical marijuana for contamination, potency or cannabinoid profile.
Marina: A business establishment having frontage on navigable water and, as its principal use, providing
for hire offshore moorings or docking facilities for boats, and which may also provide accessory services
such as boat and related sales, boat repair and construction, indoor and outdoor storage of boats and
equipment, boat and tackle shops, and fuel service facilities.
Market Value: The estimated price a property will bring in the open market and under prevailing market
conditions in a sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer, both conversant with the property and
with prevailing general price levels.
Medical Marijuana Establishment: "Medical marijuana establishment" means a registered caregiver
retail store, marijuana testing facility, Marijuana Manufacturing facility, or Cultivation area.
Medical Use: The acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, delivery, transfer or
transportation of marijuana or paraphernalia relating to the administration of marijuana to treat or
alleviate a qualifying patient's medical diagnosis or symptoms for which a medical provider has provided
the qualifying patient a written certification in accordance with Title 22 Chapter 558-C of the Maine
Revised Statutes.
Mineral Exploration: Hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of determining the nature or extent
of mineral resources which create minimal disturbance to the land and which include reasonable measures
to restore the land to its original condition. Mineral exploration shall not include testing for a quarry.
Mineral Extraction: Any operation within any twelve (12) successive month period removes more than
5,000 cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, peat, or other like material from its natural
location, and to transport the product removed, away from the extraction site. Mineral extraction shall not
include the term quarry.
Minimum Lot Width: The closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot. When only two lot lines
extend into the shoreland zone, both lot lines shall be considered to be side lot lines.
Minor Street: A street with average daily traffic of less than 200 vehicles per day.
Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land under unified ownership approved by the Town of Turner Planning
Board pursuant to the Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance for the placement of three (3) or more
manufactured homes.
Mobile Home Park Lot: Mobile home park lot means the area of land on which an individual home
is situated within a mobile home park and which is reserved for use by the occupants of that home.
154
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
Motor Vehicle Sales: An establishment primarily engaged in the sale of new or used motor vehicles
together with any accessory repair and service facilities which are incidental to the sales operation.
Motor vehicle: Motor vehicle" means a self-propelled vehicle but does not include:
A. A snowmobile as defined in Title 12, section 13001
B. An all-terrain vehicle as defined in Title 12, section 13001
Multi-Unit Residential: A residential structure containing three (3) or more residential dwelling units.
Native: Indigenous to the local forests.
Neighborhood "Convenience" Stores: A store of less than 1,500 square feet of floor space intended
to service the convenience of a residential neighborhood primarily with the sale of merchandise
including such items as, but not limited to, basic foods, newspapers, emergency home repair articles,
and other household items.
Net Residential Acreage: The total acreage available for a subdivision, and shown on the
proposed subdivision plan, minus the area for streets or access and the areas which are unsuitable for
development. Net Residential Density: The number of dwelling units per net residential acre.
New Construction: Means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Nonconforming Lot: A single lot of record which, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance, does not meet the area, frontage, or width requirements of the district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Sign: Any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance.
Nonconforming Structure: A structure which does not meet any one or more of the following
dimensional requirements; setback, height, or lot coverage, but which is allowed solely because it was
in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Nonconforming Use: Use of buildings, structures, premises, land or parts thereof which is not permitted
in the district in which it is situated, but which is allowed to remain solely because it was in lawful
existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Nonhabituated Accessory Structure: A structure which is incidental and subordinate to the principal
use or structure which is not considered a dwelling unit.
Normal High-Water Line: That line which is apparent from visible markings, changes in the character
of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation, and which distinguishes between
predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial land. Areas contiguous with rivers that support nonforested
wetland vegetation and hydric soils and that are at the same or lower elevation as the water level
of the river during the period of normal high-water are considered part of the river.
Nursing Home: A privately operated establishment where maintenance and personal or nursing care are
provided for persons who are unable to care for themselves.
155
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
100 Year Flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Open Space Development: A subdivision in which the dimensional requirements are reduced below
those normally required in return for permanently preserved open space.
Park Model Mobile Home: Recreational vehicles primarily designed as living quarters for recreation,
camping or seasonal use. They are built on a single chassis, mounted on wheels and have a gross trailer
area not exceeding 400 square feet in the set-up mode.
Parks and Recreation: Recreation facilities open to the general public including, but not limited
to, playgrounds, parks, monuments, green strips, open space, mini-parks, athletic fields, boat
launching ramps, picnic grounds, swimming pools, and wildlife and nature preserves, along with
any necessary accessory facilities, restrooms, bath houses and the maintenance of such land and
facilities. The term shall not include campgrounds or commercial recreation and amusement centers.
Peddler: Any person selling or offering for sale tangible commodities from any public street or other
public place or private property within the Town of Turner, and where delivery is made at the time
of sale. The word “peddler” shall include the words “hawker” and “huckster”. The word "peddler" does
not include yard sales as defined and regulated by the Town of Turner Zoning Ordinance or lemonade
stands and the like run by children.
For the purposes of this definition the term “person” shall include the singular and the plural, and
shall also mean and include any person, firm or corporation, association, club, partnership
or society, excepting bonafide charitable, service, religious, municipal, athletic, educational
organizations or agencies or events sponsored by bonafide charitable, service, religious, municipal,
athletic, educational organizations or agencies.
Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any
kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
Permitted Use: Uses which are listed as permitted uses in the various districts set forth in this Code. The
term shall not include prohibited uses.
Person: An individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality, trust, estate, partnership,
association, two or more individuals having a joint or common interest, or other legal entity.
Piers, Docks, Wharfs, Bridges and Other Structures and uses extending over or beyond the normal
high-water line or within a wetland:
Temporary: Structures which remain in or over the water for less than seven (7) months in
any period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
Permanent: Structures which remain in or over the water for seven (7) months or more in any
period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
Planned Unit Development: A planned unit development is a mixed-use land development which is
developed under unified management; is planned as a whole according to comprehensive and detailed
plans, including streets, utilities, lots or building sites, open space and preserved natural features,
recreational facilities, and design principles for proposed buildings; that may be developed in clearly
156
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
identified stages; and provides for the operation and maintenance of common facilities.
Planning Board: The planning board of the Town of Turner.
Principal Structure: A building other than one which is used for purposes incidental or accessory to the
use of another building or use on the same premises.
Principal Use: A use other than one which is incidental or accessory to another use on the same
premises.
Private Common Docking Facility: Privately owned piers, docks, wharfs, moorings or other structures
extending over or below the normal high water line the use of which is intended for the docking and
or securing of watercraft for more than one residential dwelling unit, family unit or other legal entity.
Privately-Owned Street: A residential street meeting the standards contained in Section VI.H. of the
Town of Turner Street Construction Ordinance not including a street serving a mobile home park which
is not intended to be dedicated as a public way.
Professional Engineer: A professional engineer, registered in the State of Maine.
Projecting Sign: Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends
more than six inches beyond the surface of such building or wall.
Public and Private Schools: Primary and secondary schools, or parochial schools, which satisfy either
of the following requirements: the school is not operated for a profit or as a gainful business; or the
school teaches courses of study which are sufficient to qualify attendance in compliance with state
compulsory education requirements.
Public Docking Facility: Publicly owned piers, docks, wharfs, moorings or other structures extending
over or below the normal high water line the use of which is intended for the docking and or securing
of watercraft.
Public Facility: Any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings, property, recreation areas, and
roads, which are owned, leased, or otherwise operated, or funded by a governmental body or public
entity.
Public Utility: Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department, board or commission authorized
to furnish gas, steam, electricity, waste disposal, communication facilities, transportation or water to
the public. Public Utility shall not include commercial communication towers and related facilities.
Qualifying Patient: Qualifying patient or patient means a person who has been a resident of the State
for at least 30 days and who possesses a valid written certification regarding medical use of marijuana
in accordance with section 2423-B.
Quarry: A place where stone is excavated from rock.
Registered Caregiver Retail Store: “Registered caregiver retail store” means a registered caregiver
authorized under state law to cultivate medical marijuana for qualifying patients that operates a retail store
157
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
to sell medical marijuana to qualifying patients.
Registered Dispensary: “Registered dispensary” means a dispensary authorized under state law to
cultivate and dispense medical marijuana to qualifying patients and caregivers.
Residential Sign: Any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses that contains no commercial
message except advertising for goods or services legally offered on the premises where the sign
is located, if offering such service at such location conforms with all requirements of the zoning ordinance.
Recent Floodplain Soils: The following soil series as described and identified by the National
Cooperative Soil Survey:
Alluvial Cornish Charles Fryeburg Hadley
Limerick Lovewell Medomak Ondawa Podunk
Rumney Saco Suncook Sunday Winooski
Reconstructed: The rebuilding of a road or section of a road to improve its serviceability.
Recording Plan: A copy of the Final Plan which is recorded at the Registry of Deeds and which need not
show information not relevant to the transfer of an interest in the property, such as sewer and water line
locations and sizes, culverts, and building lines.
Recreational Facility: A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time activities,
and other customary and usual recreational activities, excluding boat launching facilities.
Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle designed to be towed, and designed for
temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons, and which may include a pick-up camper,
travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and motor home. In order to be considered as a vehicle and not
as a structure, the unit must remain with its tires on the ground, and must be registered with the
State Division of Motor Vehicles.
Registered caregiver: "Registered caregiver" means a caregiver who is registered by the Department of
Administrative and Financial Services pursuant to section 2425-A.
Rental Cabin/Structure: Any structure or room or group of rooms inhabited for temporary family
recreational use by a person or persons who pay some form of monetary compensation to the owner of
the structure or to the primary occupant of the structure or room/rooms.
Repair: to take necessary action to fix normal damage or storm damage.
Replacement System: A system intended to replace:
1. an existing system which is either malfunctioning or being upgraded with no
significant change of design flow or use of the structure, or
2. any existing overboard wastewater discharge.
158
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
Residential Dwelling Unit: A room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use
as permanent, seasonal, or temporary living quarters for only one family. The term shall include
mobile homes, but not recreational vehicles.
Residual Basal Area: The average of the basal area of trees remaining on a harvested site.
Restaurant: An establishment where meals are prepared and served to the public for consumption on the
premises entirely within a completely enclosed building; and where no food or beverages are served
directly to occupants of motor vehicles or directly to pedestrian traffic from an exterior service opening
or counter, or any combination of the foregoing; and where customers are not permitted or encouraged
by the design of the physical facilities, by advertising, or by the servicing or packaging procedures, to
take- out food or beverage for consumption outside the enclosed building.
Resubdivision: The division of an existing subdivision or any change in the plan for an approved
subdivision which effects the lot lines including land transactions by the subdivider not indicated on the
approved plan.
Retail Business: A business establishment engaged in the sale, rental or lease of goods or services to the
ultimate consumer for direct use or consumption and not for resale.
Right-of-way: All public or private roads and streets, state and federal highways, private ways (now
called public easements), and public land reservations for the purpose of public access, including utility
rights-of-way.
Riprap: Rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least six (6) inches in diameter, used for erosion control and
soil stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two (2) units horizontal to one (1) unit vertical
or less.
River: A free-flowing body of water including its associated flood plain wetlands from that point
at which it provides drainage for a watershed of twenty-five (25) square miles to its mouth.
Road (Shoreland Area): For the purpose of the performance standards of Section 4.T. of this Ordinance,
a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel, asphalt, or other surfacing material
constructed for or created by the repeated passage of motorized vehicles. This definition is intended to
expand the applicability of the performance standards applicable to the shoreland area and not to change
the road frontage requirements under Section 3 of this Ordinance or to permit substandard roads to
be used to meet frontage requirements.
Roof Sign: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof a building, supported by the
roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof.
Sand and Gravel Pit: See mineral extraction.
Scroll: A mode of message transition on a changeable message sign where the message appears to move
vertically across the display surface.
Seasonal Dwelling: A dwelling unit lived in for periods aggregating less than seven months of the year
and not the principal residence of the owner.
159
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
Service Business: Establishments engaged in providing services for individuals and businesses such
as laundries, beauty shops, barbershop, advertising and equipment leasing.
Service Drop: Any utility line extension which does not cross or run beneath any portion of a water body
provided that:
1. in the case of electric service
a. the placement of wires and/or the installation of utility poles is located entirely
upon the premises of the customer requesting service or upon a roadway right-ofway;
and
b. the total length of the extension is less than one thousand (1,000) feet.
2. in the case of telephone service
a. the extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation of telephone
wires to existing utility poles, or
b. the extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or placement underground
is less than one thousand (1,000) feet in length.
Setback: The minimum horizontal distance from a lot line to the nearest part of a building, including
porches, steps and railings.
Setback, Front: The minimum horizontal distance measured from the front line of the property or the
sideline of the street, whichever is closer to the nearest part of a building, including porches, steps and
railings.
Setback (Shoreland Zoning): The nearest horizontal distance from the normal high-water line to the
nearest part of a structure, road, parking space or other regulated object or area.
Setback, Rear: The minimum horizontal distance measured from the rear or back property line to the
nearest part of a building, including porches, steps and railings.
Setback, Side: The minimum horizontal distance measured from the side property line to the nearest part
of a building, including porches, steps and railings.
Shopping Center: Any concentration of two or more retail stores or service establishments under one
ownership or management containing 15,000 square feet or more of gross floor space.
Shore Frontage: The length of a lot bordering on a water body or wetland measured in a straight line
between the intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline.
Shorefront Common Area: Any land area having shoreline frontage on any water body regulated by this
ordinance and intended for use by more than one residential dwelling unit or family unit or other legal
entity, excluding visitors and guests. This definition shall also include areas for which easements, rights
of way, or other use rights are granted or sold.
Shoreland Area: The land area located within two hundred and fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance,
160
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
of the normal high-water line of any great pond or river; within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the
upland edge of a freshwater wetland; or within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high- water line of a stream.
Shoreline: The normal high-water line, or upland edge of a freshwater wetland.
161
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
Sign: Any device, fixture, placard or structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol,
or writing to advertise, announce the purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or
to communicate information of any kind of the public.
Significant Scenic View Locations: Points where scenic views can be accessed as identified in the
Turner Comprehensive Plan.
Sketch Plan: Conceptual maps, renderings and supportive data describing the project proposed by the
applicant for initial review prior to submitting an application for subdivision approval. May be used by
the applicant as the basis for preparing the subdivision plans as part of the application for subdivision
approval.
Skid Trail: A route repeatedly used by forwarding machinery or animal to haul or drag forest products
from the stump to the yard or landing, the construction of which requires minimal excavation.
Slash: The residue, e.g., treetops and branches, left on the ground after a timber harvest.
State Registration Authority: “State registration authority” means the authority created or designated
by the State for the purpose of regulating and controlling registration for medical marijuana establishments.
Stream (Shoreland Area): A free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond or the
confluence of two (2) perennial streams as depicted on the most recent edition of a United States
Geological Survey 7.5 minute series topographic map, or if not available, a 15-minute series topographic
map, to the point where the body of water becomes a river or flows to another water body or wetland
within the Shoreland Zone or flows to another water body or wetland within the shoreland area.
Stream, River or Brook: River, stream or brook means a channel between defined banks including the
floodway and associated floodplain wetlands where the channel is created by the action of the surface
water and characterized by the lack of upland vegetation or presence of aquatic vegetation and by the
presence of a bed devoid of topsoil containing waterborne deposits on exposed soil, parent material or
bedrock.
Street: Public and private ways such as alleys, avenues, highways, roads and other rights-of-way, as well
as areas on subdivision plans designated as rights-of-way for vehicular access other than driveways, farm
roads or logging roads.
Structure: Anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods or property
of any kind, together with anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the
ground, exclusive of fences, and poles, wiring and other aerial equipment normally associated with
service drops as well as guying and guy anchors. The term includes structures temporarily or permanently
located, such as decks, patios, and satellite dishes.
Subdivision: The division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more lots as defined by Title 30-A
M.R.S.A. Section 4401. In additional shall include developments where there are three or more units
involved such as mobile home parks, multiple family housing, apartment houses, multiple housing units.
Substantial Damage: Means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring
the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Start: Completion of thirty (30) percent of a permitted development, structure or use, as the
162
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
case may be, measured as a percentage of estimated total cost.
Subsurface Sewage Disposal System: A collection of treatment tank(s), disposal area(s), holding tank(s)
and pond(s), surface spray system(s), cesspool(s), well(s), surface ditch(es), alternative toilet(s), or other
devices and associated piping designed to function as a unit for the purpose of disposing of wastes
or wastewater on or beneath the surface of the earth. The term shall not include any wastewater
discharge system licensed under 38 M.R.S.A. Section 414, any surface wastewater disposal system
licensed under 38 M.R.S.A. Section 413 Subsection 1-A, or any public sewer. The term shall not
include a wastewater disposal system designed to treat wastewater which is in whole or in part hazardous
waste as defined in 38 M.R.S.A. Chapter 13, subchapter 1.
Suspended Sign: A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is
supported by such surface.
Sustained Slope: A change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is substantially maintained
or exceeded throughout the measured area.
Swimming Pool: A body of water in an artificial receptacle or other container, whether in the ground
or above the ground, used or intended to be used for swimming or bathing and designed for a water
depth of thirty-eight (38) inches or more.
Temporary Movable Sign: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground, a building, or other
permanent structure by direct attachment to a rigid well, frame or structure, or a sign designed to be
transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs
converted to A or T-frames; and balloons used as signs.
Timber Harvesting: The cutting and removal of timber for the primary purpose of selling or processing
forest products. The cutting or removal of trees in the shoreland zone on a lot that has less than two (2)
acres within the shoreland zone shall not be considered timber harvesting. Such cutting or removal of
trees shall be regulated pursuant to Section 4.T.12, Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities
Other Than Timber Harvesting.
Time and Temperature Sign: A type of changeable message sign that is capable of displaying only
public service information such as time, date, temperature, but not words, symbols or other advertising
messages.
Tract, or Parcel, of Land: All contiguous land in the same ownership, provided that lands located
on opposite sides of a public or private road shall be considered each a separate tract or parcel of land
unless such road was established by the owner of land on both sides thereof after September 22, 1971.
Travel: A mode of message transition on a changeable message sign where the text appears to move
horizontally across the display surface.
Tributary Stream (Shoreland Area): A channel between defined banks created by the action of surface
water, whether intermittent or perennial, and which is characterized by the lack of upland vegetation
or presence of aquatic vegetation and by the presence of a bed devoid of topsoil containing
waterborne deposits on exposed soil, parent material or bedrock, and which flows to a water body
or wetland as defined. This definition does not include the term "stream" as defined elsewhere in this
Ordinance, and only applies to that portion of the tributary stream located within the shoreland zone
163
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
of the receiving water body or wetland.
Trucking/Distribution Terminal: An establishment primarily engaged in furnishing trucking or transfer
services with or without storage.
Undue Hardship: As used this Ordinance, the words "undue hardship" shall mean all of the following:
1. that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted; and
2. that the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the
general conditions in the neighborhood; and
3. that the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and
4. that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
A variance is not justified unless all elements are present in the case.
Upland edge of a wetland: The boundary between upland and wetland. For purposes of a freshwater
wetland, the upland edge is formed where the soils are not saturated for a duration sufficient to support
wetland vegetation; or where the soils support the growth of wetland vegetation, but such vegetation
is dominated by woody stems that are six (6) meters (approximately twenty (20) foot) tall or taller.
Use: The manner in which land or a structure is arranged, designed or intended, or is occupied.
Variance: A relaxation of the terms of this Ordinance where such relaxation will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property, and not the result of the actions of the
applicants, a literal enforcement of the code would result in undue hardship.
Vegetation: All live trees, shrubs, ground cover, and other plants including, without limitation, trees both
over and under 4 inches in diameter, measured at 4 ½ above ground level.
Veterinary Hospital or Clinic: A building used for the diagnosis, care and treatment of ailing or injured
animals which may include overnight accommodations. The overnight boarding of healthy animals shall
be considered a kennel.
Volume of a Structure: The volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by roof and fixed exterior
walls as measured from the exterior faces of these walls and roof.
Wall Sign: Any sign attached parallel to, but within six inches of, a wall, painted on the wall surface of,
or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which
is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface.
Warehousing/Storage: The storage of goods, wares and merchandise in a warehouse.
Water Body: Any great pond, river, stream.
Water Crossing: Any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a river, stream, tributary
stream, or wetland whether under, through, or over the water course or wetland. Such projects include
but may not be limited to roads, fords, bridges, culverts, water lines, sewer lines, and cables as well
164
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Tuner, Maine
Amended April 6, 2019
as maintenance work on these crossings. This definition includes crossings for timber harvesting
equipment and related activities.
Wetland: A freshwater wetland.
Wetlands Associated with Great Ponds and Rivers: Wetlands contiguous with or adjacent to a great
pond or river, and which during normal high water, are connected by surface water to the great pond
or river. Also included are wetlands which are separated from the great pond or river by a berm,
causeway, or similar feature less than 100 feet in width, and which have a surface elevation at or below
the normal high water line of the great pond or river. Wetlands associated with great ponds or rivers are
considered to be part of that great pond or river.
Window Sign: Any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate
information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service that is placed inside a window
or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
Wholesale Business: The use of land and/or buildings engaged in the selling of merchandise to retailers
to industry, commercial, institutional, farm or professional business users or other wholesalers as
distinguish from the sale to the general public.
Woody Vegetation: Live trees or woody, non-herbaceous shrubs.
Yard: An open, landscaped area adjacent to the property line which is not and may not be occupied
by buildings, structures, parking lots, storage or similar uses. Access roads or drives and sidewalks may
be located to allow vehicular and pedestrian traffic to cross yard areas.
Yard Sale: So-called garage sales, porch sales, tag sales and the like occurring for not more than five (5)
days per month. Goods, even those protected by temporary cover, shall not be visible from public or
adjacent private property at any time other than at the time of the yard sale. Yard sales exceeding this
definition shall be considered home occupations or commercial use and require review and approval
by the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board.
Appendix 1 Turner,
Maine Design
Standards
Commercial, Retail & Service
Building Architecture
Adopted April 9, 2016
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
161
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
ARCHITECTURAL
INTRODUCTION
Turner encourages a greater sense of continuity and
identity throughout its commercial and village areas
by describing and illustrating high quality
architectural design. Its Comprehensive Plan states
that commercial development will be encouraged to
have landscaping and trees, pitched roofs and a New
England Village building character. These standards
are not intended to dictate building styles. Rather,
they establish criteria by which any new or renovated
development can be compared with its surroundings.
Architectural Goals
• New England Village-scale architecture that
is sited and designed to offer a positive
experience to both pedestrians viewing the
buildings up close and motorists on the
highway.
• Good neighborhood buildings that
thoughtfully consider scale, form,
orientation, height, setback, massing,
materials, and architectural features that will
be consistent with the goals of the
comprehensive plan.
• Buildings that are designed as
permanent, positive additions to
Turner, constructed of high quality,
long lasting materials.
• Architecture that utilizes energy
conservation measures wherever
possible.
Contents
Introduction 160
Architectural Principles 161
Building Materials 163
Facade Design 166
Awnings & Canopies 169
Rooflines 170
Renovations & Additions 172
Design of National Franchises 173
Large Scale Buildings 175
Linear Commercial Buildings 177
Service Stations & Convenience Stores 179
Drive-Throughs 180
Accessory Structures 181
Drawing from traditional forms, the scale of this newcommercial
building has been effectively reduced by variations in the massing,
wall projections, and careful attention to detailing.
162
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
ARCHITECTURAL
OBJECTIVES
The purpose of these guidelines is to encourage
architectural forms that draws inspiration from
traditional New England Village examples (e.g., Cape
Cod, Federal, Classic Revival, etc.) and from local
rural region architecture. Building design should be
developed to a human scale through careful
consideration of architectural forms, massing,
detailing, number and use of materials, and color
DESIGN STANDARDS
Design. Design new buildings to fit the specific
characteristics of their particular site. The architecture
should be influenced by traditional New England
building forms and town-making patterns, the specific
needs of the intended users, the nature of the intended
use, and other site-specific factors.
Architectural Styles. Contemporary architecture
may be appropriate, provided it is designed in
accordance with these standards.
Human Scale. Design buildings and site elements
to human scale. The forms, massing, and openings
of buildings should be proportional to the size of the
human figure. Many architectural elements can add
scale to a building – watertables, planters, recessed
openings, divided pane windows, building mounted
light fixtures, dormers, cupolas, projecting rooflines,
covered walkways, colonnades, and similar features
– provided they are designed as integral parts of the
overall structure.
Energy Conscious Design. Consider energy
conservation and sustainability in the design and siting
of all new and renovated buildings. While LEEDs
(Leader- ship in Energy and Environmental Design)
certification is not required, developers are strongly
urged to use the principles of sustainability and energy
conservation. This may be achieved by specifying
proper insulation, reduced lighting, landscaping for
windbreaks and shading, recycled materials, and a
host of other appropriate techniques. The Maine
Uniform Building & Energy Code standards will be
met.
Examples of high quality contemporary Maine architecture – a
branch bank, an office building, and a library – that have been
designed to fit their uniquesites.
163
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
ARCHITECTURAL
Many elements of New England architecture – pitched roof, gable
ends, overhanging roof – are used in this attractive bank building.
An office supply store in a new shopping center. The design ofall
buildings feature pitched rooflines, traditional materials, and great
attention to architectural detail.
This building pays little attention to the site where it is located,
nor gives much attention to detailing and the roofline. Flat roofs
such as this are discouraged.
The themed design of this restaurant is out of character in a New
England village setting.
164
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
BUILDING
OBJECTIVES
Building materials should be treated as significant
design elements that define the appearance of the
structure.
DESIGN STANDARDS
Types of Materials Encouraged. Traditional, highquality
building materials common to northern New
England (e.g., brick, clapboard, shingles or other
similar products) should be used as the primary siding
material. Contemporary materials that have the same
visual characteristics as traditional materials (e.g.,
cement plank clapboards or vinyl siding) are
acceptable if attention is paid to detailing (e.g.,
corners, trim at openings, changes in material).
Painted Medium Density Overlay (MDO) plywood is
acceptable as a secondary material when used in
combination with traditional materials to give it scale.
Consider long- term maintenance in the selection of
all building materials.
Types of Materials Discouraged. Highly reflective
or processed materials (e.g., sheet metal or plastic
panels, brushed aluminum, bronzed glass), stucco or
synthetic stucco (Exterior Insulation and Finish
Systems (EIFS)), adobe, concrete block, T-111,
untreated plywood, particle board, tilt-up concrete
panels, and multicolored brick (incorporating
occasional white bricks in a random pattern) should
not be used as the primary facade material.
Colors. Facade colors should be low reflectance.
High intensity, high reflectance, chrome, metallic,
fluorescent colors, or black should not be used on the
primary building face.
Trim. Where trim is used, it should be a color that is
similar or complementary to the building’s primary
color.
Detailing. Arbitrary changes in materials or
embellishments that are not in keeping with the rest
of the building are discouraged.
Highly reflective surfaces and bright colors are notcharacteristic
of traditional New England architecture.
This branch bank uses materials, forms, and details that are common to Maine.
165
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
BUILDING
Unacceptable building materials. Examples of
materials that lack reference to traditional
architectural styles and would not meet the
design standards.
Metal panels
Painted concrete block
Corrugated plastic panels
Split face block
Reflective metallic siding
Synthetic stucco (Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS
166
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
BUILDING
Acceptable building materials. Examples of the
richness and variety of traditional New England
materials and colors that would be appropriate to
Turner.
167
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
FACADE
OBJECTIVES
Facades for new or renovated structures should
provide visual interest from all accessible sides. The
windows, doorways, and architectural detailing should
complement the building’s form and façade
DESIGN STANDARDS
Entrances. Building entrances should be clearly
visible from Route 4 and other public streets and
provide unobstructed areas for pedestrians. Design
features, such as canopies, projecting rooflines,
integrated signage, recesses, patios, lighting, and
landscaping, can be used to reinforce the entrance.
Street Facades. For retail structures, any facade that
faces public or private streets should have display
windows, entry areas, or other transparent features.
As an alternative, other features may be used to
provide scale and visual interest to the front facade, as
long as they are integrated into the design of the
building by color, form, materials, and architectural
design.
The facade treatment on this shop wraps around the corner to
present a unified design from all visible faces. The entrance is
emphasized by columns and the lower roofline.
Rear and Side Facades. Facades that are visible or
potentially visible from adjacent properties should be
designed to match or complement the architectural
treatment of the front facade. Blank or unadorned
walls should not face public roads, abutting properties,
residential areas, or other public viewpoints, except
when such wall faces a service area.
Wall Murals will be allowed if they are integrated
into the facade of the building and done in a
professional manner. Murals should not contain
advertising.
Maintenance of the painted surface should be
considered in the placement and execution of the
mural.
Wall Treatments. Facades should not extend for
more than 50 feet in length without incorporating
architectural features such as pilasters, windows,
cornices, porches, or offsets. Where the plane of the
wall is broken, the offset should be proportional to
the building’s height and length. Projections used to
break up the mass of the building should extend to
the ground.
Site Design. Signage, lighting, landscaping, and other
exterior elements should all be planned to complement
the facade. These elements should be coordinated
with the architectural plans to avoid unnecessary
conflicts and to retain the proper level ofvisibility.
Functional Elements. All vents, downspouts,
flashing, electrical conduits, meters, HVAC
equipment, service connections, and other functional
elements should be treated as integral parts of the
architecture, starting at the conceptual building design
phase. When these elements need to be part of the
facade (e.g., downspouts, vents) they should be
incorporated into the architecture through detailing or
matching colors. Meters, utility banks, HVAC
equipment, and other exterior service elements should
be located out of view from the public. Building
elevations which show the location and treatment of
all functional elements should be presented for
Planning Board review.
Details are critical to maintain long-term value. Plastic columns
in this example are susceptible to snowplow damage. Bases are
not flush with the pavement.
168
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
Architectural Details. Architectural detailing and
trim should be proportional to the scale and design of
the entire building.
Trim. When in public view, windows, doors,
ventilation fixtures, and other openings in frame
construction should be trimmed to create a frame
around the opening. Materials used for trim should
match those used on the facade of the building.
Shutters. If shutters are used, they should be sized
to fit the openings and provided for all windows on a
given wall.
Illustrations. Elevations of proposed buildings
should be presented with the application for design
review. The Planning Board may request perspectives
of the building to illustrate the relationship between
the front and side elevations. Elevation and
perspective drawings should include all landscape
elements (trees, shrubs, lighting, street furnishing,
signs, etc.) that will be seen in conjunction with the
facade.
FACADE
The main entrance to this grocery store is emphasized bythe
circular window. Brick banding gives visual support to the
building while providing protection fromsnowplows.
HVAC equipment and service connections are highly visible,
adding unnecessary clutter to this small restaurant.
Architectural illustrations should be presented to give an understanding of how new development will fit into the surrounding area.
169
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
Three views of a branch bank set in a mixed-residential
neighborhood. All facades were treated with equalimportance.
The front (top photo) faces the street and is built to the sidewalk,
providing a welcoming presence to pedestrian traffic. Theside
of the building (middle photo), facing a single family home, is
residential in scale and design. The canopy over the rear
entrance (bottom photo) provides a transition area between the
parking lot and the doorway.
FACADE
While the front plane of the wall of this building is broken, the
offset does not continue to the ground. The projection becomes a
billboard and the building is seen as a large box.
A similar building with a facade composed of New England forms
and materials. The overhang provides protection forpedestrians
and emphasizes the entranceway. The sign is over scaled (i.e., too
large) for the facade.
170
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
AWNINGS AND CANOPIES
OBJECTIVES
Awnings and canopies can enhance the appearance
and function of a building by providing shade, shelter,
shadow patterns, and visual interest. Where awnings
are used, they should complement the design,
materials, color, and appearance of the building.
DESIGN STANDARDS
Location. When used, fixed or retractable awnings
and canopies should be an integral element of the
architecture. They should be located directly over
windows or doors to provide protection from the
elements.
Materials. Awnings and canopies should be made of
canvas or similar non-reflective material. Their color
should be the same or complementary to the facade of
the building.
Design Elements. Graphics used on awnings for
identification or advertising should be designed as an
integral part of the signage for the property, and be
coordinated with other sign elements in terms of
type- face, color, and spacing. Awnings should not
be used as advertising features or light sources.
Internally lit awnings are discouraged.
Awnings can be used effectively to add scale, visual interestand
provide shade to the building facade.
171
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
ROOFLINE
OBJECTIVES
Rooflines should be designed to provide diversity in
the form of the building and add visual interest to the
streetscape. Rooflines can be used to reduce the mass
of large buildings, emphasize entrances, and provide
shelter and shade for the pedestrian.
DESIGN STANDARDS
Pitched Roofs. Buildings with pitched roofs are
strongly encouraged. Where pitched roofs are used,
the minimal pitch should be at least 5/unless this is
not feasible from an engineering or technical
standpoint. Buildings with projecting rooflines
should be designed to create strong patterns of shade
and shadow.
Roof Forms. Roofs should have traditional roof
designs, such as gambrel, gable, hipped, and saltbox.
Non-traditional roof forms – such as false mansard,
a-frames, and shed roofs – should not be used as the
primary roofline.
The use of false mansard roofs or vertical panels are inappropriate
forrooflines.
The cupola projecting from this pitched roof is an example of
traditional forms used in a contemporary structure.
Roof Colors. Where the roof will be visible, the
roofing materials should be selected to complement
the color and texture of the building’s facade. Roof
colors should be dark muted earth tones or a color that
is darker than the facade. Stripes, patterns, or
advertising features on the roof are strongly
discouraged.
Roof-Mounted Equipment. Mechanical and other
equipment mounted on rooftops must be screened
from public view or grouped at the rear of the
structure where visibility is limited. Rooftop screening
should be designed as an integral part of the
architecture to complement the building’s mass and
appearance. These design standards are sensitive to
the placement of communication reception equipment
such as satellite dishes and other external components.
Shedding Snow and Ice. All roofs should be
designed to shed snow, ice, and rainwater in a manner
that does not cause a safety hazard or interfere with
pedestrians or vehicles.
Flat Roofs. Flat roofs on single-story isolated
buildings are discouraged in most applications. Flat
roofs may be allowed, provided that the design
creates no horizontal line greater than 50 feet.
Where para- pets are used to break up a flat roofline,
the height of the parapet should be at least five
percent of the total length of the wall.
Preferred Materials for Visible Roofs.
Composite asphalt shingles and standing-seam
non-glare metal are acceptable for visible
roofing. High gloss roofing materials should not
be used. Roof-mounted mechanical equipment has been effectively screened
by balustrades.
172
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
D
I
The roof-mounted mechanical equipment (as well as the dumpsters
and downspouts) present an unsightly facade in a highly visible
location.
A flat roofed building that is designed as a large billboard with no
variations in form to add human scale.
ROOFLINE
An unusual roofline derived from the shingle style makes a
distinctive profile while maintaining a New England aesthetic.
The scale of this commercial building has been effectively reduced
through variations in its roofline and projecting gables.
The scale of this large retail
building has been reduced
through variations in its
roof line and roof materials
173
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
T
S
R en o v a t io n s an
OBJECTIVES
Some structures in Turner were built a number of
years ago and may be coming before the Planning
Board for Site Plan approval as they undergo
renovations or additions. This can be an opportunity to
add visual interest to a building and to strengthen its
relationship with the site and nearby structures. In
many instances, existing buildings can be greatly
improved by well-designed additions or remodeling
efforts. The Town expects high quality architectural
and site design for all renovated structures.
DESIGN STANDARDS
Alterations. Where the existing building currently
meets the design standards, renovations should be
designed to respect the proportions, fenestration
patterns, and details of the original building. Where
the existing building does not meet the design
standards, the owner is strongly encouraged to
upgrade the entire structure.
Design. Applications to the Planning Board that
involve renovations should show all improvements as
well as the existing structure. A narrative should
accompany the application which explains the
designer’s intent to relate the old to new.
RENOVATIONS AND
ADDITIONS
The addition to this restaurant does not relate to the formor building
materials of the existing structure.
Materials. Where a building meets the design
guidelines, additions or renovations should
complement or match the materials of the original
structure in color, detailing, and texture. Where the
building does not meet the standards, the owner
should demonstrate how the materials used in the
renovation will complement the existing structure.
Architectural Features. Renovations should retain
any distinctive architectural features or examples of
skilled craftsmanship. Where such features occur,
similar details should be incorporated into the addition
where possible.
A former school house was
transformed into bank with
drive up window adding
interest and variety to the
streetscape.
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
173
174
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
NATIONAL FRANCHISES
OBJECTIVES
National franchises (e.g., restaurants, service stations,
retail stores) are permitted in commercial and village
districts. Without proper attention to architectural
characteristics, the design of buildings for these uses
can contribute to the loss of community identity by
repeating generic architectural forms found
throughout the country.
DESIGN STANDARDS
Franchise Styles. Architectural forms primarily
derived from building styles from other regions of
the country are strongly discouraged. New England
Village prototypes from national franchises are
desirable, provided they meet the Design Standards
for architectural principles, scale, color, rooflines,
andmaterials. Buildings that are stylized to the point
where the structure is a form of advertising are not
suitable.
Coordination of Site Features. As part of the
Site Plan application, provide illustrations
(including perspective views) of all sides of the
proposed building(s). Include all site features and
accessory structures (e.g., dumpster screens,
storage buildings, refrigeration lockers,
playgrounds, vending machines, signage, and
lighting) in the illustrations to demonstrate how
they are being coordinated with the principle
building.
The addition of an outdoor playground bears no relationship to
the existing structure.
approach. The result is a box with applied facade features that
has no reference to New England design, and would not meetthese
Design Standards.
A restaurant that wasdesigned
to complement the vision for a
Rural highway corridor.
A national franchise that has been designed with a ‘kit of parts’
175
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
NATIONAL FRANCHISES
Unacceptable Franchise Designs. Examples of
building forms commonly used by national franchises
that would NOT meet the Design Standards and
would not be desirable.
Acceptable Franchise Designs. Examples of
architecture for similar uses which respond to
New England traditions, meeting the Design
Standards.
176
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
OBJECTIVES
Due to their visibility and mass, the design of new
or renovated large structures (20,000 square feet or
greater) such as ‘big box’ retail or grocery stores
have the ability to greatly enhance or detract the
visual character of the commercial and village
districts. These structures should be designed as
attractive pieces of commercial architecture,
responsive to their site and respectful of adjacent
neighbors.
DESIGN STANDARDS
Design and Massing. Large structures should be
designed to break up their mass into smaller visual
components through the use of projections, recesses,
and varied facade treatment. The resultant design
should provide variation to create a logical building
hierarchy and to add shadow, depth and scale.
Site Design. Scale reductions of large buildings
should be reinforced by site features such as
pedestrian pathways, landscaping, site furnishings,
and clearly defined entrances. Avoid major grade
changes and retaining walls in site development.
Architectural Details. Architectural details should be
used to reduce the scale and uniformity of large
buildings. Elements such as colonnades, pilasters,
gable ends, canopies, display windows, and light
fixtures can be effective measures to add visual
interest and scale, providing they are proportional to
the size of the building.
Entrances. Large structures should have clearly
defined and highly visible customer entrances,
incorporating at least three of the following:
LARGE-SCALE
• significant variations in roof lines
• distinctive lighting and landscaping,
• canopies or porticos
• overhangs, recesses, or projections
• pedestrian arcades
• raised corniced parapets over the door
• peaked roof forms in scale with building
• outdoor patios
• display windows
• architectural details such as tile
work and moldings which are
integrated into the building
structure and design.
Where additional stores will be located in the principal
building and customer entrances to such stores are
outdoors, each additional store should incorporate at
least two of the aforementioned elements.
Facades and Exterior Walls. Horizontal facades
greater than 50 feet in length should incorporate wall
plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least
3% of the length of the facade and extending at least
20% of the length of the facade. No uninterrupted
facade should exceed 50 horizontal feet.
Other devices to add interest to long walls include
strong shadow lines, changes in rooflines, pilasters
and other architectural details, patterns in the surface
material, and wall openings. Facade elements should
be coordinated with the landscape plan to maintain
visibility from public areas.
Ground floor facades that are visible from public roads
should have display windows, entry areas, awnings, or
other such features along a minimum of 40% of their
horizontal length.
Two examples of large-scale buildings whose mass has been reduced by a rhythmic architectural treatment and subtle changes in geometry.
Contrasting vertical elements draw the eye to the entranceways.
177
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
Central Features and Amenities. Each largeretail
establishment should contribute to the establishment
or enhancement of the pedestrian environment by
providing one or more of the following:
• Patio/seating area
• Pedestrian area with benches
• Kiosk area
• Fountain
• Clock tower
• Other such deliberately shaped area and/or a
focal feature or amenity that, in the judgement
of the Planning Board, adequately enhances
the pedestrian environment of the large retail
store. Any such area should have direct access
to the public sidewalk network and such
features should be constructed of materials
that will enhance the pedestrian environment
and are similar and complimentary to the
principal materials of the building and the
landscape.
LARGE-SCALE
This smaller retail store attached to a large grocery hasbeen
designed as an individual building, with a separate entrance
and architectural detailing. A covered walkway connects all the
storefronts.
Additional Structures. Development of smaller
commercial buildings on out-parcels is encouraged
to reduce the scale of large parking areas. Site
planning for renovated and new buildings on large
parcels should illustrate how additional structures
and pedestrian and vehicular movement could be
accommodated on the property.
Cart Storage. Shopping carts must be stored inside
the building, or in ‘cart corrals’, out of the way of
pedestrian circulation. Where cart corrals are
proposed they should be subject to the design
standards for accessory structures.
Large retail buildings can be designed
to avoid the appearance of a ‘big box’
through careful massing anddetailing.
178
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
LINEAR COMMERCIAL
OBJECTIVES
Linear commercial structures (e.g., strip shopping
centers and multi-tenant offices) are appropriate
within the commercial and village areas, provided that
they are designed with facades and rooflines that
reduce their scale, add architectural interest, and
provide for comfortable pedestrian movement.
DESIGN STANDARDS
Design. Buildings with multiple store-fronts (e.g.,
strip shopping centers, one story office buildings)
should be visually unified through the use of
complimentary architectural forms, similar materials
and colors, consistent details, and coordinated
signage.
Entrances. Linear commercial buildings should have
clearly defined and highly visible customer entrances
that are designed as integral architectural elements.
Individual entrances should be emphasized.
Facade Offsets. Variations in the building plane
facing the public road should be included to add visual
interest such as spaces for common entries, outdoor
eating / social spaces and similar landscaped spaces.
Offsets should be a minimum of four feet.
Covered Walkways. Where a linear commercial
building has two or more entrances, it should include
a permanently covered walkway, arcade, or open
colonnade along its long facade to provide shelter,
encourage pedestrian movement, and visually unite
the structure.
Focal Points. Linear commercial buildings should
include a focal point – such as raised entrance way,
clock tower, or other architectural elements – to add
visual interest and help reduce the scale of the
building.
Roof Lines. Variations in rooflines, detailing, and
building heights should be included to break up the
scale of connected linear buildings.
Covered walkways add a shadow line which
can reduce thescale of a long building and
unify its facade.
Colonnades effectively add visual interest to linear
buildings, while providing scale and protection from
the elements.
Long commercial buildings should have a focal point and/or an
offset in the roofline to break up their mass.
Covered walkways add a shadow line which can reduce thescale
179
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
A linear building that has been effectively
scaled downby variations in the roofline
and facade. Each storefront is treated
as a separate entity. Variety in the use
of materials adds visual interest to all
facades. The colonnaded walkway
encourages pedestrian movement and
window shopping.
LINEAR COMMERCIAL
180
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
SERVICE STATIONS AND CONVENIENCE
STORES
OBJECTIVES
Service stations, car washes, convenience stores that
sell fuel and other automobile-oriented facilities
should be designed with facade and roofline elements
that reduce their scale and add architectural interest.
Drive-throughs (for restaurants, banks, pharmacies,
and similar uses) should be subordinate to the design
of the main building.
DESIGN STANDARDS
Design. The architecture of service stations,
convenience stores, and other auto-oriented
commercial buildings should follow the same
standards recommended for other buildings. All
architectural details should be related to an overall
design theme. Windows or other forms of fenestration
should be included on the facade facing the street
which should be treated as a front facade.
Orientation. Service stations, convenience stores,
and similar uses should be sited to face the street. On
corner lots, said uses may face both streets. Pump
islands and canopies should be located at the rear or
on the side of the building so the primary building is
the major feature seen from the road.
Canopies. Canopies should be visually compatible
with the main structure through consistency in roof
pitch, architectural detailing, materials, and color.
Pitched roofs and fascia trim are preferred for
canopies. Bands of bold colors on the canopy and
back-lighting inside the canopy are strongly
discouraged.
The gas station canopy has been designed to complement
the main building. The town strongly encourages the use of
attached canopies, especially in service stations that are
being retrofitted.
Site Design. The site design must address off-site
noise exposure, underground drainage systems to
keep water off public streets (e.g., in the case of car
washes), snow storage, vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, room for vehicle stacking, and other
issues peculiar to these uses.
Large Openings. Openings for car washes or service
bays should be integrated into the design of the
building and sited so they are not directly visible from
public roadways or adjacent residential areas.
Pedestrian Circulation. The front facade should
include a pedestrian entrance from the street.
Vehicular access routes should minimize conflicts
with pedestrian circulation. Where walkways must
cross driveways, motorists should be made aware of
pedestrians through signage, lighting, raised
crosswalks, changes in paving, or other devices.
This service station canopy is designed to be an extension of the
building. The columns, roofline, dormers, and signagecontribute
to a sense of continuity in thearchitecture.
The flat-roofed canopy bears no design relationship to the
well-detailed convenience store in terms of form, materials,
or architectural style. The store was designed to fit into the
residential surroundings.
181
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
DRIVE-THROUGHS
OBJECTIVES
Drive-throughs (for restaurants, banks, pharmacies,
and similar uses) should be subordinate to the design
of the main building.
DESIGN STANDARDS
Drive-Throughs. Drive-through windows shouldbe
incorporated into the design of the building through
their scale, color, detailing, massing, and other
architectural treatments.
Location. Drive-throughs should be located at the
side or rear of the building and avoid facing the main
street, unless there are no alternative for safety or
security. Where they are located at the rear,
consideration should be given to their visibility to
ensure the safety of patrons.
The design of this drive-through bank continues the theme of
adaptive re-use and traditional materials.
The drive-through window on this bank repeats the same architectural elements used throughout the building.
182
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
OBJECTIVES
Non-habitable structures – such as freestanding ATMs,
garages, storage units, canopies, recycling sheds, cart
corrals, and utility buildings – should be treated as
architectural elements and meet the same standards as
larger buildings.
DESIGN STANDARDS
Design. Accessory structures should be designed as a
coordinated element of the site plan by
complementing or matching the materials, form, roof
pitch, detailing, and color of the main building.
Site Planning. The location of all accessory structures
should be illustrated on the site plan to show how they
will be coordinated with plans for circulation,
landscaping, lighting, parking, and other site features.
The design of this successful drive-through repeats the same
roof pitch, forms, and materials found in the main bank
building.
This ATM machine does not relate in form, color, or materials of
the adjacent building.
By using the same form and materials the canopy over the
drive- through is visually compatible with the main bank
building.
This cart corral does not reflect the architecture of the large retail
building and appears out of place in the parking lot.
The design of this successful drive-through repeats the same roof
pitch, forms, and materials found in the main bank building
Turner, Maine Design Standards • Commercial, Retail & Service Building Architecture
183
TOWN OF TURNER
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
Amended March 17, 1990
Amended March 17, 1990
Amended March 9, 1991
Amended March 14, 1992
Amended June 20, 1992
Amended June 12, 1993
Amended June 11, 1994
Amended April 13, 1996
Amended July 21, 1997
Amended April 18, 1998
Amended April 10, 1999
Amended April 8, 2000
Amended April 7, 2001
Amended April 6, 2002
Amended April 5, 2003
Amended April 3, 2004
Amended April 9, 2005
Amended April 8, 2006
Amended April 5, 2008
Amended April 4, 2009
Amended April 10, 2010
Amended April 5, 2014
Amended May 19, 2018

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I. PURPOSES .............................................................................................................. 1
ARTICLE II. AUTHORITY, ADMINISTRATION, EFFECTIVE DATE REPEAL OF
EXISTING ORDINANCE.............................................................................................................. 1
2.1 Authority............................................................................................................................................1
2.2 Administration...................................................................................................................................1
2.3 Effective Date..............................................................................................................................1
2.4 Repeal of Existing Subdivision Ordinance..................................................................................1
2.5 Conflict with Other Ordinances...................................................................................................1
2.6 Validity and Severability.............................................................................................................1
ARTICLE III. DEFINITIONS....................................................................................................... 2
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE .................................................................... 5
4.1 Purpose ........................................................................................................................................5
4.2 Agenda.........................................................................................................................................5
4.3 Joint Meetings .............................................................................................................................5
ARTICLE V. PREAPPLICATION FOR MINOR AND MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS................... 5
5.1 Submission ..................................................................................................................................5
5.2 Ownership Interest.......................................................................................................................6
5.3 Proposed Road Name and Numbering System............................................................................6
ARTICLE VI. MINOR SUBDIVISIONS ..................................................................................... 7
6.1 General ........................................................................................................................................7
6.2 Procedure.....................................................................................................................................7
6.3 Submissions.................................................................................................................................8
ARTICLE VII. PRELIMINARY PLAN FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION ................................... 10
7.1 Procedure...................................................................................................................................10
7.2 Submissions...............................................................................................................................12
ARTICLE VIII. FINAL PLAN FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION.................................................. 15
8.1 Procedure...................................................................................................................................15
8.2 Submissions...............................................................................................................................16
8.3 Final Approval and Filing..........................................................................................................18
ARTICLE IX. ENFORCEMENT................................................................................................ 18
9.1 Inspection of Required Improvements ......................................................................................18
9.2 Violations and Enforcement ......................................................................................................20
ARTICLE X. GENERAL STANDARDS................................................................................... 21
10.1 Conformance with Comprehensive Plan ...................................................................................21
10.2 Open Space Provisions ..............................................................................................................21
10.3 Land Not Suitable for Development..........................................................................................22
10.4 Blocks ........................................................................................................................................22
10.5 Lots............................................................................................................................................22
10.6 Utilities ......................................................................................................................................23
10.7 Required Improvements ............................................................................................................23
10.8 Land Features ............................................................................................................................25
10.9 Phosphorous Export...................................................................................................................25
10.10 Lake Protection Level ...........................................................................................................26
10.11 Construction in Flood Hazard Areas.....................................................................................26
10.12 Mobile Home Parks...............................................................................................................27
10.13 Municipal Services................................................................................................................27
10.14 Open Space Development .....................................................................................................27
10.15 Traffic Conditions .................................................................................................................27
10.16 Ground Water Quality...........................................................................................................29
10.17 Protection of Significant Wildlife Habitat ............................................................................30
10.18 Scenic Locations ...................................................................................................................30
10.19 Archaeological Sites..............................................................................................................31
10.20 Solid Waste ...........................................................................................................................31
10.21 Financial and Technical Capacity .........................................................................................31
ARTICLE XI. STREET AND STORM DRAINAGE DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION
STANDARDS............................................................................................................................... 31
11.1 General Requirements ...............................................................................................................31
11.2 Storm Water Management Design Standards............................................................................32
11.3 Storm Drainage Construction Standards ...................................................................................32
11.4 Certification of Construction.....................................................................................................33
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES................................................................... 33
12.1 Types of Guarantees ..................................................................................................................33
12.2 Contents of Guarantee ...............................................................................................................34
12.3 Escrow Account.........................................................................................................................34
12.4 Performance Bond.....................................................................................................................34
12.5 Letter of Credit ..........................................................................................................................34
12.6 Conditional Agreement..............................................................................................................34
12.7 Phasing of Development............................................................................................................35
12.8 Release of Guarantee.................................................................................................................35
12.9 Default .......................................................................................................................................35
12.10 Privately-Owned Roads.........................................................................................................35
12.11 Improvements Guaranteed ....................................................................................................35
12.12 ...............................................................................................................................................35
ARTICLE XIII. WAIVERS......................................................................................................... 35
13.1 Waiver requests .........................................................................................................................35
13.2 Where the Board makes written findings of fact .......................................................................35
13.3 When the Board grants a waiver................................................................................................26
ARTICLE XIV. AMENDMENTS .............................................................................................. 36
14.1 Initiation of Amendments..........................................................................................................36
14.2 .........................................................................................................................................................36
14.3 Adoption of Amendment ...........................................................................................................36
ARTICLE XV. APPEALS........................................................................................................... 36
15.1 .........................................................................................................................................................36
ARTICLE XVI. SUBDIVISION AMENDMENTS.................................................................... 36
16.1 Fees......................................................................................................................................36
16.2 Revisions to approved plans ............................................................................................37
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
1
ARTICLE I. PURPOSES
The purposes of this Ordinance are to assure the comfort, convenience, safety, health and welfare of the
people of the Town of Turner, to protect the environment and to promote the development of an
economically sound and stable community. To this end, in approving subdivisions within the Town of
Turner, Maine, the Planning Board shall consider the following criteria and before granting approval shall
make findings of fact that the provisions of this Ordinance have been met and that the proposed
subdivision will meet the requirements established by State Subdivision Law.
ARTICLE II. AUTHORITY, ADMINISTRATION, EFFECTIVE DATE
REPEAL OF EXISTING ORDINANCE
2.1 Authority
A. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Home Rule Powers as provided for in Article VIIIA
of the Maine Constitution and Title 30-A, M.R.S.A. Section 3001.
B. These standards shall be known and may be cited as "Subdivision Ordinance of the Town
of Turner, Maine."
2.2 Administration
A. The Planning Board of the Town of Turner, hereinafter called the Board, shall administer
these standards.
B. The provisions of these standards shall pertain to all land proposed for subdivision, as
defined by this Ordinance within the Town of Turner.
2.3 Effective Date
The effective date of this Ordinance is July 8, 1988, which was the date of preparation of the
Final Draft. The ultimate enactment authority rests with a majority vote of a town meeting.
2.4 Repeal of Existing Subdivision Ordinance
Adoption of this Ordinance shall repeal any and all previous subdivision ordinances. This shall
not prevent the enforcement of repealed ordinances or regulations with respect to the time periods
in which they were in effect.
2.5 Conflict with Other Ordinances
A. This Ordinance shall not be construed to repeal any existing bylaws or ordinances, other
than those specifically identified, or to impair the provisions of private restrictions placed
upon property, provided, however, that where this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions,
its provisions shall control.
2.6 Validity and Severability
A. Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court to be invalid,
such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
2
ARTICLE III. DEFINITIONS
In general, words and terms used in this Ordinance shall have their customary dictionary meanings. More
specifically, certain words and terms used herein are defined as follows:
Complete Application: An application shall be considered complete upon submission of the required fee
and all information required by this Ordinance, or by a vote by the Board to waive the submission of
required information. The Board shall issue a receipt to the applicant upon its determination that an
application is.
Creative Design Subdivision: A subdivision layout that considers the natural and cultural features of the
parcel to be developed and the intent of the Town of Turner Comprehensive Plan. Design elements may
include but not be limited to set aside of open space, conservation easements, building envelopes, and
setbacks.
Developed Area: Any area on which a site improvement or change is made, including buildings,
landscaping, parking areas, and streets.
Farmland: “Farmland” means a parcel consisting of 5 or more acres of land that is:
a. Classified as prime farmland, unique farmland or farmland of statewide or local
importance by the Natural Resources Conservation Service within the United States
Department of Agriculture; or
b. Used for the production of agricultural products as defined in Title 7, section 152,
subsection 2. ("Agricultural products" means those plants and animals and their products
that are useful to humans and includes, but is not limited to, forages and sod crops, grains
and feed crops, dairy and dairy products, poultry and poultry products, bees and bees'
products, livestock and livestock products and fruits, berries, vegetables, flowers, seeds,
grasses and other similar products, or any other plant, animal or plant or animal products
that supply humans with food, feed, fiber or fur. "Agricultural products" does not include
trees grown and harvested for forest products.)
Final Plan: The final drawings on which the applicant's plan of subdivision is presented to the Board for
approval and which, if approved, shall be recorded at the Registry of Deeds.
Fresh Water Wetland: Means fresh water swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas which are:
a. Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration
sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils; and
b. Not considered part of great pond, river, stream or brook.
These areas may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not conform to the criteria.
High Intensity Soil Survey: A soil survey conducted by a Certified Soil Scientist, meeting the standards
of the National Cooperative Soil Survey, which identifies soil types down to 1/10 acre or less at a scale
equivalent to subdivision plan submitted. The mapping units shall be the soil series. Single soil test pits
and their evaluation shall not be considered to constitute high intensity soil surveys.
Infrastructure Improvements: Roads, drainage and stormwater systems, common water and sewer
systems whether public or private.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
3
Liquidation Harvesting: Has the same meaning as in Title 12, section 8868, subsection 6 and "parcel"
means a contiguous area within one municipality, township or plantation owned by one person or a group
of persons in common or joint ownership.
Low Impact Development. “Low impact development” or “green infrastructure” means site planning
and design strategies intended to replace or replicate predevelopment hydrology through the use of source
control and relatively small-scale measures integrated throughout a site to disconnect impervious surfaces
and enhance filtration, treatment, and management of stormwater runoff as close to its source as possible.
Low impact development strategies may be either nonstructural or structural, except that low impact
development strategies utilizing structural stormwater management techniques shall be limited to an
impervious contributing drainage area equal to or less than 1 acre. Low impact development strategies
include, but are not limited to: bioretention filters, grass swales and channels, vegetated filter strips,
permeable pavements, rain gardens and vegetated rooftops.
Manufactured Housing: Means a structural unit or units designated for occupancy and constructed in a
manufacturing facility and transported, by the use of its own chassis or an independent chassis, to a
building site. The term includes any type of building which is constructed at a manufacturing facility and
transported to a building site where it is used for housing and may be purchased or sold by a dealer in the
interim. For purposes of this section, two types of manufactured housing are included. Those two types
are:
1. Those units constructed after June 15, 1976, commonly called "newer mobile homes,”
which the manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance with the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development standards, meaning structures
transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode are 14 body feet or
more in width and are 750 or more sq.ft., and which are built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as dwellings, with or without permanent foundations, when
connected to the required utilities including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning or
electrical systems contained in the unit;
a. This term also includes any structure which meets all the requirements of this
subparagraph, except the size requirements and with respect to which the
manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and complies with
the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction
and Safety Standards Act of 1974, United States Code, Title 42, Section 5401,
et.seq.; and
2. Those units commonly called "modular homes" which the manufacturer certifies are
constructed in compliance with Title 10, Chapter 957, and rules adopted under that
chapter, meaning structures, transportable in one or more sections, which are not
constructed on a permanent chassis and are designed to be used as dwellings on
foundations when connected to required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning or electrical systems contained in the unit.
Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land under unified ownership approved by the Town of Turner's
Planning Board pursuant to the Town of Turner's Subdivision Ordinance for the placement of three (3) or
more manufactured homes.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
4
Mobile Home Park Lot: Mobile home park lot means the area of land on which an individual home is
situated within a mobile home park and which is reserved for use by the occupants of that home. A
municipality shall require a lot to be designated on a mobile home park plan.
100 Year Flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Open Space Development: A subdivision in which the lot sizes are reduced below those normally
required which in return for the provision of permanent open space owned in common by lot/unit owners,
the Town, or a land conservation organization.
Person: Includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as
an individual.
Preliminary Subdivision Plan: The preliminary drawings indicating the proposed layout of the
subdivision to be submitted to the Board for its consideration.
Recording Plan: Recording Plan: A copy of the Final Plan which is recorded at the Registry of Deeds.
Resubdivision: The division of an existing subdivision or any change in the plan for an approved
subdivision which effects the lot lines, including land transactions by the subdivider not indicated on the
approved plan.
Solar Collector: A device, or combination of devices, structure, or part of a device or structure that
transforms direct solar energy into thermal, chemical, or electrical energy and that contributes to a
building's energy supply.
Solar Energy System: A complete design or assembly consisting of a solar energy collector, an energy
storage facility (when used), and components for the distribution of transformed energy.
Stream, River or Brook: River, stream or brook means a channel between defined banks. A channel is
created by the action of surface water and has two (2) or more of the following characteristics.
A. It is depicted as a solid or broken blue line on the most recent edition of the U.S.
Geological Survey 7.5-minute series topography map or if that is not available, a 15-
minute series topography map.
B. It contains or is known to contain flowing water continuously for a period of at least 3
months of the year in most years.
C. The channel bed is primarily composed of material such as sand and gravel, parent
material or bedrock that has been deposited or scoured by water.
D. The channel contains aquatic animals such as fish, aquatic insects or mollusks in the
water or, if no surface water is present in the stream bed.
E. The channel bed contains aquatic vegetation and is essentially devoid of upland
vegetation.
River, stream or brook does not mean a ditch or other drainage way constructed and maintained solely for
the purpose of draining storm water or a grassy swale.
Subdivision: The division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more lots as defined by Title 30-A
M.R.S.A. Section 4401. In addition shall include developments where there are three or more units
involved such as mobile home parks, multiple family housing, apartment houses, multiple housing units,
and condominiums.
Subdivision, Major: Any subdivision containing more than four lots or dwelling units, or any
subdivision containing a proposed street.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
5
Subdivision, Minor: Any subdivision containing not more than four lots or dwelling units, and in which
no street is proposed to be constructed.
Substantial Construction: Completing of at least 30% of the required infrastructure improvements
measured as a percentage of total estimated cost of improvements.
Tract, or Parcel, of Land: All contiguous land in the same ownership, whether or not the land is
separated at any point by: an intermittent or non-navigable stream, provided that lands on the opposite
sides of a public or private road are considered each a separate tract or parcel of land unless the road was
established by the owner of land on both sides of the road after September 22, 19971.
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE
4.1 Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to establish an orderly, equitable and expeditious
procedure for reviewing subdivisions.
4.2 Agenda. In order to avoid unnecessary delays in processing applications for subdivision review,
the Board shall prepare an agenda for each regularly scheduled meeting. Applicants shall request
to be placed on the Board's agenda at least twenty eight (28) days in advance of a regularly
scheduled meeting by contacting the Chair or the Planner. Applicants who attend a meeting but
who are not on the Board's agenda may be heard but only after all agenda items have been
completed, and then only if a majority of the Board so votes. Every application shall be
accompanied by the written certificate of the Town's Code Enforcement Officer that the applicant
is not in violation of any Town Ordinance regulating land use. No application shall be considered
complete, nor shall any application be in order for review or approval unless accompanied by this
written certificate. The Board shall not waive this requirement.
4.3 Joint Meetings. If any portion of the proposed subdivision crosses the boundary of an adjacent
municipality, the Planning Board shall meet jointly with that municipality's planning board to
discuss the application.
ARTICLE V. PREAPPLICATION FOR MINOR AND MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS
5.1 Submission.
A. The Preapplication Sketch Plan shall show, in simple sketch form, the proposed layout of
streets, lots, and other features in relation to existing conditions. The Sketch Plan, which
may be a freehand pencilled sketch, should be supplemented with general information to
describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development. It is
recommended that the sketch plan be superimposed on or accompanied by a copy of the
Assessor's Map(s) on which the land is located. The Sketch Plan shall be accompanied
by
1. A copy of a portion of the U.S.G.S. topographic map of the area showing the outline
of the proposed subdivision, unless the proposed subdivision is less than ten acres in
size.
2. A statement concerning timber harvesting resulting in any violation of the
Liquidation Harvesting Rule.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
6
B. When the proposed subdivision will encompass twenty (20) or more acres and five or
more lots and is located in the Rural I or Rural II District as defined in the Town of
Turner Zoning Ordinance, the applicant shall submit sketch plans of both a traditional
subdivision layout and open space or creative design subdivision layout.
C. The sketch plan for an open space or creative design subdivision will show how the
following applicable provisions will be incorporated in subdivision design.
1. The policy of the Town of Turner to encourage use of prime agricultural land for
farming;
2. The policy of the Town of Turner to use residential development techniques that
conserve land, significant natural areas and reduce construction costs;
3. The policy of the Town of Turner that development that takes place in forested
areas to conserve forest lands and resource values;
4. The policy of the Town of Turner to minimize impacts of development upon
recognized historic buildings and natural sites/areas;
5. The policy of the Town of Turner to minimize the loss of the values of
significant scenic areas and sites from encroaching development;
6. The parcel’s unique features that may include but not be limited to agricultural
land, forest land, fields, ridges, stone walls, tree lines, streams, wetlands, wildlife
habitat, and scenic views and how such features will be conserved and integrated
into the subdivision design.
5.2 Ownership Interest. The developer will furnish written evidence showing his interest (option,
contract for sale, etc.) in the property to be subdivided to the Planning Board.
5.3 Proposed Road Name and Numbering System. The developer shall submit to the Board the
name proposed for any new public or privately owned road and a numbering system that
complies with Section 5 of the Turner Addressing Ordinance.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
7
ARTICLE VI. MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
6.1 General. In any case in which, because of the complexity of the subdivision proposal or
circumstances indicating that some aspect of the proposal is likely to present a substantial risk to
public health, safety, or welfare, the Planning Board may require the applicant to submit any of
the additional information which would be required for a major subdivision where necessary to
assure that a hazardous condition will not be present.
6.2 Procedure.
A. Within six months after receipt of the sketch plan by the Board the sub divider shall
submit an application for approval of a Final Plan at least twenty-eight (28) days prior to
a scheduled meeting of the Board. Failure to do so shall require resubmission of the
Sketch Plan to the Board. The Final Plan shall approximate the layout shown on the
Sketch Plan, plus any recommendations made by the Board. The Board shall provide the
sub divider with a dated receipt of a Final Plan application at the Board Meeting where
the Final Plan application is first presented and heard by the Board. Every application
shall be accompanied by the written certificate of the Town's Code Enforcement Officer
that the applicant is not in violation of any Town Ordinance regulating land use. No
application shall be considered complete, nor shall any application be in order for review
or approval, unless accompanied by this written certificate.
B. All applications for Final Plan approval for a minor Subdivision shall be accompanied by
an application fee of $100 per lot, dwelling unit, payable by check to the Town of Turner.
There shall be an additional payment of $150.00 for each lot or dwelling unit .This
portion of the application fee shall be known as the Planning Board Review Escrow
Account, a dedicated account. The monies shall be made by check payable to the Town
of Turner, Maine. These funds or portion thereof may, from time to time, be used by the
Planning Board, for purposes to be determined by the Planning Board in order to make
payments for reasonable costs, expenses and services incurred by or contracted for by the
Town through the Planning Board at its discretion which relates directly to the review of
the subdivision application. Such services may include, but need not be limited to,
consulting engineering fees, architectural fees, land uses planner fees and attorney fees.
All fees must relate to the review of the application pursuant to the review criteria of the
Town of Turner ordinances and the laws of the State of Maine. If the balance in the
applicant's portion of the Planning Board Review Escrow Account shall be drawn down
by 75%, the Board shall require that an additional $50.00 per lot or dwelling unit or unit
contained in a commercial or business complex be deposited by the applicant. The Board
shall continue to notify the applicant and require an additional $50.00 per lot or unit be
deposited as necessary whenever the balance of the account is drawn down to 75% of the
original deposit. The Town at the request of the Planning Board shall refund all the
remaining monies in the account upon the payment of all costs and services related to the
Planning Board review. Such payment of remaining monies shall be made no later than
30 days after the approval of the application, denial of application, or approval with
condition of application. Such refund shall be accompanied by final accounting of
expenditures from the fund. The monies in such fund shall not be used by the Planning
Board for any enforcement purposes.
C. Upon receipt of an application for approval of a Minor Subdivision, the Planning Board
shall notify in writing all owners of abutting property to the proposed subdivision.
D. The subdivider, or his duly authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of the
Board to discuss the Final Plan.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
8
E. At the first meeting held, the Board shall notify the applicant whether or not the
application is complete, and what, if any, additional submissions are required for a
complete application.
F. The Board shall hold a public hearing on each application at the first meeting the
application is presented, and shall publish notice of the date, time, and place of the
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least two times, the
date of the first publication to be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Notice of
the public hearing shall be mailed to all abutters of the proposed subdivision seven (7)
days prior to the hearing by the Town of Turner Planning Board.
G. Within thirty days of receipt of a complete application, or within another time limit as
may be otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board and the sub divider, the Board shall
make findings of fact on the application, and approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the Final Plan. The Board shall specify in writing its findings of facts and reasons for any
conditions or denial.
6.3 Submissions.
Applications for a Minor Subdivision shall be submitted on the application forms provided by
the Town. Ten (10) copies of the completed application form, required plans, and related
information shall be submitted to the Chair or Planner no less than twenty-eight (28) days
prior to the regular scheduled meeting.
The subdivision plan for a Minor Subdivision shall consist of two reproducible, stable based
transparent originals, one to be recorded at the Registry of Deeds, the other to be filed at the
Municipal Office and three paper copies of one or more maps or drawings drawn to a legible
scale such that all necessary detail can easily be read. Plans shall be no larger than 24 by 36
inches in size, and shall have a margin of two inches outside of the border lines on the left
side for binding and a one inch margin outside the border along the remaining sides. Space
shall be provided for endorsement by the Board. The Applicant shall provide copies of the
application no less than twenty eight (28) days prior to the regular meeting.
The Planning Board shall make available at Town Hall documents for review by the Fire
Department, Rescue Chief, Road Commissioner, and Superintendent of Schools. The
Planning Board can request that the Fire Chief, Rescue Chief, The Road Commissioner and
Superintendent of Schools provide the Planning Board with official comments upon the
adequacy of their department's existing capacity to service the proposed development
.
The application for approval of a Minor Subdivision shall include the following information:
1. Proposed name of the subdivision, or identifying title, and the name of the
municipality in which it is located, plus the Assessor's Map and Lot Numbers.
2. A field survey of the boundary lines of the tract, giving complete descriptive data
by bearings and distances, made and certified by a professional land surveyor.
The corners of the tract shall be located on the ground and marked by
monuments. At least one corner of the parcel shall be identified with relation to
abutting property. The plan shall indicate the type of monument set or found at
each lot corner.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
9
3. A copy of the deed from which the survey was based. A copy of all deed
restrictions, easements, rights-of-way, or other encumbrances currently affecting
the property.
4. A copy of any deed restrictions intended to cover all or part of the lots in the
subdivision.
5. Indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the subdivision.
a. When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by subsurface wastewater
disposal systems, test pit analyses, prepared by a Licensed Site Evaluator
shall be provided. A map showing the location of all test pits dug on the
site shall be submitted.
6. Indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the subdivision.
Evidence of adequate ground water supply and quality shall be submitted by a
well driller or a hydro geologist familiar with the area.
7. The date the Plan was prepared, north point, graphic map scale, names and
addresses of the record owner, subdivider, and individual or company who
prepared the plan, and the names of adjoining property owners. The plan(s) shall
be embossed with the seal by the professional engineer, surveyor or planner, or
all of the above, as the case may be.
8. A copy of the portion of the county Soil Survey covering the subdivision.
9. Contour lines at the interval specified by the Planning Board, showing elevations
in relation to Mean Sea Level.
10. If any portion of the subdivision is in a flood-prone area, the 100-year flood
elevation shall be delineated on the plan. The final plan shall include a condition
of approval that principal structures will be constructed with their lowest floor,
including the basement, at least one foot above 100- year flood elevation.
11. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan.
12. A plan to control surface drainage prepared by a Licensed Professional Engineer.
13. The location of any fresh water wetlands.
14. The location of river, stream or brook within or abutting the proposed
subdivision.
15. The location and nature of significant wildlife identified by the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or the Town of Turner.
16. Any portion of the subdivision which is located within the watershed of a lake or
pond shall be identified.
17. A phosphorus impact analysis and control plan when determined as necessary by
the Board.
18. The location of any zoning boundaries affecting the subdivision.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
10
19. The location known of potential archaeological resources.
20. Identification of known rare and endangered species and measures to protect
them.
21. The location of documented historic buildings and sites on or adjacent to the site
and measures to minimize impacts of them.
22. The location of scenic sites or views as identified in the Town of Turner
Comprehensive Plan.
23. The estimated cost of infrastructure improvements and a statement of the
applicant’s technical and financial capacity to carry out the project as proposed.
24. A copy of the approved Driveway or Entrance permit issued by the Maine
Department of Transportation if a driveway or entrance will enter onto Route 4,
Route 117, Route 219, Center Bridge Road, Upper Street or Weston Road.
25. A statement indicating if the applicant will install utilities above or below
ground.
26. A map or plan of the subdivision identifying farmland.
ARTICLE VII. PRELIMINARY PLAN FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION
7.1 Procedure.
Procedure. Preliminary Plan review is optional at the Applicant’s request. Should the Applicant
elect to forego Preliminary Plan review, then the Final Plan review must include all of the
requirement submission information of the Preliminary Plan review along with the requirements
of the Final Plan review. A Public Hearing will be required.
A. Within six months after receipt of the sketch plan by the Planning Board, the subdivider
shall submit an application for approval of a Preliminary Plan at least twenty-eight (28)
days prior to a regular scheduled meeting of the Planning Board. Failure to do so shall
require resubmission of the Sketch Plan to the Board. The Preliminary Plan shall
approximate the layout shown on the Sketch Plan, plus any recommendations made by
the Board. The Board shall provide the subdivider with a dated receipt of a Preliminary
Plan application at the Board meeting where the Preliminary Plan application is first
presented and heard by the Board. Every application shall be accompanied by the written
certificate of the Town's Code Enforcement Officer that the applicant is not in violation
of any Town Ordinance regulating land use. No application shall be considered
complete, nor shall any application be in order for review or approval, unless
accompanied by this written certificate.
B. All applications for Preliminary Plan approval for a Major Subdivision shall be
accompanied by an application fee of $100.00 per lot, dwelling unit, or unit contained in
a shopping center or similar commercial establishment payable by check to the Town of
Turner. There shall be an additional payment of $150.00 for each lot or dwelling unit or
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
11
for each unit contained in a shopping center, mini mall, business complex or similar
commercial establishment. This portion of the application fee shall be known as the
Planning Board Review Escrow Account, a dedicated account. The initial payment into
the Planning Board Review Escrow Account shall in no case exceed $3,000.00. The
monies shall be made by check payable to the Town of Turner, Maine. These funds or
portion thereof may, from time to time, be used by the Planning Board, for purposes to be
determined by the Planning Board in order to make payments for reasonable costs,
expenses and services incurred by or contracted for by the Town through the Planning
Board at its discretion which relates directly to the review of the subdivision application.
Such services may include, but need not be limited to, consulting engineering fees,
architectural fees, land uses planner fees and attorney fees. All fees must relate to the
review of the application pursuant to the review criteria of the balance in the applicant's
portion of the Planning Board Review Escrow Account shall be drawn down by 75%, the
Board shall require that an addition $50.00 per lot or dwelling unit or unit contained in a
commercial or business complex be deposited by the applicant. The Board shall continue
to notify the applicant and require an additional $50.00 per lot or unit be deposited as
necessary whenever the balance of the account is drawn down to 75% of the original
deposit. The Town at the request of the Planning Board shall refund all the remaining
monies in the account upon the payment of all costs and services related to the Planning
Board review. Such payment of remaining monies shall be made no later than 30 days
after the approval of the application, denial of application, or approval with condition of
application. Such refund shall be accompanied by final accounting of expenditures from
the fund. The monies in such fund shall not be used by the Planning Board for any
enforcement purposes.
C. The subdivider, or his duly authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of the
Board to discuss the Preliminary Plan.
D. The Board shall hold a public hearing on the Preliminary Plan application at the first
meeting the application is presented and shall publish notice of the date, time and place of
the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least two times,
the date of the first publication to be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Notice
of the public hearing shall be mailed to all abutters of the proposed subdivision seven (7)
days prior to the hearing by the Town of Turner.
When a subdivision is located within 500 feet of a municipal boundary, the Planning
Board shall notify the Clerk and the Planning Board of the adjacent municipality
involved, at least ten days prior to the Public Hearing.
E. At the first meeting held, the Board shall notify the applicant whether or not the
application is complete, and what, if any, additional submissions are required for a
complete application.
F. Within sixty days of receipt of a complete application, or within another time limit as
may be otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board and the subdivider, the Board shall
make findings of fact on the application, and approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the Preliminary Plan. The Board shall specify in writing its findings of facts and reasons
for any conditions or denial.
G. When granting approval to a Preliminary Plan, the Board shall state the conditions of
such approval, if any, with respect to:
1. The specific changes which it will require in the Final Plan;
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
12
2. The character and extent of the required improvements for which waivers may
have been requested and which in the Board's opinion may be waived without
jeopardy to the public health, safety, and general welfare; and
3. The amount and type of all performance guarantees which it will require as
prerequisite to the approval of the Final Plan.
H. Approval of a Preliminary Plan shall not constitute approval of the Final Plan or intent to
approve the Final Plan, but rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the
design of the Preliminary Plan as a guide to the preparation of the Final Plan. The Final
Plan shall be submitted for approval of the Board upon fulfillment of the requirements of
this Ordinance and the conditions of preliminary approval, if any. Prior to the approval
of the Final Plan, the Board may require additional changes or conditions the Board
deems necessary, as a result of the further study of a subdivision or as a result of
additional information received, so that the Final Plan satisfies all of the approval criteria
set forth in this Ordinance or in 30-A M.R.S.A. §4404 for subdivision approval.
7.2 Preliminary Plan Submissions.
A. Applications for preliminary plan approval shall be submitted on the application forms
provided by the Town. Ten (10) copies of the completed application form, required plans,
and related information shall be submitted to the Planning Board no less than twentyeight
(28) days prior to the regular scheduled meeting.
B. The preliminary plan shall consist of one or more maps or drawings which may be
printed or reproduced on paper, with all dimensions shown in feet or decimals of a foot.
The Preliminary Plan shall be drawn to a legible scale such that all necessary detail can
easily be read. The Applicant shall provide copies of the application no less than twentyeight
(28) days prior to the regular meeting. The Planning Board shall make available at
Town Hall documents for review by the Fire Department, Rescue Chief, Road
Commissioner, and Superintendent of Schools. The Planning Board can request that the
Fire Chief, Rescue Chief, The Road Commissioner and Superintendent of Schools
provide the Planning Board with official comments upon the adequacy of their
department's existing capacity to service the proposed development.
The following information shall either be shown on the Preliminary Plan or accompany
the application for preliminary approval:
1. Location Map: The Preliminary Plan shall be accompanied by a Location Map
adequate to show the relationship of the proposed subdivision to the adjacent
properties, and to allow the Board to locate the subdivision within the
municipality. The Location Map shall show:
a. Existing subdivisions in the proximity of the proposed subdivision.
b. Locations and names of existing and proposed streets.
c. Boundaries and designations of any zoning districts.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
13
d. An outline of the proposed subdivision and any remaining portion of the
owner's property if the Preliminary Plan submitted covers only a portion
of the owner's entire contiguous holding.
2. Proposed name of the subdivision and the name of the municipality in which it is
located, plus the Tax Assessor's Map and Lot Numbers.
3. An actual field survey of the boundary lines of the tract, giving complete
descriptive data by bearings and distances, made and certified by a professional
land surveyor. The corners of the tract shall be located on the ground and marked
by monuments. The plan shall indicate the type of monument set or found at each
lot corner.
4. A copy of the deed from which the survey was based. A copy of all covenants or
deed restrictions, easements, rights-of-way, or other encumbrances currently
affecting the property.
5. A copy of any covenants or deed restrictions intended to cover all or part of the
lots in the subdivision.
6. Contour lines at the interval specified by the Planning Board, showing elevations
in relation to Mean Sea Level.
7. The number of acres within the proposed subdivision, location of property lines,
existing buildings, watercourses, vegetative cover type, and other essential
existing physical features shall be shown on the plan.
8. Indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the subdivision.
a. When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by subsurface sewage
disposal systems, test pit analyses, prepared by a Licensed Site Evaluator
shall be provided. A map showing the location of all test pits dug on the
site shall be submitted.
9. Indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the subdivision.
Evidence of adequate ground water supply and quality shall be submitted by a
well driller or a hydro geologist familiar with the area.
10. The date the Plan was prepared, magnetic north point, graphic map scale, names
and addresses of the record owner, subdivider, and individual or company who
prepared the plan. The plan(s) shall be stamped or sealed by a licensed engineer,
surveyor or planner, or all of them, as the case may be.
11. The names and addresses of owners of record of adjacent property, including any
property directly across an existing public street from the subdivision.
12. The location of any zoning boundaries affecting the subdivision.
13. The location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water mains, culverts, and
drainage ways on or adjacent to the property to be subdivided.
14. The location, names and present widths of existing and proposed streets,
highways, easements, building lines, parks and other open spaces on or adjacent
to the subdivision.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
14
15. The width and location of any streets or public improvements shown upon the
Comprehensive Plan, if any, within the subdivision.
16. The proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and lot areas.
17. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of
such dedication.
18. The location of any open space to be preserved and an indication of its
improvement and management.
19. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan.
20. A plan to control surface drainage, prepared by a Licensed Professional Engineer.
21. A copy of that portion of the county soil survey covering the subdivision. When
the medium intensity soil survey shows soils which are generally unsuitable for
the uses proposed, the Board may require the submittal of a report by a Registered
Soil Scientist indicating the suitability of soil conditions for those uses.
22. If any portion of the subdivision is in a flood-prone area, the boundaries of any
flood hazard areas and the 100-year flood elevation shall be delineated on the
plan.
23. The location of any fresh water wetlands.
24. The location of river, stream or brook within or abutting the proposed subdivision.
25. The location and nature of significant wildlife habitat identified by the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or the Town of Turner.
26. Any portion of the subdivision which is located within the watershed of a lake or
pond shall be identified.
27. A phosphorus impact analysis and control plan when determined as necessary by
the Board.
28. The location known or potential archaeological resources.
29. Identification of known rare and endangered species and measures to protect
them.
30. The location of documented historic buildings and sites on or adjacent to the site
and measures to minimize impacts on them.
31. The location of scenic sites or views as identified in the Town of Turner
Comprehensive Plan.
32. The estimated cost of infrastructure improvements and a statement of the
applicant’s technical and financial capacity to carry out the project as proposed.
33. A Traffic Impact Analysis when required by the Board prepared by a Professional
Engineer.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
15
34. A copy of the approved Driveway or Entrance permit issued by the Maine
Department of Transportation if a driveway or entrance will enter onto Route 4,
Route 117, Route 219, Center Bridge Road, Upper Street or Weston Road.
35. A statement indicating if the applicant will install utilities above or below ground.
36. The location of farmland.
ARTICLE VIII. FINAL PLAN FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION
8.1 Procedure.
A. The subdivider shall, within 12 months after the approval of the Preliminary Plan, file
with the Board an application for approval of the Final Plan. If the application for the
Final Plan is not submitted within 12 months after Preliminary Plan approval, the Board
may refuse without prejudice to act on the Final Plan, and require resubmission of the
Preliminary Plan. The Final Plan shall approximate the layout shown on the Preliminary
Plan, plus any recommendations made by the Board. The Board shall provide the
subdivider with a dated receipt of a Final Plan application at the Board meeting where the
Final Plan application is first presented and heard by the Board. Every application shall
be accompanied by the written certificate of the Town's Code Enforcement Officer that
the applicant is not in violation of any Town Ordinance regulating land use. No
application shall be considered complete, nor shall any application be in order for review
or approval, unless accompanied by this written certificate.
B. The subdivider, or his duly authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of the
Board to discuss the Final Plan.
C. At the first meeting held on a Final Plan, the Board shall notify the applicant whether or
not the application is complete, and what, if any, additional submissions are required for a
complete application and determine whether to hold a public hearing on the Final Plan
application.
D. Prior to approval of the Final Plan application, the following approvals shall be obtained
in writing, where applicable.
1. Maine Department of Environmental Protection, under the Site Location of
Development Act, Natural Resource Protection Act, Stormwater Management
Law, or if a Wastewater Discharge License is needed.
2. Maine Department of Human Services, if the subdivider proposes to provide a
Community Water System as defined by the State of Maine Rules of the
Department of Human Services Relating to Drinking Water (10-144A. C.M.R.
231).
3. Maine Department of Human Services, if a centralized or shared subsurface
sewage disposal system(s) is to be utilized.
4. An approved Driveway or Entrance permit issued by the Maine Department of
Transportation if a driveway or entrance will enter onto Route 4, Route 117,
Route 219, Center Bridge Road, Upper Street or Weston Road.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
16
E. A public hearing may be held by the Planning Board within thirty days after the issuance
of a receipt for the submittal of a complete application. This hearing shall be advertised
in a newspaper of local circulation at least two times, the date of the first publication to
be at least seven days before the hearing, and the notice of the hearing shall be posted in
at least three prominent places at least seven days prior to the hearing. Notice of public
hearing shall be mailed to all abutters of the proposed subdivision seven (7) days prior to
the hearing.
When a subdivision is located within 500 feet of a municipal boundary, and a public
hearing is to be held, the Planning Board shall notify the Clerk and the Planning Board of
the adjacent municipality involved, at least ten days prior to the hearing.
F. Before the Board grants approval of the Final Plan, the subdivider shall meet the
performance guarantee requirements contained in Article XII.
G. If the subdivision is located in more than one municipality, the Board shall have a joint
meeting with the Planning Board of the adjacent municipality to discuss the Plan.
H. The Board, within thirty days from the public hearing or within sixty days of receiving a
complete application, if no hearing is held, shall make findings of fact, and conclusions
relative to the standards contained in Title 30-A M.R.S.A. §4404 and in this Ordinance.
If the Board finds that all standards of the Statute and this Ordinance have been met, they
shall approve the Final Plan. If the Board finds that any of the standards of the Statute
and this Ordinance have not been met, the Board shall either deny the application or
approve the application with conditions to ensure all of the standards will be met by the
subdivision. The reasons for any conditions shall be slated in the records of the Board.
8.2 Submissions.
The Final Plan shall consist of one or more maps or drawings drawn to a legible scale such that
all necessary detail can easily be read. Plans shall be no larger than 24 by 36 inches in size, and
shall have a margin of two inches outside of the border line on the left side for binding and a one
inch margin outside the border along the remaining sides. Space shall be reserved thereon for
endorsement by the Board. Two reproducible, stable based transparent originals, embossed with
the seal of the professional who prepared the plan, one to be recorded at the Registry of Deeds,
the other to be filed at the Municipal Offices, and three paper copies of the plan shall be
submitted. The Applicant shall provide copies of the final plan no less than twenty-eight (28)
days prior the regular meeting. The Planning Board shall make available at Town Hall
documents for review by the Fire Department, Rescue Chief, Road Commissioner, and
Superintendent of Schools. The Planning Board can request that the Fire Chief, Rescue Chief,
The Road Commissioner and Superintendent of Schools provide the Planning Board with official
comments upon the adequacy of their department's existing capacity to service the proposed
development.
The application for approval of the Final Plan shall include the following information.
A. Proposed name of the subdivision and the name of the municipality in which it is located,
plus the Assessor's Map and Lot Numbers.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
17
B. An actual field survey of the boundary lines of the tract, giving complete descriptive data
by bearings and distances, made and certified by a professional land surveyor. The
corners of the tract shall be located on the ground and marked by monuments. The plan
shall indicate the type of monument set or found at each lot corner.
C. The number of acres within the proposed subdivision, location of property lines, existing
buildings, watercourses, and other essential existing physical features.
D. Indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the subdivision.
E. Indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the subdivision.
F. The date the Plan was prepared, magnetic and true north point, graphic map scale, names
and addresses of the record owner, subdivider, and individual or company who prepared
the plan.
G. The location of any zoning boundaries effecting the subdivision.
H. The location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water mains, culverts, and
drainage ways on or adjacent to the property to be subdivided.
I. The location, names and present widths of existing and proposed streets, highways,
easements, building lines, parks and other open spaces on or adjacent to the sub
division. The plan shall contain sufficient data to allow the location, bearing and length
of every street line, lot line, and boundary line to be readily determined and be
reproduced upon the ground. These lines shall be tied to reference points previously
established. The length of all straight lines, the deflection angles radii, length of curves
and central angles of curves, tangent distances and tangent bearings for each street shall
be included. The final plan showing a proposed road shall indicate by lines or dots in the
center of the proposed road intervals of every fifty (50) feet beginning at the intersection
with the existing street.
J. If not provided during Preliminary Plan review, the width and location of any streets or
public improvements shown upon the Comprehensive Plan, if any, within the
subdivision.
K. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such
dedication. Written offers of cession to the municipality of all public open spaces shown
on the plan, and copies of agreements or other documents showing the manner in which
open spaces to be retained by the developer or lot owners are to be maintained shall be
submitted. If open space or other land is to be offered to the municipality, written
evidence that the Municipal Officers are satisfied with the legal sufficiency of the written
offer of cession shall be included.
L. If any portion of the subdivision is in a flood-prone area, the 100-year flood elevation
shall be delineated on the plan. The final plan shall include a condition of approval that
principal structures will be constructed with their lowest floor, including the basement, at
least one foot above 100- year flood elevation.
M. The location of wetlands.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
18
8.3 Final Approval and Filing
A. No plan shall be approved by the Planning Board as long as the subdivider has
outstanding violations on any approved subdivision plan within the Town of Turner.
B. Upon findings of fact and determination that all standards in Title 30-A, M.R.S.A. §4404,
and this Ordinance have been met, and upon voting to approve the subdivision, the Board
shall sign the Final Plan. The Board shall specify in writing its findings of facts and
reasons for any conditions or denial. One copy of the signed plan shall be retained by the
Board as part of its permanent records. One copy of the signed plan shall be forwarded to
the Tax Assessor. One copy of the signed plan shall be forwarded to the Code
Enforcement Officer. Any subdivision not recorded in the Registry of Deeds by the
subdivider within ninety days of the date upon which the plan is approved and signed by
the Board shall become null and void.
C. At the time the Board grants Final Plan approval, it may permit the Plan to be divided
into two or more sections subject to any conditions the Board deems necessary in order to
insure the orderly development of the Plan.
D. The approval by the Board of a subdivision plan shall not be deemed to constitute or be
evidence of any acceptance by the municipality of any street, easement, or other open
space shown on such plan. When a park, playground, or other recreation area shall have
been shown on the plan to be dedicated to the municipality, approval of the Plan shall not
constitute an acceptance by the municipality of such areas. The Board shall require the
Plan to contain appropriate notes to this effect. The Board may also require the filing of a
written agreement between the applicant and the Municipal Officers covering future deed
and title, dedication, and provision for the cost of grading, development, equipment, and
maintenance of any such dedicated area.
E. Failure to commence substantial construction of the required infrastructure improvements
for the subdivision within two years of the date of approval and signing of the final Plan
shall render the Plan null and void. A statement of this effect must appear on any final
plan. Upon good cause shown, the Board may extend the approval for additional two
year periods. The extension request must be made to the Board at least thirty days prior
to the time of expiration. Upon determining that a subdivision's approval has expired
under this paragraph, the Board shall have a notice placed in the Registry of Deeds to that
effect.
ARTICLE IX. ENFORCEMENT
9.1 Inspection of Required Improvements
A. At least five days prior to commencing each major phase of construction of required
infrastructure improvements, the sub divider or builder shall:
1. Notify the Code Enforcement Officer in writing of the time when he proposes to
commence construction of such improvements, so that the Municipal Officers can
cause inspection to be made to assure that all municipal specifications and
requirements shall be met during the construction of required infrastructure
improvements, and to assure the satisfactory completion of improvements and
utilities required by the Board.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
19
2. Deposit with the municipal officers a check for the amount of 2% of the estimated
costs of construction and infrastructure improvements to pay for the costs of
inspection. If upon satisfactory completion of construction and cleanup there are
funds remaining, the surplus funds shall be refunded to the applicant within 30 days.
If the inspection account shall be drawn down by 90%, the applicant shall deposit an
additional 1% of the estimated costs of construction and infrastructure
improvements.
B. If the inspecting official finds, upon inspection of the infrastructure improvements that
any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the plans
and specifications filed by the subdivider, he shall so report in writing to the Municipal
Officers, Planning Board, and the subdivider or builder. The Municipal Officers shall
take any steps necessary to preserve the municipality's rights.
C. If at any time before or during the construction of the required infrastructure
improvements, it appears to be necessary or desirable to modify the required
improvements, the inspecting official is authorized to approve minor modifications due to
unforeseen circumstances such as encountering hidden outcrops of bedrock, natural
springs, etc. The inspecting official shall issue any approval under this section in writing
and shall transmit a copy of the approval to the Board. Revised plans shall be filed with
the Town. For major modifications, such as relocation of rights-of-way, property
boundaries, changes of grade by more than 1%, etc., the applicant shall submit to the
Planning Board an amended application for review and approval in accordance
with Section 6.2.
D. At the close of each summer construction season, the Town shall, at the expense of the
subdivider, have the site inspected by a qualified individual. By December 1 of each year
during which construction was done on the site, the inspector shall submit a report to the
Board based on that inspection, addressing whether storm water and erosion control
measures (both temporary and permanent) are in place, are properly installed, and appear
adequate to do the job they were designed for. The report shall also include a discussion
and recommendations on any problems which were encountered.
E. Prior to the sale of any lot, the sub divider shall provide the Board with a letter from a
Professional Land Surveyor, stating that all monumentation shown on the plan has been
installed.
F. Upon completion of street construction and prior to a vote by the Municipal Officers to
submit a proposed town way to a town meeting, a written certification signed by a
licensed professional engineer registered in the State of Maine shall be required by the
Municipal Officers at the expense of the applicant, certifying that the proposed town way
meets or exceeds the design and construction requirements of the Town of Turner, Maine,
Street Construction Ordinance. “As built” plans shall be submitted to the Municipal
Officers.
G. The subdivider or builder shall be required to maintain all infrastructure improvements
and provide for snow removal on streets and sidewalks and maintenance until acceptance
of the improvements by the municipality.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
20
9.2 Violations and Enforcement
A. No plan of a division of land within the municipality which would constitute a
subdivision shall be recorded in the Registry of Deeds until a Final Plan has been
approved by the Board in accordance with Title 30-A, M.R.S.A. §4404 and this
Ordinance.
B. No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity may convey, offer or agree to convey
any land in a subdivision which has not been approved by the Board and recorded in the
Registry of Deeds.
C. No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity may convey, any land in an approved
subdivision which is not shown on the Final Plan as a separate lot.
D. Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who conveys, offers or agrees to
convey any land in a subdivision which has not been approved as required by this
Ordinance shall be penalized in accordance with Title 30-A M.R.S.A., Section 4452.
Each day the violation exists shall be considered a separate violation. The Municipality
may institute proceedings to enjoin the violation of this section, and may collect
attorneys’ fees and court costs if it is the prevailing party.
E. No public utility or any utility company of any kind shall serve any lot in a subdivision
for which a Final Plan has not been approved by the Board.
F. No person shall establish or develop a subdivision without first having a final plan
thereof approved by the Planning Board. “Develop” shall include grading or construction
of roads, grading of land or lots, or construction of any buildings.
G. Once a preliminary plan for a subdivision approval has been received by the Planning
Board no lot or lots shall be sold or developed until the final plan has been approved an
recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
H. Consent Agreements: The municipal officers, or their authorized agent, are hereby
authorized to enter into administrative consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating
violations of this Ordinance and collecting fines without court action.
I. Legal Actions: When the above action does not result in the complete correction or
abatement of the violation or nuisance condition, the Municipal Officers, upon notice
from the Code Enforcement Officer, are hereby directed to institute any and all actions
and proceedings, either legal or equitable, including seeking injunctions of violations and
the imposition of fines, that may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of
this Ordinance in the name of the municipality.
J. Fines: Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner’s agent or a
contractor, who orders or conducts any activity in violation of this Ordinance shall be
penalized in accordance with Title 30-A M.R.S.A., Section 4452. Each day the violation
exists shall be considered a separate violation.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
21
ARTICLE X. GENERAL STANDARDS
In reviewing applications for a subdivision, the Board shall consider the following general standards and
make findings that each, in addition to standards contained in Title 30-A, M.R.S.A., Section 4404, have
been met prior to the approval of a Final Plan. In all instances, the burden of proof shall be upon the
applicant.
10.1 Conformance with Comprehensive Plan. All proposed subdivisions shall be in conformity
with the Comprehensive Plan of the municipality and with the provisions of all pertinent state and
local codes and ordinances.
10.2 Open Space Provisions
A. The Board may require that a proposed subdivision design include a landscape plan that
will show the preservation of existing trees, the replacement of trees and vegetation,
graded contours, streams and the preservation of scenic, historic or environmentally
desirable areas.
B. The Board may require that the subdivider reserve an area equal to ten percent of his total
land as an open space and/or recreational area for use by property owners in the
subdivision. The developer may instead make a payment in lieu of dedication into a
municipal land acquisition fund. A payment in lieu of dedication shall be calculated at
the market value of land at the time of the subdivision, as determined by the municipal
tax assessor, and deposited into a municipal land acquisition or improvement fund.
1. If such an area is reserved, the Final Plan shall provide how title to the reserved
land shall be held and how costs of development, maintenance and taxes shall be
met.
2. Included in the instrument of conveyance to each property owner of the
subdivision shall be a statement of:
a) The manner of providing for the cost of development and maintenance
and for property taxes of the reserved land.
b) If appropriate, the individual property owner's pro rata share of
development costs, maintenance cost and property taxes of the reserved
land.
c) Land designed for public use shall not be subdivided for any other
purpose. This prohibition does not apply to land areas designed for later
development if the Subdivision Plan includes provision for development
in discrete stages.
d) Any area designated for common use shall be so arranged that each
property owner has access to it.
C. Land reserved for open space purposes shall be a character, configuration and location
suitable for the particular use intended. A site intended to be used for active recreation
purposes, such as a playground or a play field, should be relatively level and dry. The
Planning Board shall review open space plans to determine if the subdivider has made a
maximum effort to preserve scenic vistas and make available land for trails and lookouts,
etc.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
22
D. Reserved land acceptable to the Board and subdivider may be dedicated to the
municipality as a condition of approval.
E. The proposed subdivision shall provide safe pedestrian access within the subdivision and
interconnection with existing facilities on abutting properties including connection and/or
preservation of existing snowmobile trails to accomplish the goals of the Comprehensive
Plan.
10.3 Land Not Suitable for Development. The following lands shall not be included in the
calculations of building density for the purpose of meeting the requirements of Mobile Home
Parks and Multi-family Developments of three or more units.
A. Land which is located within the 100-year frequency floodplain as identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Flood Insurance Administration, unless the
subdivider shows proof through the submittal of materials prepared by a Professional
Land Surveyor which show that the property in question lies above the 100-year flood
level. The elevation of filled or made land shall not be considered.
B. Land which is part of a right-of-way, or easement, including utility easements.
C. Land that has been created by filling or draining a pond or wetland.
10.4 Blocks. Where street lengths exceed 1,000 feet between intersections with other streets, the
Board may require a utility/pedestrian easement, at least 20 feet in width, to provide for
underground utility crossings and/or a pedestrian pathway of at least five feet in width.
Maintenance obligations of the easement shall be included in the written description of the
easement.
10.5 Lots
A. All lots shall meet the minimum requirements of the Town of Turner's Zoning Ordinance.
The lot configuration should be designed to maximize the use of solar energy on building
sites with suitable orientation. Lack of restrictive covenants may necessitate larger lots.
B. Lot configuration and area shall be designed to provide for adequate off-street parking
and service facilities based upon the type of development contemplated. Wherever
possible, parking areas shall be laid out to coincide with building locations to maximize
solar energy gain.
C. Lots with multiple frontages shall be avoided wherever possible. When lots do have
frontage on two or more roads, the plan, and deed restrictions shall indicate vehicular
access shall be located only on the less traveled way.
D. Wherever possible, side lot line shall be perpendicular to the street.
E. The subdivision of tracts into parcels with more than twice the required minimum lot size
shall be laid out in such a manner as either to provide for or preclude future
resubdivision.
F. In the Rural I and II Districts, as defined in the Town of Turner Zoning Ordinance, each
lot shall contain a minimum of 20,000 square feet of land area that is not located in the
100-year floodplain, does not contain slopes greater than 20 percent and considered a
fresh water wetland.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
23
10.6 Utilities
A. The Planning Board may require utilities serving the subdivision to be installed
underground.
B. Underground utilities shall be installed prior to the installation of the final gravel base of
the road. All underground utilities shall be properly marked to avoid damage by future
excavations.
C. Street lighting, if required by the Planning Board, shall meet specifications established by
the Planning Board.
10.7 Required Improvements. The following improvements are required for all subdivisions unless
waived by the Board in accordance with provisions of this Ordinance.
A. Monuments
1. Permanent granite or cement monuments not less than four (4) inches square in
width or iron reinforcement rods at least 5/8 inches across the top and at least four
(4) feet in the ground shall be installed as follows:
1. Monuments shall be set at all street intersections and points of curvature,
but no further than 750 feet apart along street lines without curves or
intersections.
2. Monuments shall be set at all corners and angle points of the subdivision
boundaries and all lot boundary and angle points.
B. Water Supply
1. If a central water supply system is provided by the subdivider, the location and
protection of the source, and the design, construction and operation of the system
shall conform to the standards of the State of Maine Rules of the Department of
Human Services Relating to Drinking Water (10-144 A.C.M.R. 231).
2. Based on the recommendations of the Fire Department the Board may require the
subdivider to install systems to provide water for fire fighting purposes or to pay
for such systems.
C. Sewage Disposal
1. The developer shall submit evidence of soil suitability for subsurface sewage
disposal prepared by a Maine Licensed Site Evaluator in full compliance with the
requirements of the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
D. Surface Drainage
1. Where a subdivision is traversed by a stream, river, or surface water drainage
way, or where the Board has determined that surface water runoff to be created
by the subdivision should be controlled, there shall be provided easements or
drainage rights-of-way with swales, culverts, catch basins or other means of
channeling surface water within the subdivision and over other properties. This
storm water management system shall be designed by a Licensed Professional
Engineer.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
24
2. Drainage easements for existing watercourses or proposed drainage ways
shall be provided and indicated on the plan at least thirty feet wide,
conforming substantially with the lines of existing natural drainage.
3. A storm water drainage plan, showing ditching, culverts, storm drains,
easements, and other proposed improvements, meeting the standards of
Article XI. 2-3 shall be submitted.
E. Conservation, Erosion and Sediment Control.
Erosion of soil and sedimentation of water-courses and water bodies shall be
minimized. The following measures shall be included, where applicable, as part
of any Subdivision review and approval.
a. Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be done in
such a way as to minimize erosion.
b. Development shall keep cut-fill operations to a minimum and ensure
conformity with topography so as to create the least erosion potential and
so as to adequately handle surface water runoff.
c. The disturbed area and the duration of exposure of the disturbed area shall
be kept to a practical minimum.
d. Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practical.
e. Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be used to protect exposed critical
areas during development.
f. The permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control measure
shall be installed as soon as practical on the site.
g. Until the disturbed area is stabilized, sediment in the runoff water shall be
trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or other
acceptable methods.
h. Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation, regrading or
other development, it shall be the responsibility of the developer causing
such sedimentation to remove it from all adjoining surfaces, drainage
systems and watercourses and to repair any damage at his or her expense
as quickly as possible.
i. Maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses originating and
completely on private property is the responsibility of the owner to the
point of open discharge at the property line or at a communal watercourse
within the property.
j. The standards set forth in the Maine Erosion and Sediment Control
Handbook for Construction, Best Management Practices (March 1991 and
as amended) shall be employed.
k. The most current standards set forth in the Stormwater Management Law
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
25
administered by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection shall
be employed.
10.8 Land Features
A. Topsoil shall be considered part of the subdivision and shall not be removed from the site
except for surplus topsoil from roads, parking areas, and building excavations.
B. Except for normal thinning, landscaping, and cutting trees to provide access to direct
sunlight,existing vegetation shall be left intact to prevent soil erosion. The Board shall
require a developer to take measures to correct and prevent soil erosion in the proposed
subdivision.
C. The Board shall require a developer to take measures as contained in the Maine Erosion
and Sediment Control Best Management Practices to correct and prevent soil erosion in
the proposed subdivision.
10.9 Phosphorous Export
Projects proposed within the direct watershed of a lake or pond listed below shall be designed to
limit phosphorous runoff to the levels defined below. The Board shall keep an accurate record of
permits issued by watershed using an appropriate record keeping system, and shall review actual
development rates and recommend adjustments to the table at five year intervals, subject to a
reasonable appropriation by the Town to conduct such a reassessment, or the availability of
adequate State or regional grant programs or technical assistance programs. Adjustments shall be
made by amendment of this Ordinance and the Town's Comprehensive Plan.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
26
10.10 Lake Protection Level
LPL Phosphorus
Loads
Per Acre Phosphorus
Load (pounds)
Bear Pond High 2.31 0.035
Blacksnake Pond High 0.13 0.024
Crystal Pond High 3.04 0.035
Lake Auburn High 3.74 0.082
Lard Pond High 0.85 0.034
Lily Pond High 2.16 0.039
Little Wilson Pond High 7.27 0.031
Mud Pond (1) Medium 8.11 0.025
Mud Pond (2) High 0.39 0.037
Mud Pond (3) High 0.39 0.042
Pleasant Pond High 8.48 0.045
Round Pond High 0.35 0.038
Sandy Bottom Pond High 0.74 0.037
The Basin High 0.13 0.020
(1) North of Little Wilson Pond
(2) Mud Pond in Buckfield
(3) North of Sandy Bottom Pond
a. Phosphorous export from a proposed development shall be calculated according to the
procedures defined in "Phosphorous Control in Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide for
Evaluating New Development" (Maine DEP et.al., September 1989 with revision in
1992 and as may be amended). Upon request, copies of all worksheets and calculations
shall be made available to the Planning Board.
b. Phosphorous control measures shall meet the design criteria contained in "Phosphorus
Control in Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide for Reviewing Development" (Maine
DEP et al., September 1989 with revisions in 1992 or as may be amended). The Planning
Board shall require the reasonable use of vegetative buffers, limits on clearing, and
minimizing road lengths, and shall encourage the use of other non-structural measures
prior to allowing the use of high-maintenance structural measures such as infiltration
systems and wet ponds.
10.11 Construction in Flood Hazard Areas
When any part of a subdivision is located in a special flood hazard area as identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, the plan shall indicate that all principle structures on
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
27
lots in the subdivision shall be constructed with their lowest floor, including the basement, at
least one foot above the 100-year flood elevation. Such a restriction shall be included in the deed
to any lot which is included or partially included in the flood hazard area.
10.12 Mobile Home Parks
Proposed new mobile home parks and expansions to existing mobile home parks which would
constitute a subdivision as defined shall comply with the provisions of this Ordinance, the Town
of Turner's Zoning Ordinance, the Town of Turner's Street Construction Ordinance and the
following:
A. The mobile home park will be designed so that each mobile home is placed on a defined
lot clearly marked having access from a roadway within the mobile home park. The
roadways and lots will be laid out to provide safe and convenient access to every mobile
home lot. The lot layout will be designed so that the vehicular access to each lot is from
the internal road system of the mobile home park and not from existing public streets.
B. Each lot within in a mobile home park shall be of such dimensions to provide for two (2)
off-street parking spaces. Each park space shall contain minimum of 200 square feet.
The Planning Board may require additional parking areas within the mobile home park.
C. Lots within mobile home parks shall not be reduced below those required in the Town of
Turner's Zoning Ordinance.
D. Streets and walkways designed for the general use of the manufactured home community
residents shall be lighted during the hours of darkness. Lighting shall be provided and
maintained to produce a minimum of 0.1 footcandle (1.1 lux) at street level throughout
the system.
E. A 50-foot buffer strip shall be provided along all property boundaries. No structures,
streets or utilities may be placed in the buffer strip except that they may cross a buffer
strip to provide services to the park.
F. No lot in a mobile home park may be sold or conveyed without prior approval of the
Planning Board. Any such lot sold or conveyed shall meet the lot size requirement for a
single-family dwelling as contained in the Town of Turner's Zoning Ordinance.
10.13 Municipal Services
When the Board finds, based upon the recommendation of Department heads, that municipal
services do not have sufficient capacity to service the proposed subdivision, the Board may
require phasing of the subdivision to allow for the development of expanded municipal services,
deny the application or require the applicant to assist in upgrading municipal services.
10.14 Open Space Development
Open space subdivisions shall comply with the provisions set forth in the Town of Turner's
Zoning Ordinance.
10.15 Traffic Conditions
When conflicts exist between this Section and a Driveway Permit or Entrance Permit onto Route
4, Route 117, Route 219, Center Bridge Road, Upper Street or Weston Road, issued by the Maine
Department of Transportation, the most stringent or restrictive shall apply.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
28
A. Where a subdivision will be accessed from Route 4 a common access or shared
driveways should be developed.
B. A subdivision to be located in a Commercial II, Rural I or Rural II Zoning District as
defined in the Town of Turner Zoning Ordinance that will have lot access from an
existing street that has a peak hour volume of 200 vehicle trips or greater as determined
from available traffic counts from the Maine Department of Transportation shall be
limited to one (1) access point for the first lot and one (1) additional access point for each
500 feet of frontage beyond the first lot on such street. Where the subdivision will have
more than one (1) access point, spacing shall comply with Sections 10.15.E, F, and G.
A subdivision to be located in a Commercial I Zoning District as defined in the Town of
Turner Zoning Ordinance that will have lot access from an existing street that has a peak
hour volume of 200 vehicle trips or greater as determined from available traffic counts
from the Maine Department of Transportation shall be limited to one (1) access point for
the first lot and one (1) additional access point for each 400 feet of frontage beyond the
first lot on such street. Where the subdivision will have more than one access point,
spacing shall comply with Sections 10.15.E, F, and G.
C. Where a lot has frontage on two or more streets, the access to the lot shall be provided to
the lot across the frontage and to the street where there is lesser potential for traffic
congestion and for hazards to traffic and pedestrians unless other factors make it not
practical.
D. The Planning Board may require, based upon site distances and volume of traffic, the use
of shared or common driveways in the Rural I and Rural II Districts as defined in the
Town of Turner Zoning Ordinance, where such lots will be accessed by off-site public
streets.
E. Minimum corner clearance shall be measured from the point of tangency for the corner to
the point tangency for the access by type of driveway and meet the following.
Driveway
Minimum Corner Clearance (feet)
Intersection
Signalized
Intersection
Unsignalized
Low Volume <50 trips/day 150 50
Medium Volume >50-100 trips/day
<200 trips/hour
150 50
High Volume >200 trips/hour 500 250
F. Minimum distances between driveways serving the same parcel, measured from point of
tangency to point of tangency by type of driveway, shall be as follows:
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
29
Driveway Type
Minimum Spacing to Adjacent
Driveway by Driveway Type
High w/o RT
(feet)
High w/RT
(feet)
Medium Volume 75
High Volume W/O RT (without
right-turn channelization)
75 150
High Volume W/RT (with rightturn
channelization)
75 250 500
G. The minimum distance between driveways and property line, as measured from point of
tangency, shall be:
Driveway Type Minimum Spacing to
Property Line (ft.)
Low Volume
Medium Volume
High Volume (without right-turn
channelization)
High Volume (with right-turn channelization)
10
20
75
75
For lots with shared access, the driveway may be located along the property line. The
minimum spacing to property line may be varied if (1) the safest point of access to the
site is closer to the property line and (2) there are at least 20 feet of separation between
low volume driveways serving adjacent parcels, 40 feet of separation between medium
volume driveways, and 150 feet of separation between high volume driveways.
H. When the proposed development is to be located on the opposite side of an existing
development, the driveway shall be directly opposite of the existing driveway or
separated from the opposite driveway by a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet whenever
possible.
10.16 Ground Water Quality
A. 1. When a hydrogeologic assessment is submitted, by request of the Board, the
assessment shall contain at least the following information:
a. A map showing the basic soils types.
b. The depth to the water table at representative points throughout the
subdivision.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
30
c. Drainage conditions throughout the subdivision.
d. Data on the existing ground water quality, either from test wells in the
subdivision or from existing wells on neighboring properties.
e. An analysis and evaluation of the effect of the subdivision on ground
water resources. In the case of residential developments, the evaluation
shall, at a minimum, include a projection of post development nitratenitrogen
concentrations at any wells within the subdivision, at the
subdivision boundaries and at a distance of 1000 feet from potential
contamination sources, whichever is a shorter distance.
f. A map showing the location of any subsurface wastewater disposal
systems and drinking water wells within the subdivision and within 100
feet of the subdivision boundaries.
2. The subdivision will not result in the existing ground water quality becoming
inferior to the physical, biological, chemical, and radiological levels for raw and
untreated drinking water supply sources specified in the Maine State Drinking
Water Regulations, pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A., Section 601.
3. If ground water contains contaminants in excess of the primary standards, and the
subdivision is to be served by on-site ground water supplies, the applicant shall
demonstrate how water quality will be improved or treated.
4. If ground water contains contaminants in excess of the secondary standards, the
subdivision shall not cause the concentration of the parameters in question to
exceed 150% of the ambient concentration.
5. Subsurface waste water disposal systems and drinking water wells shall be
constructed as shown on the map submitted with the assessment. If construction
standards for drinking water wells or other measures to reduce ground water
contamination and protect drinking water supplies are recommended in the
assessment, those standards shall be included as a note on the Final Plan, and as
restrictions in the deeds to the affected lots.
10.17 Protection of Significant Wildlife Habitat
Applicants proposing to subdivide land in or within 75 feet to wildlife resources identified in the
Town of Turner Comprehensive Plan or by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife shall consult with a recognized wildlife or fisheries consultant or the Maine Department
of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife and provide their written comments to the Board. The Board
may consult with the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife and may impose any
recommendations by the Maine Department or consultant as conditions of approval.
10.18 Scenic Locations
The Planning board shall consider the existence of a scenic site or view location as identified in
the Town of Turner Comprehensive Plan and the impact of the proposed subdivision on such a
site or view. The Board may require the placement or visual qualities of structures on lots in such
locations as to minimize the negative impacts of the subdivision on such sites and views.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
31
10.19 Archaeological Sites
Any proposed subdivision activity involving structural development or soil disturbance on or
adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places, as
determined by the permitting authority shall be submitted by the applicant to the Maine Historic
Preservation Commission for review and comment, at least 20 days prior to action being taken by
the permitting authority. The permitting authority shall consider comments received from the
Commission prior to rendering a decision on the application.
10.20 Solid Waste
All Solid Waste shall be disposed of at a Department of Environmental Protection Licensed
Facility.
10.21 Financial and Technical Capacity
A. Financial Capacity.
The applicant shall demonstrate the availability of financial resources sufficient to
implement the proposed plan. In determining the applicant’s financial capacity, the
Board shall consider cost estimates for implementation of the plan, letters from
prospective sources of financing, the proposed time frame for construction, and
performance guarantees required of the applicant.
B. Technical Ability.
1. The applicant shall demonstrate the qualifications of the contractors and
consultants who will supervise, construct and inspect the improvements associated
with the proposed subdivision.
2. In determining the applicant's technical ability the Board shall consider the
applicant's previous experience, the experience and training of the applicant's
consultants and contractors, and the number and nature of any violations of
previous approvals granted to the applicant.
ARTICLE XI. STREET AND STORM DRAINAGE DESIGN AND
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
11.1 General Requirements
A. All streets proposed as an element of a subdivision shall comply with the Town of
Turner's Street Construction Ordinance.
B. All street designs as required by the Town of Turner's Street Construction Ordinance
shall be submitted as an element of the Subdivision Application as required by this
Ordinance.
C. Street names shall be proposed by the applicant and approved by the Board. Streets that
are continuations of existing streets shall be given the same name of the existing street.
Names of new streets shall not duplicate nor bear the phonetic resemblance of the names
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
32
of existing streets with the Town. No street name shall be given the common name of a
person.
11.2 Storm Water Management Design Standards
A. All stormwater improvements within the subdivision shall be designed to be in
compliance with the most current standards of the Stormwater Management Law as
administered by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
B. All subdivisions that fall below the minimum thresholds of the Stormwater Management
Law shall comply with the Conservation, Erosion and Sediment Control Standards of
Article X, Section 10.7. E.
C. Wherever the storm drainage system is not within the right-of-way of a public street,
perpetual easements shall be provided to the Town allowing maintenance and
improvement of the system.
D. Where soils require a subsurface drainage system, the drains shall be installed and
maintained separately from the storm water drainage system.
11.3 Storm Drainage Construction Standards
A. Materials
1. Reinforced Concrete Pipe. Reinforced Concrete Pipe shall meet the
requirements of ASTM Designation C-76 (AASHTOM 170). Pipe classes shall
be required to meet the soil and traffic loads with a safety factor of 1.2 on the .01
inch crack strength with a Class B bedding. Joints shall be of the rubber gasket
type meeting ASTM Designation C 443-70, or of an approved performed plastic
jointing material such as "Ramnek". Perforated Concrete Pipe shall conform to
the requirements of AASHTOM 175 for the appropriate diameters.
2. Asbestos Cement Pipe. Asbestos Cement Pipe shall meet the requirements of
ASTM Designation C-428 (AASHTOM 189). Pipe classes shall be required to
meet the soil and traffic loads with a safety factor of 1.5 on the crushing strength.
Joints shall be of the rubber gasket type meeting ASTM Designation D-1869-63,
or of an approved performed plastic sleeve type.
3. Corrugated Metal Pipe. Corrugated Metal Pipe shall be bituminous coated
meeting the requirements of AASHTO Designation M 190 Type C for iron or
steep pipe or AASHTO Designation M 196 for aluminum alloy pipe for sectional
dimensions and type of bituminous coating. Pipe gauge shall be as required to
meet the soil and traffic loads with a deflection of not more than 5%.
4. ABS Pipe. ABS (Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene) composite pipe and fittings
shall conform to the requirements of AASHTOM 264 and AASHTOM 265.
Perforated pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTOM 36, Type III.
5. Corrugated Plastic Pipe. Corrugated Plastic Pipe shall conform to the
requirements of AASHTO M-252.
6. Manholes. Manholes shall be of precast concrete truncated cone section
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
33
construction meeting the requirements of ASTM Designation C 478 or precast
concrete manhole block construction meeting the requirements of ASTM
Designation C 139, radial type. Bases may be cast in place 3,000 psi 28 day
strength concrete or may be of precast concrete, placed on a compacted
foundation of uniform density. Metal frames and traps shall be set in a full mortar
bed and with tops shall conform to the requirements of AASHTOM 103 for
carbon steep castings, AASHTOM 105, Class 30 for gray iron castings or
AASHTOM 183 (ASTMA 283, Grade B or better) for structural steel.
7. Catch Basins. Catch Basins shall be of precast concrete truncated cone section
construction meeting the requirements of ASTM Designation C 478 or precast
concrete manhole block construction meeting the requirements of ASTM
Designation C 139, radial type. Casting shall be square cast iron sized for the
particular inlet condition with the gratings perpendicular to the curb line. Bases
may be cast in place 3,000 psi 28 day strength concrete or may be of precast
concrete, placed on a compacted foundation of uniform density. Metal frames and
traps shall be set in a full mortar bed and with tops shall conform to the
requirements of AASHTOM 103 for carbon steel castings, AASHTOM 105, Class
30 for gray iron castings or AASHTOM 183 (ASTMA 283, Grade B or better) for
structural steel.
B. Drain inlet alignment shall be straight in both horizontal and vertical alignment unless
specific approval of a curvilinear drain is obtained in writing from the Board, after
consultation with the Municipal Engineer.
C. Manholes shall be provided at all changes in vertical or horizontal alignment and at all
junctions. On straight runs, manholes shall be placed at a maximum of 400 foot intervals.
D. Upon completion each catch basin or manhole shall be cleaned of all accumulation of silt,
debris, or foreign matter and shall be kept clean until final acceptance.
11.4 Certification of Construction
Upon completion of street construction and prior to a vote by the Municipal Officers to submit a
proposed public way to the legislative body, a written certification signed by a licensed
professional engineer registered in the State of Maine shall be submitted to the Municipal
Officers at the expense of the applicant, certifying that the proposed way meets or exceeds the
design and construction requirements of these regulations. "As built" plans shall be submitted to
the Municipal Officers.
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES
12.1 Types of Guarantees. With submittal of the application for Final Plan approval, the subdivider
shall indicate one of the following performance guarantees that will be provided for an amount
adequate to cover the total construction costs of all required infrastructure improvements, taking
into account the time-span of the construction schedule and the inflation rate for construction
costs.
A. Either a certified check payable to the Town or a savings account or certificate of deposit
naming the Town as owner, for the establishment of an escrow account.
B. A performance bond payable to the Town issued by a surety company, approved by the
Municipal Officers.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
34
C. An irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution establishing funding for the
construction of the subdivision, from which the Town may draw if construction is
inadequate, approved by the Municipal Officers.
D. An offer of conditional agreement limiting the number of units built or lots sold until all
required infrastructure improvements have been constructed.
The conditions and amount of performance guarantee shall be determined by the Board with the
advice of the Town Engineer, Road Commissioner and Municipal Officers.
12.2 Contents of Guarantee. The performance guarantee shall contain a construction schedule, cost
estimates for each major phase of construction taking into account inflation, provisions for
inspections of each phase of construction, provisions for the release of part or all of the
performance guarantee to the developer, and a date after which the developer will be in default,
and the Town shall have access to the funds to finish construction.
12.3 Escrow Account. A cash contribution to the establishment of an escrow account shall be made
by either a certified check made out to the municipality, the direct deposit into a savings account,
or the purchase of a certificate of deposit. For any account opened by the subdivider, the
municipality shall be named as owner or co-owner, and the consent of the municipality shall be
required for a withdrawal. Any interest earned on the escrow account shall be returned to the
subdivider except for any portion of the interest earned which was needed, in addition to the
principle of the escrow account, to pay for completion of the required improvements.
12.4 Performance Bond. A performance bond shall detail the conditions of the bond, the method for
release of the bond or portions of the bond to the subdivider, and the procedures for collection by
the municipality. The bond documents shall specifically reference the subdivision for which
approval is sought.
12.5 Letter of Credit. An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other lending institution shall
indicate that funds have been set aside for the construction of the subdivision and may not be used
for any other project or loan.
12.6 Conditional Agreement. The Board, at its discretion may permit for the sub divider to enter
into a binding agreement with the municipality in lieu of the other financial performance
guarantees. Such an agreement shall provide for approval of the Final Plan on the condition that
no units be built or lots sold until either:
A. It is certified by the Board, or its agent, that all of the required improvements have been
installed in accordance with these regulations and the regulations of the appropriate
utilities; or
B. A performance guarantee, acceptable to the municipality, is submitted in an amount
necessary to cover the completion of the required improvements at an amount adjusted
for inflation and prorated for the portions of the required improvements already installed.
Notice of the agreement and any conditions shall be on the Final Plan which is recorded
by the subdivider at the Registry of Deeds. Release from the agreement shall follow the
procedures for release of the performance guarantees contained in Section 12.8. Proof of
recording shall be provided by the subdivider to the Board.
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
35
12.7 Phasing of Development. The Board may approve plans to develop a major subdivision in
separate and distinct phases. This may be accomplished by limiting final approval to those lots
abutting that section of the proposed subdivision street which is covered by a performance
guarantee. When development is phased, road construction shall commence from an existing
public way. Final approval of lots in subsequent phases shall be given only upon satisfactory
completion of all requirements pertaining to previous phases.
12.8 Release of Guarantee. Prior to the release of any part of the performance guarantee, the Board
shall determine to its satisfaction, that the proposed improvements meet or exceed the design and
construction requirements for that portion of the infrastructure improvements for which the
release is requested.
12.9 Default. If, upon inspection, it is found that any of the required infrastructure improvements
have not been constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications filed as part of the
application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall so report in writing to the Municipal Officers, the
Board, and the sub divider or builder. The Municipal Officers shall take any steps necessary to
preserve the Town's rights.
.
12.10 Privately-Owned Roads. Where the subdivision streets are to remain privately-owned roads, the
following words shall appear on the recorded plan.
"All roads in this subdivision shall remain private roads to be maintained by the
developer or the lot owners and shall not be accepted or maintained by the Town."
12.11 Improvements Guaranteed. Performance guarantees shall be tendered for all infrastructure
improvements required by Section 10.7 11.1 and 11.2 of this ordinance, as well as any other
improvements required by the Board.
12.12 At least five days prior to commencing each major phase of construction of required
infrastructure improvements, the sub divider or builder shall provide the Town with the
type and amount of the performance guarantee approved in Section 12.1 above.
.
ARTICLE XIII. WAIVERS
13.1 Any requests for waivers from submission requirements and/or review standards shall be
in writing. Waiver requests shall indicate the requirements requested to be waived and
shall indicate what special circumstances exist that the required improvements or
standards are not necessary to provide for the public health, safety, or welfare, or are
inappropriate because of inadequate or lacking connecting facilities adjacent to or in
proximity of the proposed development.
13.2 Where the Board finds, based on written justification by the applicant, and makes written
findings of fact that due to extraordinary and unnecessary hardships that may result from
strict compliance of this Ordinance, or where there are special circumstances of a
particular application, certain required improvements or review standards are not
necessary to provide for public health, safety or welfare, or are inappropriate because of
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
36
inadequate or lacking connecting facilities adjacent to or in proximity of the proposed
development, it may waive this requirement, subject to appropriate conditions provided
that the performance standards of this ordinance have been or will be met. Waivers may
not be granted if the waiver will have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the
Comprehensive Plan, this Ordinance, or any other ordinance or law, or if this ordinance
expressly does not allow a waiver from the requirement a waiver is sought. In granting
waivers, the Planning Board shall require such conditions as will assure the purpose of
this ordinance is met.
13.3 When the Board grants a waiver to any of the improvements required by this ordinance, the Final
Plan to be recorded at the Registry of Deeds, shall indicate the waivers granted and the date
which they were granted.
ARTICLE XIV. AMENDMENTS
14.1 Initiation of Amendments. An amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by:
A. The Planning Board, provided a majority of the Board has so voted;
B. Request of the municipal officers; or
C. Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least 10% of the number of votes cast in
the municipality at the last gubernatorial election.
14.2 The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed amendment. Notification of
the hearing shall be posted in the Town Office at least thirteen (13) days before the hearing and
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least two (2) times with the
date of the first publication at least twelve (12) days before the hearing and the date of the 2nd
publication at least seven (7) days before the hearing. The Planning Board shall make a report and
its recommendation on the proposed amendment within ten (10) days after the public hearing has
been closed.
14.3 Adoption of Amendment. An amendment to this Ordinance may be adopted by a majority vote
of the Town Meeting.
ARTICLE XV. APPEALS
15.1 An aggrieved party may appeal any decision of the Board under this Ordinance within 30 days
from the date of that decision to Androscoggin County Superior Court.
ARTICLE XVI. SUBDIVISION AMENDMENTS
16.1 Fees.
A. The fee for any amendment when the number of lots remains the same, and there is no
substantial change to roads or drainage systems, shall be $25 plus planner fees.
B. The fee for any amendment, when three or less new lots are created, shall be a $25
Town of Turner Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 19, 2018
37
publishing and notice fee and $100 for the first new lot created and $50 for each
additional lot plus planner fees.
C. The fee for amendment, when there are substantial changes to roads and drainage systems
or more than three lots are created, shall be all fees and escrow accounts required by a
new application.
16.2 Revisions to Approved Plans
No change, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any Final Plan after approval
has been given by the Planning Board and endorsed in writing on the Plan, by the original sub
divider at any time or within five years of the approval if other than the original subdivider,
unless the revised Final Plan is first submitted and the Board approves any modifications, except
in accordance with Article 9.1.C. The Board shall make findings that the revised plan meets the
standards of Title 30-A, M.R.S.A. §4404, and this Ordinance. In the event that a Plan is recorded
without complying with this requirement, it shall be considered null and void, and the Board shall
institute proceedings to have the Plan stricken from the records of the Registry of Deeds.
Tile 30-A MRSA Section 4406.1.E
Any person who, after receiving approval from the municipal reviewing authority or approval
under Title 38, chapter 3, subchapter I, article 6 and recording the plan at the registry of deeds,
constructs or develops the subdivision or transfers any lot in a manner other than depicted on
the approved plans or amendments or in violation of any condition imposed by the municipal
reviewing authority or the Department of Environmental Protection, when applicable, must be
penalized in accordance with section 4452.
3/12/91
Amended March 14, 1992
Amended June 20, 1992
Amended June 12, 1993
Amended June 11, 1994
Amended April 13, 1996
Amended July 21, 1997
Amended April 18, 1998
Amended April 10, 1999
Amended April 8, 2000
Amended April 7, 2001
Amended April 6, 2002
Amended April 5, 2003
Amended April 3, 2004
Amended April 9, 2005
Amended April 8, 2006
Amended April 5, 2008
Amended April 4, 2009
Amended April 10, 2010
Amended April 5, 2014
Amended May 19, 2018

























