Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Town Manager Plan
[Adopted 1-23-1991 STM, Art. 8, as Ch. 1 of the Topsham Code]
§ 1-1. Effect of plan.
Upon the adoption and implementation of the Town Manager Plan of the
Town of Topsham, any reference to "Town Administrator" in any action of
the town, including but not limited to the Code, ordinances or regulations,
shall be deemed to refer to the Town Manager. The Town Manager Plan
shall prevail over any inconsistent or incompatible provision in the Code,
ordinances or regulations. Any provision or action which may otherwise be
provided by town ordinance under the Town Manager Plan and is otherwise
provided by ordinance shall remain in effect unless specifically repealed or
amended.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:5
[An
ordinance
adopting
Parts
I
and
II
of
the
Topsham
Code
and
accepting
the
renumbering
and
reorganization
of
existing
ordinances,
as
well
as
minor
nonsubstantive
changes,
is
presently
proposed
before
the
Town
Meeting.
Upon
final
adoption,
it
will
be
included
here
as
Article
II
of
this
chapter.]
§ 1-1 TOPSHAM CODE § 1-1
1:6
Chapter 6
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Codes of Conduct — See Ch. 7.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:7

ARTICLE I
Form of Town Government
§ 6-1. Town Meeting - Selectman - Manager form of government.
The Town of Topsham has adopted the Town Meeting - Selectman - Manager
form of government. Under this form of government the legislative and
executive functions are divided. The purpose of this section is to define the
executive role and attendant duties of the Board of Selectmen in carrying
out its policy functions as part of Topsham's town government, to clarify the
separation of the Board's executive role from the legislative role of the Town
Meeting, and the administrative role of the Town Manager.
A. The Town Meeting performs the election function and the legislative
function of adopting governmental policy, levying taxes and raising and
appropriating monies, authorizing the contracting of debts, among
other things.
B. Board of Selectmen.
(1) The Board of Selectmen is the executive body that interprets,
processes, and sets the policies of the Town and chooses the course
of action between Town Meetings, has ultimate administrative
responsibility to see that governmental policies are carried out (but
must deal with administration solely through the Town Manager),
and appoints and supervises the Town Manager.
(2) 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2635 states that the Board of Selectmen is to act as
a body and that administrative service is to be performed through
the Town Manager, Town departments and Town committees. The
statute states "It is the intention of this subchapter that the Board
of Selectmen as a body [emphasis added] shall exercise all
administrative and executive powers of the Town except as
provided in this subchapter."
(3) The Board of Selectmen shall deal with the administrative services
totally through the Town Manager and shall not give orders to any
subordinates of the Manager, either publically or privately. This
section does not prevent the Board of Selectmen from appointing
committees or commissions of its own members or of citizens to
conduct investigations into the conduct of any official or
department, or any matter relating to the welfare of the Town.
(4) Duties of the Board of Selectmen. A member of the Board of
Selectmen, in relation to his or her community should:
(a) Realize that his or her basic function is to make policy, with
administration delegated to the Town Manager;
(b) Realize that he or she is one of a team and should abide by, and
carry out, all Board decisions once they are made;
§ 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1
1:9
(c) Be well informed concerning the duties of a Board member on
both local and state levels;
(d) Remember that he or she represents the entire community at
all times;
(e) Accept that the role of a member is a means of unselfish
service, not to benefit personally or politically from his or her
Board activities;
(f) Abide by the ethics guidelines established by the State of
Maine and not use the position of Selectmen to obtain inside
information on matters that may benefit someone personally.
(5) A member of the Board of Selectmen, in his or her relations with
the Town Manager, should:
(a) Endeavor to establish sound and clearly defined policies that
will direct and support the administration for the benefit of the
staff and residents of the community;
(b) Recognize and support the administrative chain of command
and refuse to act on complaints as an individual outside the
administration;
(c) Give the Town Manager full responsibility for discharging his
or her disposition and/or solutions;
(d) When a situation comes to the attention of a Board member,
convey that information to the Town Manager for consideration
and resolution or action as the Town Manager may deem
appropriate. Inform the other Board members of suggestions
and information conveyed to the Town Manager;
(e) Not give orders or directions to the Town Manager for action
as an individual Board member;
(f) Not give instructions to or request assistance from the Town
department heads, but rather channel all such activities
through the full Board and the Town Manager.
(6) A member of the Board of Selectmen, in his or her relations with
fellow Board members, should:
(a) Recognize that action at official legal meetings is binding, and
that he or she alone cannot bind the Board outside of such
meetings;
(b) Not make statements or promises of how he or she will vote on
matters that will come before the Board until he or she has had
an opportunity to hear the pros and cons of the issue during a
Board meeting;
§ 6-1 TOPSHAM CODE § 6-1
1:10
(c) Uphold the intent of executive session and respect the
privileged communication that exists in executive session;
(d) Make decisions only after all facts on a question have been
presented and discussed;
(e) Refrain from communicating the position of the Board of
Selectmen to anyone unless the full Board has previously
agreed on both the position and the language of the statement
conveying the position;
(f) Treat with respect the rights of all members of the Board
despite differences of opinion.
(7) A member of the Board of Selectmen, in his or her relations with
Town staff, should:
(a) Treat all staff as professionals and respect the abilities,
experience, and dignity of each individual;
(b) Limit contact to specific Town staff. Questions of Town staff
and/or requests for additional background information should
be directed only to the Town Manager;
(c) Never publically criticize an individual employee. Concerns
about staff performance should only be made to the Town
Manager through private conversation;
(d) Insure that all requests for staff support go through the Town
Manager's office;
(e) Insure that any materials or information provided to the
Selectmen from a staff member be made available to all
Selectmen.
C. Town Manager.
(1) Powers and duties of the Town Manager. The powers and duties of
the Town. Manager are as described in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2636: The
Town Manager shall perform such other duties related to the
functions, duties and authorities as may be prescribed by the Board
of Selectmen and by any applicable state or local laws or
ordinances.
(2) The Town Manager executes and carries out the government and
fiscal policies with guidance from the Board of Selectmen and has
direct responsibility for and authority over all administrative
functions. The Town Manager carries out the day-to-day operations
of the Town, acting as Chief Administrator.
(3) The Town Manager is the single chief administrator accountable to
the Board of Selectmen for the performance of his/her duties. The
Town Manager is given the responsibility to appoint, subject to the
§ 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1
1:11
personnel policies of the Town of Topsham, all department heads,
and through them, all other employees. The Town Manager
prepares the financial plan for approval by the legislative body
and is responsible for administering the budget once enacted. The
Town Manager is specifically responsible for all the administrative
functions. The Town Manager coordinates all administrative
activities. The Town Manager is in a position to provide expert
information on the needs and status of various governmental
activities. The Town Manager regulates departmental spending
and reports on the financial needs of each of the branches of
government. Within the framework of the policies laid down by the
legislative and executive body of the Town, the Town Manager can
formulate and carry out an administrative plan for governmental
activity allowing for regular and orderly development. (Source of
reference - National Municipal League, Forms of Municipal
Government, 1968, p. 12).
Source of reference - JJ Haag, The Manager Plan in Maine, 1971,
pp. 42 (see chart 11)
Town Meeting/Board of Selectmen/Town Manager Form of
Government
§ 6-1 TOPSHAM CODE § 6-1
1:12
ARTICLE II
Town Meeting
§ 6-2. Holding of meetings required.
A Town Meeting shall be held annually to elect officials at municipal polling
places on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November. A
Town Meeting will be held annually in May to enact a municipal budget
and to conduct such other business as may be necessary. Additional Town
Meetings will be held two additional times each year, usually in March
and September to conduct municipal business, as necessary. Special Town
Meetings shall be held at such times as provided by statute or ordinance.
§ 6-3. Reports.
At the general business meeting of the Town each May, an annual report of
the Town will be made and shall include a State of the Town message from
the executive branch of the Town government summarizing the general
condition of the Town. Other reports of Town officers and of standing and
special committees shall be made available to the public. Reports required
by statute or by the Town to be published shall be posted on the Town's
website and printed for distribution one week before the Town Meeting.
§ 6-4. Speaking limits.
No person shall speak more than twice on any one question or more than
five minutes at a time at Town Meeting without permission of the Moderator
or assembled Town Meeting body to do so.
§ 6-5. Invocation.
Prior to the election of the Town Meeting Moderator, the Town Clerk may
call the assembled body to order with an invocation and may use the
following:
We are gathered here together in a civil assembly.
We gather as a community, in the oldest sense of the word.
We gather together to by and make decisions, about what we think is right,
and about what we think is wrong.
Let us advocate for our positions, but never at the expense of others.
Let us remember that there is an immense gap between saying "I think I
am right" and "I am right".
Let us always remember that our neighbors with whom we might disagree
at Town Meeting are good people with hopes and dreams as true and as
high as our own.
Let us not forget the citizens who have served our town in the past as well
as those who are serving it today.
§ 6-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-5
1:13
Most importantly, let us remember that, in the end, caring for each other,
and our community, is of far greater importance than any differences we
may have at this meeting.
§ 6-6. Moderator.
A Moderator shall be elected to serve at every general business meeting of
the Town. The election of the Moderator shall be conducted as governed
by statute or ordinance. The Moderator shall follow the Maine Moderator's
Manual or such other rules as may be allowed by statute or ordinance. The
Moderator shall make a summary presentation to the assembled body about
the rules of procedure and decorum to be followed at the meeting.
§ 6-7. Opening of general business meetings.
Every general business meeting of the Town shall be opened with a prayer.
§ 6-8. Materials.
All materials made available at Town Meeting shall disclose who is
responsible for making them available to the assembled body. Any materials
developed by Town officials or Town staff shall be identifiable as Town
materials through the use of some form of authentic identification method.
§ 6-9. Annual citizen recognition.
At the general business meeting of the Town each May, the Town may
bestow a recognition award on a citizen of the Town. The Town Meeting
Committee shall be responsible for developing a nomination and selection
process. The name of the award recipient shall not be disclosed prior to the
meeting.
§ 6-10. Reconsideration.
No motion shall be entertained at a reconvened meeting for reconsideration
of any vote passed at the original meeting, or any adjournment thereof,
unless notice of such action to reconsider shall have been given at such
original meeting or at some intervening reconvened meeting, but this
section may be suspended in any particular case by a vote of three-fourths
(3/4) of those present and voting.
§ 6-5 TOPSHAM CODE § 6-10
1:14
ARTICLE III
Selectmen
§ 6-11. Membership; Chairman; terms of office; Overseers of the
Poor.
The number of members of the Board of Selectmen shall be five, and the
Board shall choose its own Chairman. The normal term of Selectmen shall
be three years. Selectmen shall serve staggered terms with two positions
open for election on consecutive years and one position open for election
on the third year. Vacancies on the Board of Selectmen shall be filled in
accordance with state statutes (currently 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2602, Subdivision
3). The Selectmen shall serve as Overseers of the Poor.
§ 6-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-11
1:15

ARTICLE IV
Committees
§ 6-12. Standing Committees.
The following shall be the standing committees of the Town of Topsham.
§ 6-13. Powers and duties of standing committees.
§ 6-14. Standing committee general provisions.
A. Planning Board (7 members).
B. Board of Appeals (5 members, two alternates).
C. Finance Committee (9 members).
D. Board of Assessment Review (3 members, two alternates).
E. Historic District Commission (5 members).
F. Conservation Commission (5 members).
A. Planning Board: The powers and duties of the Planning Board shall be
those powers and duties established by Town of Topsham ordinance and
state law.
B. Board of Appeals: The powers and duties of the Board of Appeals shall
be those powers and duties established by Town of Topsham ordinance
and state law.
C. Finance Committee: It shall examine all Town Meeting articles that call
for an appropriation or expenditure of money and make its
recommendations to the Town Meeting.
D. Board of Assessment Review: A Board of Assessment Review is adopted
pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2526, Subsection 6, and shall consist of
three members and two alternates. Initially, one member shall be
appointed for one year, one member for two years and one member for
three years. One alternate shall be appointed for one year and one
alternate for two years. Thereafter, the term of each new member or
alternate is three years.
E. Conservation Commission: The powers and duties of the Conservation
Commission shall be those powers and duties established by the Town
of Topsham ordinance and state law.1
A. Quorum. Except as may be permitted by Town of Topsham ordinance or
state law, no meeting of a standing committee shall be held without a
quorum consisting of a majority of appointed members.
1. Editor's Note: See Ch. 10, Conservation Commission.
§ 6-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-14
1:17
§ 6-15. Standing committee prohibited appointments.
The following may not be appointed to standing committees:
§ 6-16. Standing committee terms.
§ 6-17. Standing committee vacancies.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint new members to the standing
committees as necessary. In the event of the resignation of any Committee
member, or his or her inability to serve, or unapproved absence of three
(3) or more consecutive meetings, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint
a member to finish any unexpired term that might remain at its earliest
convenience.
§ 6-18. Ad-hoc committees.
The Board of Selectmen is authorized to establish committees that are
temporary and have a specific purpose. The number of members on an
ad-hoc committee may be whatever the Selectmen determine and may be
composed of individuals without restriction. Ad-hoc committees shall not be
established to undermine the powers and duties of standing committees.
The term, powers, and duties shall be whatever the Selectmen determine at
the point in time that the committee is established. Ad-hoc committees may
be established for an indefinite term if appropriate.
B. Voting. Notwithstanding Town of Topsham ordinance or state law, any
action of a standing committee shall require the affirmative vote of a
majority of its membership present and voting.
A. Selectmen.
B. Full-time and part-time regular employees, except Fire Department oncall
employees may serve on standing committees.
C. Spouses and domestic partners of Selectmen and employees as
described above.
A. Appointments subsequent to the amendment of this Code shall be for a
three-year term.
B. All appointments and reappointments subsequent to amending the
Code will commence and terminate consistent with the Town's fiscal
year (July 1 through June 30).
§ 6-14 TOPSHAM CODE § 6-18
1:18
ARTICLE V
Assessment
§ 6-19. Tax Assessor.
A single Tax Assessor shall be appointed by the Selectmen.
§ 6-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-19
1:19

ARTICLE VI
Finance
§ 6-20. Fiscal year.
The Town shall operate on a twelve-month fiscal year, with the fiscal year
and Town accounts starting on the first day of July of each year and the
fiscal year ending and Town accounts closing on the 30th day of June of each
year.
§ 6-21. Disbursement of Treasurer's warrants.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide an alternate to the
statutory procedure for approval of warrants authorizing the Treasurer
to disburse money.
B. Authority. This section is enacted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 3001
(municipal home rule) and 5603, Subsection 2A.
C. Procedure for approval. The Treasurer may disburse money only on the
authority of a warrant drawn for the purpose, either:
(1) Affirmatively voted and signed by a majority of the municipal
officers at a duly called public meeting;
(2) Seen and signed by a majority of them acting individually and
separately; or
(3) Signed as otherwise provided by law for the disbursement of
employees' wages and benefits and payment of municipal
education costs.
§ 6-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-21
1:21

ARTICLE VII
Municipal Property
§ 6-22. Tax-acquired property.
The Treasurer may, from time to time, with the consent of the Selectmen,
convey by deeds of quitclaim the title and interest of the Town in and to
any real estate acquired by the Town by virtue of the Revised Statutes of
Maine, at any sale for taxes, to such persons and for such consideration as
the Treasurer and the Selectmen may, in each case, determine.
§ 6-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-22
1:23

ARTICLE VIII
Budget
§ 6-23. Budget development.
A. Presentation to Board of Selectmen: It shall be the responsibility of the
Town Manager to present a draft budget to the Board of Selectmen no
later than 90 days in advance of the Town Meeting at which the
subsequent fiscal year's budget is to be adopted.
B. Town Manager and department head role: The Town Manager shall
have the discretion to determine the method of developing the draft
budget to be presented to the Selectmen. Department heads shall have
the opportunity to work with the Manager to draft their respective
departmental budgets.
C. Selectmen's initial review: Upon presentation to the Board of
Selectmen, the Selectmen shall review and make preliminary
recommendations of the budget.
D. Meetings with Finance Committee: The Selectmen shall meet with the
Finance Committee and, with support from the Town Manager and
other staff as appropriate, shall review the draft budget and preliminary
Selectmen recommendations with the Finance Committee.
E. Preliminary budget: Upon completed review by the Selectmen and
Finance Committee, a preliminary budget shall be developed. The
preliminary budget shall identify appropriations and expenditures by
proposed Town Meeting warrant article. Each proposed warrant article
shall include the amount of funds being appropriated and expended, the
source of the appropriation and the preliminary recommendations of
the Board of Selectmen and Finance Committee.
F. Joint public hearing on preliminary budget: The Board of Selectmen and
Finance Committee shall hold one public hearing on the preliminary
budget at least 14 days in advance of the Town Meeting scheduled to
adopt the budget. The purpose of the public hearing shall be to present
the preliminary budget to the Town and to receive comments from the
interested parties. Following the public hearing, the Board of
Selectmen and the Finance Committee shall finalize their budget
recommendations.
G. Finalization of the budget: Once the preliminary budget has been
presented at the public hearing and final recommendations are
determined by the Board of Selectmen and the Finance Committee, the
budget shall be presented in final form for Town Meeting review and
adoption.
§ 6-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-24
1:25
§ 6-24. Community Fund. [Added 5-18-2011 STM, Art. 152]
The purpose of the Topsham Community Fund (TCF) is to assist the Town
in: developing its financial capacity to make investments in the community;
making the community a more desirable and vibrant place for residents to
live, work and raise a family; and in supporting the belief that community
development investments make the community a more desirable location
for future economic development investments.
A. Fund description.
(1) The fund shall be a nonlapsing capital fund of the Town of Topsham,
and funds remaining at the end of a fiscal year shall not be credited
to the Town's undesignated fund balance, but rather shown in the
Capital Improvement Plan for the Town.
(2) Expenditures from the TCF shall be made in accordance with the
Town's purchasing policies, as administered by the Board of
Selectmen and Town Manager.
B. (Reserved)
C. Funds from the TCF shall be used for capital investments, including for
purposes in support of capital investments (such as plans, surveys,
designs, studies) in the areas of recreation, arts, social services, parks,
heritage/history, natural resources, conservation and environmental
stewardship.
D. Funds from the TCF can be used to leverage funding from nonmunicipal
sources.
E. Topsham Community Fund Committee.
(1) The TCF Committee shall consist of five members, including two
representatives from Topsham Conservation Commission and one
representative from each of the following Topsham standing
committees and boards, appointed by the respective committees
and boards:
(a) Topsham Development, Inc.
(b) Planning Board.
(c) Historic District Commission.
(2) One of the Conservation Commission representatives shall serve as
the Chair of the TCF Committee, and the Topsham Development,
Inc., representative shall serve as the Vice Chair.
(3) The following Town department heads shall be nonvoting members:
2. Editor’s Note: This article also repealed former § 6-24, Economic and Community
Development Plan.
§ 6-24 TOPSHAM CODE § 6-24
1:26
(a) Parks and Recreation Department.
(b) Planning Department.
(c) Economic and Community Development Department.
(d) Department of Public Works.
F. Annual plan.
(1) On an annual basis, the Chair or Vice Chair of the TCF Committee
shall convene the Committee to develop an annual TCF plan.
(2) The TCF Committee shall prepare the annual TCF plan for
submission to the Town Manager by November 30 for consideration
in the Capital Improvement Budget.
(3) In preparing this report, the various department and committee
representatives shall hold a public meeting, providing the following
information, at a minimum:
(a) Current status of previously approved and active projects.
(b) Current status of uncommitted funds in the TCF, and the
source of such funds.
(c) Proposed new projects for the coming year(s) and the
anticipated capital cost of each.
(d) Proposed nonmunicipal sources of revenue for future projects.
(e) Proposed municipal sources of funds for future projects.
(f) Estimates for ongoing maintenance and operational costs for
individual departments.
(4) The TCF Committee shall actively solicit the input of members of
pertinent standing or ad hoc Town committees, and pertinent
community groups active in Topsham.
(5) Recommendations to the Town Manager can include expenditures
for the coming fiscal year, or appropriations to the TCF to be held
for future expenditures.
(6) The TCF can also be used as a repository for funds from additional
funding sources.
§ 6-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-24
1:27

ARTICLE IX
General Provisions
§ 6-25. Revision.
It shall be the duty of the Town to revise and bring up to date this chapter
at least once in every ten (10) years, and a committee of seven (7) citizens,
three (3) of whom may be Selectmen, shall be chosen for this purpose.
§ 6-26. Severability.
The invalidity of any provision of this chapter shall not affect the validity of
any other provision.
§ 6-27. Publication.
The Board of Selectmen shall have the authority to publish in a book or
pamphlet form this chapter, as accepted and voted upon at Town Meeting,
at any time after acceptance of this chapter and until such time as this
chapter is no longer in effect.
§ 6-28. When effective.
This chapter is to become effective upon being adopted by a Town Meeting
vote.
§ 6-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-28
1:29

ARTICLE X
Town Manager Plan
§ 6-29. Adoption of plan.
A. The Town of Topsham hereby adopts the form of government known as
the "Town Manager Plan" as provided in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2631 et seq.,
to become effective at the Annual Town Meeting for 1991.
B. Any reference to the "Town Administrator' is hereby amended to "Town
Manager," and any provision in the Code, ordinances, rules and
regulations of the Town which is inconsistent with the Town Manager
Plan is hereby repealed.
§ 6-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-29
1:31
Chapter 7
CODES OF CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 6.
§ 7-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to set forth codes of conduct that govern how
the Board of Selectmen and Town Manager will function in relation to one
another and in relation to the public that they both serve.
§ 7-2. Board of Selectmen.
The Board of Selectmen shall conduct its duties in accordance with this
code of conduct to the extent possible:
A. Be responsible elected officials dedicated to the concepts of effective
and democratic local government.
B. Affirm the dignity and worth of the services rendered by government
and maintain a constructive, creative, and practical attitude toward
local government affairs and a deep sense of social responsibility as a
trusted public servant.
C. Be dedicated to the highest ideals of honor and integrity in all public
and personal relationships in order that the member may merit the
respect and confidence of the public.
D. Conduct their official and personal affairs in such a manner as to give
the clear impression that they cannot be improperly influenced in the
performance of their official duties.
E. Not discuss or divulge information with anyone about pending or
completed ethics cases, except as specifically authorized by policies,
ordinances or statutes.
F. Recognize that the chief function of local government at all times is to
serve the best interests of all of the people, to the maximum extent
possible.
G. Adopt and implement Town policy that is fair, impartial, and meets the
objective of furthering the quality of life in Topsham for its citizens.
H. Work cooperatively as a Board of Selectmen in presenting issues
involved in referenda such as bond issues, annexations, and similar
matters.
§ 6-29 TOPSHAM CODE § 7-2
1:32
§ 7-3. Town Manager.
The Town Manager shall conduct his/her duties in accordance with the
Maine Town and City Management Association Code of Ethics.
Chapter 10
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 6.
Comprehensive Plan — See Ch. 105.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 161.
I. Keep the community informed on local government affairs; encourage
communication between the citizens and all local government officers;
emphasize friendly and courteous service to the public; and seek to
improve the quality and image of public service.
J. Resist any encroachment on professional responsibilities, believing the
member should be free to carry out official policies without
interference, and handle each problem without discrimination on the
basis of principle and justice.
K. Handle all matters of personnel on the basis of merit so that fairness
and impartiality govern a member's decisions pertaining to
appointments, pay adjustments, promotions, and discipline; handle all
personnel matters in a confidential manner, respecting the rights of the
employee involved and refraining from any public criticism of the Town
Manager or other Town employees who are appointed by the Board of
Selectmen.
L. Seek no favor; believe that personal aggrandizement or profit secured
by confidential information or by misuse of public time is dishonest.
M. Not invest or hold any investment, directly or indirectly, in any financial
business, commercial, or other private transaction that creates a
conflict with their official duties.
N. Not disclose to others, or use to further their personal interest,
confidential information acquired by them in the course of their official
duties.
O. Not engage in, solicit, negotiate for, or promise to accept private
employment, nor should he or she render services for private interests
or conduct a private business when such employment, service, or
business creates a conflict with or impairs the proper discharge of their
official duties.
§ 7-2 CONSERVATION COMMISSION § 10-1
10:33
§ 10-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context indicates otherwise, the following
terms have the following meanings:
COMMISSION — The Conservation Commission established pursuant to
Chapter 10.
SELECTMEN — The Board of Selectmen for the Town of Topsham.
STATE LAW REFERENCE(S) — Conservation Commission, 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 3261.
§ 10-2. Commission established; membership; vacancies; removal
from office.
§ 10-3. Powers and duties.
The Commission:
A. A Conservation Commission shall be established which shall consist of
and be administered by 5 persons appointed by the Selectmen for
staggered three-year terms as authorized by 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3261. The
members must be legal residents of the Town of Topsham and shall
serve without compensation. The Commission shall annually elect a
chair, a secretary and a treasurer from among its members and shall
adopt reasonable rules for the conduct of its meetings. The decisions of
the Commission shall be by majority vote of those present and voting,
and no business may be transacted without a majority of the members
present. The Commission shall keep accurate records of its meetings
and actions and shall file an annual work plan and property inventory
with the Selectmen.
B. Neither a municipal officer nor a member of the Topsham Planning
Board may be a member of the Commission.
C. In the event of a permanent vacancy, the Selectmen shall, within 60
days of its occurrence, appoint a person to serve for the unexpired
term.
D. Members may be removed by the Selectmen for cause. Excessive
absence from regular scheduled meetings shall be considered cause for
removal.
A. May acquire, as approved by the Selectmen and/or the municipal
legislative body as appropriate, on behalf of the municipality, fee simple
interests and any lesser interests, including conservation restrictions,
development rights or easements, in any real property situated within
the borders of the municipality, of the types set forth in § 10-4, including
any improvements on that real property, provided that all purchases or
acquisitions are consistent with the Town's Natural Areas Plan;
§ 10-1 TOPSHAM CODE § 10-3
10:34
B. May recommend to the Selectmen the acceptance of gifts in the
municipality's name for any of the Commission's purposes and shall
administer the gift for those purposes subject to the terms of the gift;
C. May recommend to the Selectmen the disposition of all or any portion of
the real property interests held by it, on behalf of the municipality,
subject to the Constitution of Maine to the extent applicable;
D. May obtain such professional services as are necessary in order to
perform its duties;
E. May maintain, manage and improve land and interests in land held by
it, on behalf of the municipality, in a manner which allows public use
and enjoyment consistent with the natural, historic and scenic
resources of the land, including planting, pruning, and cutting of trees
and shrubs to manage and enhance natural systems, constructing
nature trails and associated bridges and boardwalks, setting up bird
nest boxes, and posting of nature identification and trail signs;
F. May, as delegated to it by the Selectmen, be responsible for the care
and superintendence of conservation lands and other properties as
designated by the Selectmen;
G. May coordinate research into local land and water areas;
H. May seek to coordinate the activities of conservation bodies organized
for similar purposes;
I. May advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans
and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary, utilizing such
funds as may be donated to the Town of Topsham, acquired through
grants, or appropriated by the Selectmen and the municipal legislative
body for such purposes;
J. May maintain an inventory of all open areas, publicly or privately
owned, within the Town of Topsham, including marsh lands, swamps
and other wetlands for the purpose of obtaining information pertinent
to proper protection, development or use of such open areas;
K. May recommend to the municipal officers or any municipal body or
board, or any body politic or public agency of the State of Maine, a
program for better protection, development or use of such open areas;
L. May submit to the Selectmen annually a budget for all expenses and
projects. All expenditures authorized by the Commission must be
approved by the municipal legislative body through the budgetary
process;
M. May advise the Planning Board in regards to sensitive natural areas in
the Town of Topsham;
N. May coordinate natural resource objectives and implementation
strategies as stated in the current adopted Comprehensive Plan.
§ 10-3 CONSERVATION COMMISSION § 10-4
10:35
§ 10-4. Types of land which may be acquired.
Interests in land and other real property interests to be acquired and held
as part of the Commission on behalf of the Town of Topsham must be
situated within the boundaries of the municipality and may consist of any of
the priority conservation areas identified in the Town's Natural Areas Plan.
§ 10-5. Maintenance of real property.
§ 10-6. Annual filing of work plan and property inventory.
§ 10-7. Open space, public access, and conservation plan.
The Commission shall file with the Selectmen an open space, public access
and conservation plan, which shall be, as far as possible, consistent with
the Town's Comprehensive Plan and with any regional planning relating to
the area. The Commission may, from time to time, amend the plan. The
Commission shall actively seek comments from the Planning Board, the
Selectmen, and the general public at a public hearing before adopting a
plan or revisions to a plan.
Chapter 14
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
A. The Commission shall retain any real property interest acquired
pursuant to this chapter predominantly in its natural, scenic or open
condition, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Except upon the
approval of the Selectmen and, where appropriate, subject to the
Constitution of Maine or state law, the Commission shall not allow
construction, excavation, dumping or other acts or uses detrimental to
the cultural, natural, scenic or open condition of the land or water
areas.
B. The Commission shall recommend to the Selectmen any request to use,
improve, or dispose of any real property interest acquired by the
Commission in a manner otherwise prohibited by this section.
A. The Commission shall file annually a work plan detailing the goals and
objectives for the Commission for the coming year. The work plan shall
also delineate all potential property or interest in property being
considered for acquisition.
B. The Commission shall file annually a property inventory. The inventory
must show all real property interests then currently held by the
Commission, on behalf of the municipality, including a description of
the use of those interests, and all acquisitions, improvements, or
dispositions of all real property interests held by the Commission, on
behalf of the municipality, at any time during the year preceding each
filing, including the reason for that acquisition, improvement or
disposition.
§ 10-4 TOPSHAM CODE § 14-1
14:36
§ 14-1. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish an Emergency
Management Agency in compliance and in conformity with the provisions of
37-B M.R.S.A. § 781 et seq., to ensure the complete and efficient utilization
of the Town's facilities and resources to combat disaster as defined herein.
§ 14-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this chapter:
DIRECTOR — The director of the Town of Topsham Emergency
Management Agency, appointed as prescribed in this chapter.
DISASTER — The occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe
damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or
man-made cause, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake,
wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring
emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination,
critical material shortage, infestation, explosion or riot.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The agency created under this
chapter for the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency
functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, in order to minimize and repair injury and damage resulting
from disasters or catastrophes caused by enemy or terrorist attacks,
sabotage, riots or other hostile action, or by fire, flood, earthquake or other
natural or man-made causes. These functions include, without limitation,
fire fighting, police, medical and health, emergency welfare, rescue,
engineering, public warning and communications services; evacuation of
persons from stricken areas; allocation of critical materials in short supply;
emergency transportation; other activities related to civilian protection and
other activities necessary to the preparation for the carrying out of these
functions.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY FORCES — The employees,
equipment and facilities of all Town departments, boards, institutions and
commissions; and in addition, it shall include all volunteer persons,
equipment and facilities contributed by or obtained from volunteer persons
or agencies.
§ 14-3. Organization.
A. The Town Manager shall be responsible for the Agency's organization,
administration and operation. The Town Manager may employ such
permanent or temporary employees as he deems necessary and
prescribe their duties.
B. The Board of Selectmen shall review the existing operational
organization to ascertain the Agency's ability to cope with its
responsibilities and shall approve the Town's Emergency Operations
Plan.
§ 14-1 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 14-4
14:37
§ 14-4. Appointment of Director; duties and responsibilities.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint an Emergency Management Director,
who shall coordinate the activities of all Town departments, organizations
and agencies for civil emergency preparedness within the Town and
maintain a liaison with other emergency management agencies, public
safety agencies, and have such additional duties as prescribed by the Town
Manager.
§ 14-5. Rules and regulations.
The Emergency Management Director shall prepare, under the direction
of the Town Manager, such policies as may be deemed necessary for the
administration and operational requirements of the Agency, which policies
must be approved by the Board of Selectmen prior to becoming effective.
§ 14-6. Emergency proclamation.
§ 14-7. Termination of emergency.
A. The Town Manager shall have the power and authority, after
consultation with the Chairperson of the Board of Selectmen, to issue a
proclamation that an emergency exists whenever a disaster or civil
emergency exists or appears imminent. The proclamation may declare
that an emergency exists in any or all sections of the Town. If the Town
Manager is temporarily absent from the Town or otherwise unavailable,
the person designated by the Town Manager may issue the
proclamation that an emergency exists. If neither the Town Manager
nor the person designated to act in the Town Manager's absence is
available, then the following persons shall have the power and authority
to issue a proclamation that an emergency exists, in the following order
of succession: the Emergency Management Director, the Fire Chief, the
Police Chief, and the Public Works Director. A copy of such
proclamation shall be filed within twenty-four (24) hours in the office of
the Town Clerk.
B. Notwithstanding the above, when consultation with the Chairperson of
the Board of Selectmen would result in a substantial delay in an
effective response in alleviating or preventing an emergency or
disaster, the Town Manager, or his successor as outlined above, is
authorized to take whatever actions are necessary to prevent the loss of
life and property in the Town.
C. The Town Manager and the Emergency Management Director shall be
responsible for submitting a full report to the Board of Selectmen of all
actions taken as a result of the declared emergency as soon as the
Board of Selectmen can be convened.
A. When the Town Manager or his successor as outlined above is satisfied
that a disaster or civil emergency no longer exists, he shall terminate
the emergency proclamation by another proclamation affecting the
§ 14-4 TOPSHAM CODE § 14-7
14:38
§ 14-8. Town Manager's duties and emergency powers.
§ 14-9. Emergency Operations Plan.
sections of the Town covered by the original proclamation, or any part
thereof. Said termination of emergency shall be filed in the office of the
Town Clerk.
B. No state of emergency may continue for longer than five (5) days unless
renewed by the Board of Selectmen.
A. During any period when an emergency proclamation is in effect, the
Town Manager may promulgate such regulations as he deems
necessary to protect life and property and to preserve critical resources
within the purposes of this chapter. Such regulations may include, but
are not limited to, the following:
(1) Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles in
areas within or without the Town;
(2) Regulations facilitating or restricting the movement of persons
within the Town;
(3) Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from hazardous
areas within the Town;
(4) Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health
and safety.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority or
responsibility of any department to proceed under powers and
authority granted to them by state statute, Town ordinance or the
Charter of the Town of Topsham.
C. The Town Manager or his designee may order the evacuation of persons
from hazardous areas within the Town.
D. The Town Manager or his designee shall be authorized to request aid or
assistance from the state or any political subdivision of the state and
may render assistance to other political subdivisions under the
provisions of 37-B M.R.S.A.
E. The Town Manager may obtain vital supplies, equipment and other
items found lacking and needed for the protection of health, life and
property during an emergency without following normal purchasing or
formal bid procedures.
F. The provisions of this section will terminate at the end of the declared
emergency.
A. The Emergency Management Director shall prepare an all hazard
Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) for the Town, which shall be
submitted to the Board of Selectmen for approval. The EOP shall
§ 14-7 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 14-9
14:39
§ 14-10. Immunity from liability.
All Emergency Management Agency forces, while engaged in Emergency
Management Agency activities, shall be immune from liability, as set forth
in 37-B, M.R.S.A. § 822.
§ 14-11. Compensation for injuries.
All Emergency Management Agency forces shall be deemed to be
employees of the state when engaged in training or on duty and shall have
all of the rights of state employees under the Workmen's Compensation Act,
as set forth in 37-B, M.R.S.A. § 823.
§ 14-12. Violation of regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions of this chapter
or of the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority contained
herein, or to obstruct, hinder or delay any Emergency Management Agency
forces as herein defined in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
or any regulation or plan issued hereunder.
§ 14-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the costs of
prosecution.
§ 14-14. Severability.
Should any provisions of this chapter be declared invalid for any reason,
such declaration shall not affect the validity of other provisions or of this
chapter as a whole, it being the legislative intent that the provisions of
this chapter shall be severable and remain valid notwithstanding such
declaration.
§ 14-15. Conflicting ordinances, orders, rules and regulations
suspended.
At all times when an emergency proclamation is in effect, the orders,
rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall
incorporate the principles of the National Emergency Management
System (NIMS) and the Incident Command System (ICS).
B. It shall be the responsibility of all municipal departments and agencies
to perform the functions assigned and to maintain their portions of the
plan in a current state of readiness. The Town plan shall be reviewed
periodically by the Town Manager in conjunction with all the Town
department heads and the Emergency Management Director.
§ 14-9 TOPSHAM CODE § 14-15
14:40
supersede all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations, insofar as
the latter may be inconsistent herewith.
Chapter 19
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Chapter 24
HISTORIC COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Construction — See Ch. 91.
Site plan review — See Ch. 175.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 191.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 24-1. Establishment; membership; residency requirements; terms
of office; officers; vacancies.
A. An Historic Commission is hereby established which shall consist of five
(5) regular members and two (2) associate members who shall be
residents of Topsham. Members of the Commission shall have a
demonstrated interest, knowledge, or training in historic preservation
or closely related fields, or in the historical and architectural
development of the Town, and shall be appointed with due regard to the
proper representation of such fields as history, architectural history,
architecture, landscape architecture, planning, engineering,
archaeology, law and building construction to the extent that such
professionals are available in the community. Consideration shall also
be given to one member being a resident of a Town-designated historic
district.
B. The term of office of a member shall be three years, except that the
initial appointments shall be staggered so that subsequent
appointments shall not recur at the same time.
C. Associate members may participate fully in the deliberations of the
Commission but may only vote when they are designated by the Chair
to take the place of a regular member who is absent or otherwise not
able to vote.
D. All members are required to maintain and develop their knowledge of
historic preservation and are expected to attend at least one Maine
Historic Preservation Commission sponsored informational or
educational meeting per year that pertains to the work and functions of
a local review commission or to historic preservation.
§ 14-15 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 24-1
14:41
§ 24-2. Rules, meetings and records.
§ 24-3. Powers and duties.
The Commission has the following powers and duties:
E. The members of the Commission shall choose officers who shall serve
one-year terms as Chairman and Vice Chairman. The Chairman shall
preside at meetings of the Commission. The Vice Chairman shall, in the
case of absence or disability of the Chairman, perform the duties of the
Chairman.
F. A municipal officer may not be a member of the Commission.
G. The municipal officers shall act within 60 days to fill a vacancy,
including expired terms.
H. The Board of Selectmen may dismiss a member, prior to the expiration
of his/her term, for just cause after notice and a public hearing.
A. To conduct the business of the Commission, a quorum of at least three
(3) members must be present and eligible to vote. A majority of the
members present and voting shall be required for the approval of any
action of the Commission.
B. In the event of the absence of a regular member, the Chair shall
designate an associate member as a voting member for that meeting.
The designated associate member shall have full authority to act in the
place of the absent member.
C. The Commission shall have the power to make whatever rules are
necessary for the execution of its duties as set forth in this chapter.
D. In the event of a direct or indirect personal or financial interest in an
item being considered by the Commission, the member must refrain
from from all deliberations and voting with respect to that item. If there
is a question as to a conflict of interest, the remaining members shall
decide by vote if a conflict exists.
E. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public, and the
Commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, proceedings and
actions.
F. Public notice of any meeting of the Commission together with the
agenda for the meeting shall be posted in the Town Hall at least three
(3) days prior to the meeting.
A. Local informational and advisory functions:
(1) Conduct and periodically review and update a survey of cultural
resources within Topsham, according to guidelines established by
the Maine Historic Preservation Commission, and maintain a
record of such.
§ 24-1 TOPSHAM CODE § 24-3
14:42
(2) Recommend methods and procedures necessary to preserve,
restore, maintain and operate historic sites and properties under
the ownership or control of the Town.
(3) Recommend ordinances and otherwise provide information for the
purposes of historic preservation in the Town.
(4) Act in an advisory role to other officials and departments of local
government regarding the protection of local cultural resources.
(5) Act as a local liaison on behalf of the local government to
individuals and organizations concerned with historic preservation.
(6) Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on
historic preservation and historic properties and sites within the
Town.
(7) Cooperate with federal, state and local governments in the
pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation.
(8) Participate in the conduct of land use and other planning processes
undertaken by the Town, the state or the federal government and
the agencies of these entities.
B. State Historic Preservation Commission advisory functions:
(1) Review all proposed National Register nominations for properties
within its jurisdiction. When the Commission considers a National
Register nomination and other actions which are normally
evaluated by a professional in a specific discipline, and that
discipline is not represented on the Commission, the Commission
shall seek expertise in the area before rendering its decision.
C. Review of applications for certificates of appropriateness:
(1) Establish written guidelines for the conservation of designated
historic districts and designated landmarks (if any) on decisions for
requests for certificates of appropriateness for new construction,
alterations, demolition, relocation or additions to properties and
buildings within historic districts or designated landmarks.
(2) Review applications for certificates of appropriateness for all
regulated activities within the Town's designated Historic Overlay
Districts in accordance with § 225-18.
(3) Review all regulated activities affecting designated historic and
prehistoric properties (if any) outside of the Town's designated
Historic Overlay Districts in accordance with any requirements
established by the Town.
§ 24-3 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 24-3
14:43
Chapter 36
(RESERVED)
Chapter 41
PLANNING BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Comprehensive Plan — See Ch. 105.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 191.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 41-1. Purpose.
The purposes of the Topsham Planning Board are:
§ 41-2. Planning program.
The planning program shall include, but not be limited to:
§ 41-3. Powers and duties.
The Planning Board shall:
A. To carry forward a continuing land use planning program.
B. To review and pass upon applications for subdivisions and site plan
approval submitted pursuant to the applicable ordinances of the Town
of Topsham.
A. Inventory of assets, resources and needs.
B. Analysis of those aspects having an impact on town development.
C. Recommendation of feasible steps in achievement of long-term best use
of available resources.
D. Assignment of priorities to recommendations and thus identification of
the short-term plan (approximately five years).
E. Recommendation to the Selectmen of an action program (one year).
F. Working with neighboring communities on matters of mutual concern.
G. Participation in the capital improvements planning process.
A. Review the Comprehensive Plan.
(1) Recommend land use guidelines for the municipality in the
following areas:
§ 24-3 TOPSHAM CODE § 41-3
36:44
§ 41-4. Membership; terms of office; vacancies; residency
requirements; removal. [Amended 5-21-1997 STM, Art. 22]
(a) Subdivision Regulations.
(b) Zoning Ordinance.
(c) Site Plan Review Regulation.
(d) Shoreland Zoning.
B. Administer planning activities through:
(1) Effective ordinances and regulation guiding growth.
(2) Capital projects lists.
(3) Cooperation and coordination with other officials and boards.
C. Decide on policy direction.
D. Review all requests for subdivision and site plan review approval and
issue orders denying or granting approval of the proposed subdivision
and site plan reviews or grant approval upon such terms and conditions
as deemed appropriate to satisfy established approval criteria. In the
furtherance of this responsibility, the Planning Board may adopt
reasonable regulations governing subdivisions which shall be in
addition to the requirements of the Topsham Subdivision and Site Plan
Review Ordinances.3
A. Members of the Board, as originally required in 1957, serve five-year
staggered terms, but effective as of the 1992 Annual Town Meeting, the
terms of the Board will be reduced to three-year staggered terms by
phasing out the five-year terms as they naturally expire. Current
members will continue to serve out their terms.
B. The Board shall be constituted of seven members appointed by the
Board of Selectmen. The term of each member shall be for three years.
C. Whenever a vacancy occurs, the Selectmen shall, within 30 days of its
occurrence, appoint a person to serve for the unexpired term.
D. No municipal officer may serve as a regular member.
E. No person who is not a resident of Topsham may serve on the Planning
Board of the Town of Topsham.
F. Planning Board members who are unable to attend a meeting shall
notify the Planning Office or Chair prior to the meeting. Absence
without notification shall be considered unexcused. In cases where an
appointed member has accumulated three unexcused absences within a
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 191, Subdivision of Land.
§ 41-3 PLANNING BOARD § 41-4
41:45
§ 41-5. Quorum. [Amended 7-31-2000 STM, Art. 8; 2-19-2004 STM,
Art. 4]
No meeting shall be held without a quorum, as determined by the Planning
Board.
§ 41-6. Bylaws and rules of procedure.
The Planning Board shall have the right to adopt bylaws and other rules of
procedure so long as they are not inconsistent with law, this chapter and the
purpose of the Board.
Chapter 66
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 124.
§ 66-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish appropriate guidelines for the
installation of alarm systems for notification of the Town of Topsham's Police
and Fire Departments.
§ 66-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted or defined as follows:
ALARM SYSTEM — A system, including any mechanism, equipment or
device, designed to automatically transmit a signal, message or warning
from a private facility to any of the town's public alarm systems, and
shall include telephonic alarm systems designed to operate automatically
through the use of public telephone facilities.
NONEMERGENCY ALARMS — Shall include but not be limited to
malfunctioning equipment or improperly monitored equipment such as to
cause false alarms.
ONE-YEAR PERIOD — For purposes of assessing the penalty fee when the
alarm system causes the transmittal of a nonemergency alarm more than
three (3) times in a one-year period, "one-year period" shall mean the period
from July 1 to the following June 30.
§ 66-3. Permits.
twelve-month period the Chair may notify the Board of Selectmen and
recommend removal for cause.
§ 41-4 TOPSHAM CODE § 66-3
66:46
§ 66-4. Inspections; confidential information.
The Chief of the concerned Department shall have the sole right to inspect
or cause to be inspected by the system installer any alarm system on
premises where it is intended to function prior to issuance of any permit for
operation of such system, and he may inspect or cause an inspection, by the
system installer or by a qualified individual in alarm systems installation,
of such system to be made at any time after the issuance of a permit to
determine whether it is being used in conformity with the terms of the
permit and the provisions of this chapter. Information related to any alarm
system shall be maintained in a confidential manner, and the release of such
information by any member of a concerned Department shall be a violation
of this chapter.
A. No person shall operate or maintain an alarm system which
automatically transmits a signal, message or warning to the Police or
Fire Department without first obtaining a permit.
B. Application for a permit to install, maintain or operate an alarm system
shall be filed with the Chief of each concerned Department, or his
designee, on forms supplied by the town, together with an application
fee of fifty dollars ($50.) for residential service. A fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.) will be submitted to the Fire Department for
nonresidential installations. A fee of fifty dollars ($50.) will be
submitted to the Police Department for nonresidential burglar alarm
installations. Installations or monitoring will not be permitted until the
application has been filed with the Topsham Dispatch Center and paid
in full. Said application shall set forth the name, address and telephone
number of both the installer of the system and the person or business
on whose premises the system will be monitored, as well as a
description of the system and the location where it is proposed to be
installed. Installers are responsible for submission of said application
fee. The permit fee shall be deposited with the Town Treasurer and
placed in the general fund.
C. The Chief of the concerned Department shall approve such application
if he finds that:
(1) The use of said alarm to transmit a signal, message or warning to
the Topsham Communications Center will not interfere with the
orderly conduct of town business.
(2) The person installing the system maintains an adequate service
organization to repair, maintain or otherwise service alarm systems
sold or leased by him. Any leased monitoring company shall be UL
listed and meet N.F.P.A. Code 71 standards.
D. The Police Chief or Fire Chief may impose other reasonable conditions
on the exercise of said permits.
§ 66-3 ALARMS § 66-5
66:47
§ 66-5. Telephonic alarm systems.
No person shall install, operate or maintain a telephonic alarm system
which automatically transmits a signal message or warning to the town's
Communications Center telephone lines. The telephone number or numbers
will be designated by the permit issued under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 66-6. Revocation of permit.
The Chief of the concerned Department may revoke any permit issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, after giving written notice to
the permit holder and a reasonable opportunity for the permit holder to
be heard, if it is determined that the alarm system installed pursuant to
said permit has been installed, maintained or operated in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or of any term or condition of said permit or for
failure to pay any fee specified in § 66-8.
§ 66-7. Installation.
The three (3) following conditions, as outlined in N.F.P.A. 74, pertaining to
household fire warning equipment, should be considered by the installer
when installing an alarm system under the provisions of this chapter:
§ 66-8. Nonemergency alarms; public buildings.
A. Any residential construction in units with one (1) bedroom on one (1)
floor will require a smoke detector to be located in any hall adjacent to
bedroom or sleeping quarters and one (1) in any basement or cellar.
Detectors will be wired together so one (1) detector, when activated,
will sound the other. The detectors will be hard wire 120V AC.
B. In units with more than one (1) sleeping area, smoke detectors will be
installed to protect each bedroom and one (1) in the basement or cellar.
Detectors will be wired together so one (1) detector, when activated,
will sound the other. The detectors will be hard wire 120V AC.
C. In units two (2) stories above ground level, detectors will be located in
sleeping areas or adjacent hallways on the ground floor and in the
cellar or basement. Detectors will be wired together so one (1) detector,
when activated, will sound the other. The detectors will be hard wire
120V AC.
A. Any permit holder whose system causes the transmittal of a
nonemergency alarm more than three (3) times per year shall pay a fee
fifty dollars ($50.) in the case of the Police Department or in the case of
the Fire Department, two hundred dollars ($200.) for each instance of
nonemergency alarm in excess of three (3) such alarms in a one-year
period. Whenever the Topsham Emergency Medical Rescue Unit is also
required to respond to emergency alarms in conjunction with the Fire
Department, the fee shall be sixty-five dollars ($65.) in addition to the
Fire Department fee.
§ 66-5 TOPSHAM CODE § 66-8
66:48
§ 66-9. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
therefor, be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars
($200.).
§ 66-10. Severability.
The invalidity of any provision of this chapter shall not affect the validity of
any other provision.
§ 66-11. Effective date.
The effective date shall be July 1, 1992.
Chapter 71
AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES
B. The appropriate fee provided in Subsection A of this chapter will be
assessed after the third nonemergency alarm, and any fee assessed
under this section shall be independent of, and in addition to, any
penalties for other violations of this chapter provided for under § 66-9.
This fee will be deposited in each respective Department's budget line
account, from which the cost of responding to the nonemergency alarm
was paid.
C. Public buildings owned and operated by the state, county, municipality
or special district shall be exempt from the penalty provisions of this
chapter effective July 1, 1993.
§ 66-8 AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 66-11
71:49

ARTICLE I
Special Amusements
[Adopted as Ch. 6, Art. II of the Topsham Code]
§ 71-1. Permit required.
No licensee for the sale of liquor to be consumed on his licensed premises
situated in the Town of Topsham shall permit, on his licensed premises,
any music, except radio or other mechanical device, any dancing or
entertainment of any sort, unless the licensee shall have first obtained from
the Town of Topsham a special amusement permit signed by at least a
majority of the municipal officers.
§ 71-2. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENTERTAINMENT — Shall include any amusement, performance,
exhibition or diversion for patrons or customers of the licensed premises,
whether provided by professional entertainers or by full-time or part-time
employees of the licensed premises whose incidental duties include
activities with an entertainment value.
§ 71-3. Applications.
Applications for all special amusement permits shall be made in writing
to the municipal officers and shall state the name of the applicant; his
residence address; the name of the business to be conducted; his business
address; the nature of his business; the location to be used; and any
additional information as may be needed by the municipal officers.
§ 71-4. Fee. [Amended 5-22-1991 ATM, Art. 23]
The fee for the special amusement permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.). In
addition, the applicant shall pay the actual advertising costs incurred by the
town, and a deposit covering the estimated advertising shall accompany the
application.
§ 71-5. Public hearing.
The municipal officers shall, prior to granting a permit and after reasonable
notice to the municipality and the applicant, hold a public hearing within
fifteen (15) days of the date the request was received, at which the
testimony of the applicant and that of any interested members of the public
shall be taken.
§ 71-1 AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 71-6
71:51
§ 71-6. Standards of review.
The municipal officers shall grant a permit unless they find that issuance of
the permit will be detrimental to the public health and safety or welfare or
would violate municipal ordinances or rules, regulations or Articles.
§ 71-7. Duration of permit.
A permit shall be valid only for the license year of the applicant's existing
liquor license.
§ 71-8. Suspension or revocation of permit.
The municipal officers may, after a public hearing preceded by notice to
interested parties, suspend or revoke any special amusement permits which
have been issued under this Article on the grounds that the music, dancing
or entertainment so permitted constitutes a detriment to the public health,
safety or welfare or violates any municipal ordinances, Articles, bylaws or
rules and regulations.
§ 71-9. Rules and regulations.
The municipal officers are hereby authorized, after public notice and
hearing, to establish written rules and regulations governing the issuance,
suspension and revocation of special amusement permits, the classes of
permits, the music, dancing or entertainment permitted under each class
and other limitations on these activities required to protect the public
health, safety and welfare. These rules and regulations may specifically
determine the location and size of permitted premises, the facilities that
may be required for the permitted activities on those premises and the
hours during which the permitted activities are permitted.
§ 71-10. Permit and appeal procedures.
A. Any licensee requesting a special amusement permit from the
municipal officers shall be notified, in writing, of their decision no later
than fifteen (15) days from the date his request was received. In the
event that a licensee is denied a permit, the licensee shall be provided
with the reasons for the denial in writing. The licensee may not reapply
for a permit within thirty (30) days after an application for a permit
which has been denied.
B. Any licensee who has requested a permit and has been denied or whose
permit has been revoked or suspended may, within thirty (30) days of
the denial, suspension or revocation, appeal the decision to the
Municipal Board of Appeals as defined in 30 M.R.S.A. § 2411.4 The
Municipal Board of Appeals may grant or reinstate the permit if it finds
that the permitted activities would not constitute a detriment to the
4. Editor's Note: 30 M.R.S.A. § 2411 was repealed by Chapter 737 of the Laws of 1987. See
now 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691.
§ 71-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 71-10
71:52
§ 71-11. Charging admission.
§ 71-12. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Article shall be punished by a
fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.) for the first offense and up
to two hundred dollars ($200.) for the subsequent offenses, to be recovered,
on complaint, to the use of the Town of Topsham.
§ 71-13. Separability.
The invalidity of any provision of this Article shall not invalidate any other
part.
§ 71-14. Effective date.
The effective date of this Article shall be March 9, 1981.
§ 71-15. Statutory reference. [Amended 5-22-1991 ATM, Art. 25]
See 28-A M.R.S.A. § 1001 et seq.
public health, safety or welfare or that the denial, revocation or
suspension was arbitrary or capricious or that the denial, revocation
or suspension was not based upon a preponderance of the evidence
on a violation of any ordinance, Article or rule or regulation of the
municipality.
A. A licensed hotel, Class A restaurant, Class A tavern or restaurant malt
liquor licensee who has been issued a special amusement permit may
charge admission in designated areas approved by the municipal
special amusement permit.
§ 71-10 AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 71-15
71:53

ARTICLE II
Pinball Machines and Video Machines
[Adopted 1-23-1991 STM, Art. 7, as Ch. 6, Art. V of the Topsham
Code]
§ 71-16. Adoption of statutory provisions.
Pursuant to the authority granted municipalities under 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 3001 et seq. and 8 M.R.S.A. § 441 et seq., the Town of Topsham hereby
adopts the licensing standards contained in 8 M.R.S.A. § 441 et seq. for
pinball machines and applies such licensing standards to video machines as
defined herein.
§ 71-17. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
VIDEO MACHINE — Only those machines nominally denominated as such
which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be
operated by the public generally for use as game, entertainment or
amusement, whether or not registering a score, and which are operated for
amusement only and do not dispense any form of payoff, prize or reward,
except free replays.
§ 71-18. Provisions applicable to video machines.
All provisions contained in state law, ordinance and municipal action which
apply to pinball machines shall apply equally to video machines, including
but not limited to licensing, revocation, violations and fees.
§ 71-16 AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 71-18
71:55
Chapter 72
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 72-1. Purpose.
§ 72-2. Permit required.
No adult entertainment establishment situated in the Town of Topsham shall
be in operation without first having obtained from the Town of Topsham an
adult entertainment establishment permit signed by at least a majority of
the municipal officers.
A. Extensive research has shown that unregulated adult entertainment
facilities are a serious problem, contributing to neighborhood blight,
crime, deteriorating property values, eroding the quality of
neighborhoods, commercial districts and the quality of life.
B. To prevent the deterioration of the community and neighborhoods in
the Town of Topsham and to provide for the orderly, planned future
development of the town, certain additional special regulations are
necessary in addition to existing zoning regulations to ensure that these
adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of
surrounding neighborhoods and that for the purpose of controlling the
concentration of certain uses, special regulations relating to the
location of these uses are necessary.
C. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses
to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens
of the Town of Topsham and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the continued deleterious location and
concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the Town of
Topsham. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor
effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this chapter to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it
the intent or effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene material.
§ 71-18 TOPSHAM CODE § 72-3
72:56
§ 72-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the definition of "adult entertainment
establishment" as found in Chapter 225, Town of Topsham Code, Zoning
Ordinance, § 225-6, Definitions, shall apply.
§ 72-4. Applications.
Applications for all adult entertainment establishment permits shall be
made in writing to the municipal officers and shall state the name of the
applicant; his residence address; the name of the business to be conducted;
his business address; the nature of his business; the location to be used; and
any additional information as may be needed by the municipal officers.
§ 72-5. Fee.
The fee for the adult entertainment establishment permit shall be $50. In
addition, the applicant shall pay the actual advertising costs incurred by the
town, and a deposit covering the estimated advertising shall accompany the
application.
§ 72-6. Public hearing.
The municipal officers shall, prior to granting a permit and after reasonable
notice to the municipality and the applicant, hold a public hearing within
15 days of the date the request was received, at which the testimony of the
applicant and that of any interested members of the public shall be taken.
§ 72-7. Standards of review.
The municipal officers shall grant a permit unless they find that issuance of
the permit will be detrimental to the public health and safety or welfare or
would violate municipal ordinances, bylaws or rules, regulations or articles.
§ 72-8. Duration of permit.
A permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance by the
municipal officers.
§ 72-9. Suspension or revocation of permit.
The municipal officers may, after a public hearing preceded by notice to
interested parties, suspend or revoke any adult entertainment
establishment permits which have been issued under this chapter on the
grounds that the establishment so permitted has violated any municipal
ordinances, articles, bylaws or rules and regulations pertaining to such
establishments. The municipal officers shall, after a public hearing
preceded by notice to interested parties, suspend or revoke any adult
entertainment establishment permits which have been issued under this
chapter on the grounds that the establishment so permitted has violated any
§ 72-3 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS § 72-9
72:57
municipal ordinances, articles, bylaws or rules and regulations pertaining
to such establishments more than one time in any twelve-month period.
§ 72-10. Rules and regulations.
The municipal officers are hereby authorized, after public notice and
hearing, to establish written rules and regulations governing the issuance,
suspension and revocation of adult entertainment establishment permits,
the classes of permits, the music, dancing or entertainment permitted under
each class and other limitations on these activities required to protect
the public health, safety and welfare. These rules and regulations may
specifically determine the location and size of permitted premises, the
facilities that may be required for the permitted activities on those premises
and the hours during which the permitted activities are permitted.
§ 72-11. Standards of operation.
§ 72-12. Permit and appeal procedures.
A. Standards enumerated.
(1) No sale of liquor shall be permitted on the premises of any adult
entertainment business.
(2) No live nude dancing shall be permitted on the premises of any
adult entertainment business.
(3) No person under the age of 18 years shall be allowed to enter into
any adult entertainment establishment.
(4) No adult entertainment establishment shall be operated prior to
12:00 noon or later than 1:00 a.m., or any time on a Sunday or legal
holiday.
(5) No activities, displays or merchandise associated with any adult
entertainment establishment shall be visible from any area which is
open to minors or the general public.
(6) When requested by a law enforcement officer, management or
employees of the adult entertainment establishment will allow
entry to that law enforcement officer immediately for the purpose
of inspecting and enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
B. The above standards are in addition to any other applicable standards
found in any municipal ordinances, articles, bylaws or rules and
regulations.
A. Any applicant requesting an adult entertainment establishment permit
from the municipal officers shall be notified, in writing, of their decision
no later than 15 days from the date his request was received. In the
event that an applicant is denied a permit, the applicant shall be
provided with the reasons for the denial in writing. The applicant may
§ 72-9 TOPSHAM CODE § 72-12
72:58
§ 72-13. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the suspension and revocation provisions of § 72-9, whoever
violates any of the provisions of this chapter and the acts as defined in
MRSA title 17-A, § 251, shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$100 for the first offense and up to $200 for subsequent offenses. Any law
enforcement officer with jurisdiction in the Town of Topsham may issue
a summons and complaint for a violation of this chapter, and, in addition
thereto, the Town of Topsham may file a civil complaint to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 72-14. Separability.
The invalidity of any provision of this chapter shall not invalidate any other
part.
§ 72-15. When effective.
The effective date of this chapter shall be the day that it is enacted by
Topsham Town Meeting.
§ 72-16. Statutory reference.
See MRSA Title 30-A, § 3001.
Chapter 76
ANIMALS
not reapply for a permit within 30 days after an application for a permit
which has been denied.
B. Any applicant who has requested a permit and has been denied or
whose permit has been revoked or suspended may, within 30 days of the
denial, suspension or revocation, appeal the decision to the Superior
Court pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
§ 72-12 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS § 72-16
72:59

ARTICLE I
Dog Control
[Adopted as Ch. 3, Art. I, of the Topsham Code, as amended through
19905]
§ 76-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to require that all dogs in the Town of Topsham
be kept under the control of their owners at all times so that they will not
injure persons, damage property or create a nuisance.
§ 76-2. Applicability.
The provisions which apply to the owner of a dog apply equally to any
person having its custody or possession.
§ 76-3. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner or person charged with the
responsibility of control.
DANGEROUS DOG — A dog which has bitten a person who was not a
trespasser with criminal intent on the owner's premises at the time of the
incident; a dog which causes serious injury or death to another animal; or
a dog which causes reasonable fear of bodily injury to a person acting in a
peaceable manner outside the owner's premises.
NUISANCE — The causing of unreasonable noise, smell, litter or other
property damage; frequent and habitual barking, howling or creating other
noise; the chasing of automobiles, motorcycles, bicycles or other vehicles;
or the persistent or frequent entry on school grounds while school is in
session.[Amended 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 8]
OWNER — Any person or organization, firm, partnership or corporation
which owns, possesses or has custody of a dog.
§ 76-4. Licenses and identification. [Amended 5-16-2012 STM, Art.
8]
Each owner or keeper of a dog that is six months of age or over, except
dogs kept under a kennel license as provided by 7 M.R.S.A. § 3923-C, shall,
on or before January 1 annually, or at such time as such dog becomes six
(6) months old, obtain and display a license and tag from the Town Clerk
in accordance with Title 7, Chapters 721 and 725, of the Maine Revised
Statutes. A dog which is at least two (2) months old must wear a collar or
harness to which is attached an identification tag with the owner's name
and address or telephone number.
5. Editor’s Note: Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.
§ 76-1 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS § 76-5
72:61
§ 76-5. Running at large.
§ 76-6. Dangerous dogs.
It shall be unlawful to own or possess a dangerous dog as defined in § 76-3,
except when such dangerous dog is confined or muzzled.
§ 76-7. Nuisances.
It shall be unlawful to own or possess a dog creating a nuisance as defined
under § 76-3.
§ 76-8. Impoundment.
The Dog Officer shall apprehend any dog found running at large and
impound it in the dog pound or other suitable place. The Dog Officer shall be
empowered to impound a nuisance dog when the owner of the dog cannot
be located. Whenever a dog confined by an outside fence or on a leash while
on its owner's property disturbs the peace of any person by frequently and
habitually barking, howling or creating other noise and the owner of said
dog cannot be located, the Dog Officer shall be empowered to impound
the dog following a twenty-four-hour waiting period from the initial time of
the complaint. At the time of impoundment, the Dog Officer shall register
the breed, color, sex, license number and name and address or telephone
number of the owner in a book kept for that purpose.
§ 76-9. Refusing to reclaim dog.
It is unlawful for a person to fail or refuse to reclaim his dog and pay the
cost required by § 76-10 within one (1) week after receiving oral or written
notice of its impoundment.
§ 76-10. Notice of reclamation.
A. A dog is not permitted to run at large. A dog which is off the premises of
the owner or the premises of a person having its custody and is not on a
leash, or is on a leash exceeding six (6) feet in length, is prima facie
running at large.
B. Exception. A dog which is under the owner's control and is engaged in
field trials, training or legal hunting may run at large.
C. Running at large after causing a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for an
owner of a dog which is found running at large and who knows or has
been advised that the dog has caused a nuisance as defined in § 76-3 to
fail to keep the dog on his premises or under his control or under the
control of a person charged with the responsibility. [Added 5-16-2012
STM, Art. 8]
A. The Dog Officer shall immediately notify the owner by telephone or by
certified mail that the dog has been impounded, and that he may
reclaim it by licensing the dog if it is unlicensed, and by paying to the
§ 76-5 TOPSHAM CODE § 76-10
72:62
§ 76-11. Disposition of unclaimed dogs.
The Dog Officer shall keep all impounded dogs for ten (10) days. If the
owner has not reclaimed the dog within that time, and if the Dog Officer
is not able to place the dog with the Brunswick Area Humane Society or
another owner, he shall destroy it.
§ 76-12. Disposition of dogs which have bitten persons.
The owner of a dog who knows or has been advised that the dog has
bitten a person shall confine the dog or have it confined by itself in a
secure enclosure for at least fourteen (14) consecutive days and shall
notify the Health Officer immediately of the time, place and reason for the
confinement. During the period of confinement, the owner shall not destroy
the dog nor allow it to be destroyed.
§ 76-13. Examination of confined dogs.
The Health Officer shall have a dog which has been confined because of
having bitten a person kept under observation for symptoms of rabies. At
the end of the fourteen-day period of confinement, the Health Officer shall
determine if he shall employ such expert assistance as may be necessary.
If he deems it necessary to keep the animal confined for longer than the
fourteen-day period, he shall order it done. If the dog is found to be rabid, he
shall notify the owner and person bitten, and shall have the dog destroyed
immediately, following any procedure recommended by the Department of
Human Services. If the dog is not rabid, the owner shall thereafter muzzle
the dog or keep it confined. All expenses incurred by the town in carrying
out the procedure provided by this section shall be paid for by the owner of
the dog.
§ 76-14. Transportation of dogs.
During the months of October, November, December, January, February and
March it shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle to allow a dog
to be transported on the open portion of an open-body-type vehicle. At any
other time the dog shall be secured by a leash while the vehicle is in motion.
§ 76-15. Disposal of animal feces. [Amended 5-21-2003 STM, Art.
15; 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 86]
The following conditions apply:
town the fees set forth by the Board of Selectmen. [Amended
11-17-1992 STM, Art. 7]
B. If the owner of the dog is unknown or cannot be found, the Dog Officer
shall immediately post the notice on the bulletin board in the lobby of
the Municipal Building.
6. Editor’s Note: This amendment also renumbered former § 76-15 as § 76-16.
§ 76-10 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS § 76-15
72:63
§ 76-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-1-1993 STM, Art. 17;
5-16-2012 STM, Art. 87]
§ 76-17. Statutory reference. [Amended 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 8]
See 7 M.R.S.A. § 3911 et seq. and § 3941 et seq.
A. Owner's responsibility. It shall be a violation of this section for any
person who owns, possesses, or controls an animal to fail to remove and
dispose of any feces left by his or her animal on any sidewalk, street,
publicly owned property or privately owned property unless authorized
from the owner.
B. Duty to possess means of removal.
(1) It shall be a violation of this section for any person who owns,
possesses or controls an animal to appear with such animal on any
sidewalk, street or publicly owned property without means of
removal of animal feces left by such animal.
(2) For the purpose of this section, the means of removal shall be any
tool, implement, or other device carried for the purpose of picking
up and containing such feces. Disposal shall be accomplished by
transporting such feces to a toilet designed for the disposal of
human feces.
C. Exemption. This section shall not apply to an animal accompanying any
handicapped person who, by reason of his or her handicap, is physically
unable to comply with the requirements of this section.
D. Enforcement. The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this
section.
A. A person who violates any provision of this article, except a violation of
§ 76-4, shall be fined and subject to a civil penalty in accordance with 7
M.R.S.A. § 3915, as amended. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate violation. All fines shall be paid to the Town. The Municipal
Clerk shall deposit any fees and court fines collected pursuant to this
article into a separate account pursuant to 7 M.R.S.A. § 3945.
7. Editor’s Note: This amendment also renumbered former § 76-16 as § 76-15.
§ 76-15 TOPSHAM CODE § 76-17
72:64
Chapter 85
BLASTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 91.
§ 85-1. Purpose.
§ 85-2. Statutory authority; administration; effect on other
regulations.
§ 85-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. Unregulated blasting may cause undue psychological, physical or
nuisance damage to the people and environment of the community.
Blasting is an activity essential to the economic viability of Topsham.
B. Through the establishment of standards, notice requirements and
instrument monitoring of blasting operations it is intended to minimize
the effects of airblast overpressure, ground vibration, dust and noise
associated with blasting which may be detrimental to individuals and
the community in the enjoyment of life, property and the conduct of
business.
C. It is intended to prevent permanent damage to the geologic,
hydrogeologic and wildlife resources and ecological balance in the
region, and to have a chapter which can be effectively and efficiently
administered without causing undue financial and administrative
hardship to blasting operators.
A. This chapter is enacted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 and shall be
administered by the Codes Enforcement Officer, Town Planner and the
Planning Board of the Town of Topsham.
B. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to any other
ordinances, regulations and statutes, and where different standards are
contained elsewhere, the more restrictive standards shall apply.
C. This chapter in no way replaces or negates the requirements pertaining
to explosives as contained in the Fire Prevention Code of the American
Insurance Association, 1970 Edition, as the same may be amended, or
any rule or regulation of any governmental agency.
§ 76-17 BLASTING § 85-3
85:65
AIRBLAST — An airborne shock wave resulting from detonation of
explosives. "Airblast" may be caused by burden movement or the release of
expanding gas into the air. "Airblast" may or may not be audible.
APPLICANT — The person, company or corporation responsible for
managing and conducting blasting operations.
BLASTING — Any activity entailing the use of explosives for the purpose
of producing an explosion to demolish structures or to fragment rock for
mining, quarrying, excavation and construction.
BLASTING OPERATIONS — Herein defined to mean drilling and site
preparation for blasting, and detonation itself.
DECIBEL — The unit of sound pressure commonly used to measure airblast
from explosives. The decibel scale is logarithmic.
EXPLOSIVES — Any substance, chemical compound or mechanical mixture
that is commonly used for the purpose of producing an explosion to
fragment rock for mining, quarrying, excavation and construction. Initiating
devices (detonators, detonating cords, etc.) are also included under this
definition.
FLYROCK — Rock that is propelled through the air or along the ground as a
result of the detonation of explosives.
GROUND VIBRATIONS — A shaking of the ground caused by the blast wave
emanating from a blast.
HERTZ — A term used to express the frequency of ground vibrations and
airblast. One "hertz" is one cycle per second.
PARTICLE VELOCITY — A measure of ground vibration. "Particle velocity"
describes the velocity at which a particle of ground vibrates when excited
by a seismic wave. It is measured in inches per second.
SEISMOGRAPH — An instrument that measures and may supply a
permanent record of earthborn vibration induced by blasting.
§ 85-4. Permit required; applications; hearings; fees; bond and
insurance.
A permit shall be obtained prior to any blasting with explosive devices or
materials for any purpose within the boundaries of the Town of Topsham.
A. Applications for a permit may be obtained in the Planning Office.
Permits shall be issued by the Codes Enforcement Office. Permits for
removal of a total of 300 cubic yards or less of material per project will
be issued by the Codes Enforcement Officer following review and
approval by the Town Planner. Applications for blasting and removal of
more than 300 cubic yards of material total per project must be
reviewed by the Planning Board. For the purposes of this chapter, the
"project" shall include all blasting anticipated to be undertaken during
the completion of a contract or series of contracts, for demolition,
excavation or construction, or during the anticipated life of a quarry
§ 85-3 TOPSHAM CODE § 85-4
85:66
operation. Applications for the Planning Board shall be transmitted to
the Board for review at the next available meeting.
B. Applications shall contain the following information:
(1) The name of the applicant.
(2) The name of the property owner.
(3) The general contractor.
(4) The locations of the proposed blasting activity.
(5) The total number of cubic yards of material to be removed by
blasting.
(6) An estimate of the number of blasts required to remove the
specified amount of material.
(7) A description of the project for which the blasting is being
undertaken.
(8) Adjacent land uses.
(9) The location of adjacent structures and distance to those
structures.
(10) The projected dates work is to be undertaken.
(11) Any other studies or information deemed necessary by the Codes
Enforcement Officer, Planner or the Board, which may include but
not limited to:
(a) Preblast assessment.
(b) Hydrological studies.
(c) Geological studies.
(d) Test wells.
(e) Hours of blasting.
(f) Seismographs.
C. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Planner and the Codes
Enforcement Officer shall review and act upon the application within 10
calendar days or forward the application to the Planning Board within
10 calendar days as appropriate under § 85-4A of this chapter.
(1) If the application is forwarded to the Planning Board, the Board
shall review and act upon the application within 30 days of
transmittal of a completed application.
(2) The Board may approve, approve with conditions or deny the
application based on the performance standards contained herein
§ 85-4 BLASTING § 85-4
85:67
§ 85-5. Performance standards.
and in Chapter 225, Zoning. The applicant must be notified in
writing by first class mail within 10 days of the decision.
D. Public hearing. A public hearing shall be held on the application.
(1) All abutting property owners and/or those property owners within
250 feet of the property line of the property for which the permit is
requested shall be notified by first class mail at least 10 days prior
to the date of the hearing. A list of names and mailing addresses
shall be provided as part of the application. Such notification shall
be the responsibility of the applicant, and evidence of such
notification shall be provided to the Planning Board.
(2) Notification of the public hearing shall be given in a newspaper of
local publication twice, the first time being at least seven days prior
to the date of the hearing. Cost of this publication will be paid by
the applicant.
E. Fees. All applications for blasting permits shall be accompanied by a fee
and deposit as indicated in Chapter 109 of the Town Code. [Amended
1-30-1997 STM, Art. 10; 5-20-2004 STM, Art. 16]
F. Bond and proof of insurance.
(1) The applicant and/or the blaster may be required to post a bond in
an amount to be determined by the Planning Board for those cases
reviewed by the Board.
(2) The applicant and/or the blaster shall present proof of liability
insurance in a minimum amount of $1,000,000 combined single
limit per occurrence, except for agricultural purposes by an
individual on his own property using binary explosives.
G. Effective period. Permits shall be effective for no more than 365 days
from the date of approval. For blasting operations the scope of which
exceeds one year, renewal of the permit shall be accomplished by
reapplying in accordance with the procedure for a new permit, except
that a public hearing may be held to review past compliance with the
standards contained herein and any effects on existing uses and
property owners in the vicinity of such blasting operations.
A. Hours of detonation. Hours of detonation shall be limited to daylight
hours, no earlier than 7:00 a.m. or later than 7:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday inclusive, except by special exception as in § 85-11 of this
chapter, excluding the following legal holidays: New Year's, Memorial
Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas.
B. Water quality protection. Water is a precious resource and measures
shall be taken to protect groundwater quality. Water quality shall be as
found in the nearest nonowned well within 250 feet from the property
§ 85-4 TOPSHAM CODE § 85-5
85:68
line or as determined by the Town Planner or Planning Board and from
post-blast testing results. Post-blast testing shall be done no sooner
than 24 hours or no later than 48 hours following a blast. Turbidity in
wells tested shall be no greater than that which existed prior to the
blasting as established in the preblast survey if such survey has been
completed.
C. Ground vibration.
(1) Peak particle velocity limits (inches per second) not to be exceeded
at any time: [Amended 1-30-1997 STM, Art. 10]
(a) Quarries:
[1] Up to 30 Hertz: 0.5 inches per second.
[2] More than 30 Hertz: 1.0 inches per second.
(b) Other:
[1] Up to 30 Hertz: 0.5 inches per second.
[2] Thirty-one to 40 Hertz: 1.0 inches per second.
[3] More than 40 Hertz: 2.0 inches per second.
(2) Ground vibration shall be measured as particle velocity. Particle
velocity shall be recorded in three mutually perpendicular
directions. The maximum allowable peak particle velocity shall
apply to each of the three measurements. [Amended 5-20-1998
STM, Art. 29]
(3) A seismographic record shall be provided for each blast as required
by the Codes Enforcement Officer, Town Planner and/or the Town of
Topsham Planning Board. The applicant shall be responsible for
such record and for providing proper instrumentation as specified
in this chapter. Personnel conducting such monitoring shall be
properly trained in the operation of the equipment being used.
[Amended 1-30-1997 STM, Art. 10]
D. Airblast overpressure. [Amended 1-30-1997 STM, Art. 10]
(1) Level not to be exceeded at any time: 133 peak dB (linear) two
Hertz high-pass system.
E. The requirements established herein apply to any property of concern
as determined by the Town Planner or Planning Board but no closer
than the property line of property under the control, through ownership
or lease or other contractual arrangement, or persons having blasting
operations performed. [Added 1-30-1997 STM, Art. 108]
8. Editor's Note: This article also provided for the relettering of former Subsection E as
Subsection F.
§ 85-5 BLASTING § 85-5
85:69
§ 85-6. Notices.
§ 85-7. Instrumentation.
All seismographs used for compliance with this chapter shall meet the
following minimum specifications:
F. The applicant shall also comply with all standards and conditions
contained in other permits issued for such projects and local, state and
federal statutes and regulations. The requirements established herein
shall be measured at the property line of the applicant or at the closest
building(s) on abutting properties as determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer, Town Planner and/or Planning Board. [Amended
5-21-1997 STM, Art. 23]
A. All blasting operations greater than 300 total cubic yards shall have
notice of such blasting published in a newspaper of local publication
and mailed by first class mail to all property owners within 250 feet of
the blasting property 10 days prior to the intended date of the
commencement of blasting. Notice shall include the description of the
blasting signals to be used during the operation and an address and
telephone number where property owners may request further
information and notification. Any property owner requesting further
notification shall do so in writing to the person conducting the blasting
operation. [Amended 1-30-1997 STM, Art. 10]
B. Any person intending to detonate explosives shall first notify the Codes
Enforcement Officer or his duly authorized representative that a blast is
planned. Such notification shall be received at least 24 hours prior to
the planned detonation and shall give the time (within two hours),
location where the blasting is to be done, the amount of explosives to be
used and the name and business address of the person responsible for
the blasting operation. Additional notification shall be received at least
one hour prior to the planned detonation and shall give the time (within
30 minutes). The notification may be given orally over the telephone;
however, the burden of proof as to whether the notification was in fact
received rests with the person responsible for the blasting operation.
[Amended 5-21-1997 STM, Art. 24]
(1) Prior to any blast, the person responsible for the blast shall inform
all property owners, who have requested in writing to be so
informed, of the impending blast. Such notification shall be given
by telephone 24 hours prior to the blast stating the time of the blast
one hour. The burden of proof as to whether the notification was in
fact received rests with the person responsible for the blasting
operation.
(2) Notification requirements for blasting operations of less than 300
total cubic yards shall be determined by the Town Planner.
A. Seismic frequency range: two to 200 Hz (±three± Hz).
§ 85-5 TOPSHAM CODE § 85-7
85:70
§ 85-8. Inspection and monitoring.
The Codes Enforcement Officer or his authorized representative may
conduct tests and observe any authorized blasting operations, and may
also order that additional ground vibration and airblast overpressure
measurements using approved instrumentation be made by persons
responsible for blasting operations to ensure that the limits specified in
§ 85-5 are not exceeded.
§ 85-9. Records.
Persons responsible for blast operations shall maintain a record of each
blast. All records shall be retained at least three years following cessation
of the blasting operation, and shall be available for inspection by the Codes
Enforcement Officer and shall contain the following minimum data:
B. Acoustic frequency range: two to 200 Hz (±one± db).
C. Velocity range: 0.02 to 4.0 inches per second.
D. Sound range: 110 to 140 dB linear.
E. Transducers: three mutually perpendicular axes.
F. Recording: provide time-history of waveform.
G. Calibration: be laboratory calibrated as often as necessary, but at least
once every 12 months according to manufacturer's recommendations.
A. The name of person responsible for the blasting operation.
B. The location, date and time of blast.
C. The names of blaster in charge.
D. The type of material blasted.
E. The number of holes, burden and spacing.
F. The diameter and depth of holes.
G. The types of explosives used.
H. The amount of explosives used.
I. The maximum amount of explosives per delay period of eight
milliseconds or greater.
J. The maximum number of holes per delay period of eight milliseconds or
greater.
K. The method of firing and type of circuit.
L. The weather conditions (including such factors as wind direction, cloud
cover, etc.).
§ 85-7 BLASTING § 85-9
85:71
§ 85-10. Compliance schedule.
§ 85-11. Exceptions based on undue hardship.
Applications for a permit for exception from the performance standards
designated in this chapter may, on the basis of hardship, be made to the
Codes Enforcement Officer. Any permit granted hereunder shall contain all
conditions upon which said permit has been granted and shall specify a
reasonable time that the permit shall be effective.
M. The height or length of stemming.
N. If mats or other protections were used.
O. The type of detonators used and delay periods used.
P. Seismograph and airblast readings when measured and from where
measured.
A. For blasting operations existing at the time of adoption of this chapter
where this chapter is more restrictive, a grace period of six months will
be granted wherein such operations will be "grandfathered" in order to
bring existing operations in line with this chapter. Six months after the
adoption of this chapter all preexisting blasting operations shall also be
brought under the provisions of this chapter.
B. A complete review of all activities under this chapter shall be
undertaken by the Codes Enforcement Officer and the Town Planner 12
months after adoption of this chapter to determine if the levels are
adequate and reasonable to achieve the purpose for which this chapter
is intended. The results of this review shall be reported to the Chairman
of the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Topsham and the Chairman of
the Planning Board of the Town of Topsham.
A. The Codes Enforcement Officer may grant the exception as applied for
only if:
(1) The activity or operation will be of a temporary duration, i.e., a
limited number of blasts at a specific site, and cannot be done in a
manner that would comply with this chapter;
(2) No other reasonable alternative is available to the applicants; and
(3) The applicants represent, and the Codes Enforcement Officer finds,
that blasting as permitted will not violate recognized safety
standards.
B. Upon the issuance of any exception permit, the Codes Enforcement
Officer may prescribe any reasonable conditions or requirements he
deems necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community.
§ 85-9 TOPSHAM CODE § 85-12
85:72
§ 85-12. Violations and penalties.
The submission of false information required by this chapter or the violation
of this chapter or the violation of any condition attached to a permit granted
under this chapter shall constitute a land use violation and be penalized in
accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
§ 85-13. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter is declared unconstitutional or held invalid, it
shall not affect any other section, clause or provision thereof, but the same
shall remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 91
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards — See Ch. 115. Fire prevention — See Ch. 124.
§ 91-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to PL 2007, Chapter 699, and amendments PL 2009, Chapter 261,
as may be amended in the future, the Town of Topsham is required by
the State of Maine to utilize, implement and enforce the Maine Uniform
Building and Energy Code (MUBEC), and any previously adopted Building
Code is superseded.
§ 91-2. Repealer.
The Building Code Ordinance of the Town of Topsham entitled the "BOCA
National Building Code, Thirteenth Edition, 1996," and all other ordinances
or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 91-3. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
A. Fees.
(1) All fees shall be as established by the Topsham Board of Selectmen,
per § 109-7.
(2) All permit fee computations shall be rounded off to the nearest
dollar amount.
(3) Exception: Municipal property, including schools, are exempt from
permit fees.
B. (Reserved)
§ 85-12 BLASTING § 91-3
85:73
§ 91-4. through § 91-5. (Reserved)
§ 91-6. Severability.
Should any section or provisions of this chapter be declared by any court to
be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision
of this chapter.
Chapter 98
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 98-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the establishment and operation
of a community antenna television system in the Town of Topsham for the
safety, convenience and general welfare of the public.
C. Insert the following:
Section 112.3.2 Late fee: Any person who shall commence any
work for which a permit is required by this code without first having
obtained a permit shall, if subsequently permitted to obtain a permit,
pay a late fee as established by the Topsham Board of Selectmen,
per § 109-7; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to
emergency work when it shall be proved to the satisfaction of the
administrative authority that such work was urgently necessary before
the commencement of work. In all cases, permits must be obtained as
soon as it is practicable to do so. If there is an unreasonable delay in
obtaining such permits, a late fee shall be charged.
D. Amend to read: Section 116.4 Violation penalties: Any person who
shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of
the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a
building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the
code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of
this code, shall be guilty of a civil violation, punishable by a fine in
accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense.
E. Amend to read: Section 117.2 Unlawful continuance: Any person
who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been
served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be
liable to a fine as set forth in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
F. Amend to read: Section 121.2 Membership of Board: The Board of
Appeals shall be the same Board as established by the Town of Topsham
Code, Chapter 225, Zoning, Article X.
§ 91-3 TOPSHAM CODE § 98-2
98:74
§ 98-2. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the "CATV Ordinance."
§ 98-3. Franchise required; procedure.
A person may not establish or operate a community antenna television
system without obtaining a franchise from the municipal officers.
§ 98-4. Establishment of system.
As soon as the franchise contract has been executed, the licensee shall
proceed to establish the system and put it into operation, as follows:
A. Application. In order to obtain a franchise to establish or operate a
community antenna television system, a person must first complete an
application form furnished by the municipal officers. In addition to that
required by the form, the applicant shall furnish the municipal officers
at any time with any other information which they deem pertinent.
B. Fee. When the application is filed with the municipal officers, the
applicant shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.) which is not
returnable.
C. Notice and hearing.
(1) On receipt of the fee and the application, the municipal officers
shall hold a public hearing for its consideration. Before doing so,
they shall publish a notice in a newspaper having general
circulation in the municipality at least seven (7) days before the
hearing advising the name and address of the applicant, the fact
that he has applied for a community antenna television system
franchise and the time and place of the hearing.
(2) At the hearing, the municipal officers may inquire as to the ability
of the applicant to establish and operate a community antenna
television system. They may also permit members of the public to
ask pertinent questions through the Chairman of the municipal
officers.
D. Determination. Within thirty (30) days after the hearing, the municipal
officers shall determine whether the applicant is able to establish and
operate a community antenna television system in a satisfactory
manner and shall notify him in writing of their decision.
E. Franchise granted. The municipal officers shall grant an exclusive
franchise to the applicant who is best able to establish and operate a
cable antenna television system, for not more than ten (10) years, the
terms of which must be specifically set forth in a contract between the
applicant and the Town of Topsham. The applicant shall provide the
municipality with a bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.) conditioned on his performance of the contract.
§ 98-2 CABLE TELEVISION § 98-4
98:75
§ 98-5. Installation of service.
The licensee shall install the system in a workmanlike manner using only
those materials and methods of installation which are accepted in the
industry as being safe and suitable to the purpose for which they were
designed.
§ 98-6. Public liability insurance.
The licensee shall carry all-risk public liability insurance with limits of
one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.) per person and three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000.) per occurrence for bodily injury, and one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.) property damage. He shall furnish
the municipal officers with, and keep current, a certificate of insurance
which indicates compliance with this section.
§ 98-7. Schedule of rates and charges.
The licensee shall not charge more for its service than the amounts listed in
the following schedule:
A. Federal Communications Commission (FCC) application. Apply to the
Federal Communications Commission for authorization to receive
distant signals.
B. Engineering. After the authorization has been granted, prepare the
necessary engineering surveys, plans and specifications in conformity
with state and local laws.
C. Contracts. After plans and specifications which require it have been
approved by state and local officials, prepare and execute pole
contracts and pole line adaptation contracts to permit alteration of
poles so as to accept the necessary cables.
D. Cable installation. Install the cables in the franchise area in accordance
with a time schedule to be submitted by the licensee and approved by
the municipal officers.
E. Reports. Until the system is in operation in the franchise area, the
licensee shall report his progress to the municipal officers at least every
six (6) months. Should he fail to make all reasonable efforts to establish
the system and put it into operation, the municipal officers shall, after
notice and hearing, cancel the franchise contract. In making this
determination, the municipal officers shall take into consideration those
matters beyond the control of the licensee, including delays caused by
any federal, state or local governmental agency or by any public utility.
A. Installation of service per customer at actual cost, not to exceed
eighteen dollars ($18.) unless the length of the drop exceeds one
hundred (100) feet, in which case the customer is liable for the excess
above eighteen dollars ($18.).
§ 98-4 TOPSHAM CODE § 98-7
98:76
§ 98-8. Television signals provided by system.
§ 98-9. Hours of operation.
The licensee shall keep the system in operation whenever any of the
television stations for which it provides reception is telecasting.
§ 98-10. Local preference in duplication of programming.
The licensee is not required to provide reception of duplicate programs.
When more than one (1) television station is telecasting the same program,
the licensee shall give preference to the local television stations listed in
§ 98-8.
§ 98-11. Rate increase without hearing.
After his first year of operation or after three (3) years from the date of his
initial franchise contract, whichever is later, the licensee may increase the
rates established by § 98-7 by not more than five percent (5%) in each of the
remaining years of that contract without a hearing.
§ 98-12. Rate increase after hearing.
The licensee is entitled to a fair return on his investment. If he believes
he needs to increase the rates established by § 98-7 more than the amount
allowed by § 98-11, he may petition the municipal officers. On receipt of
the petition along with a fee of ten dollars ($10.), the municipal officers
shall hold a public hearing for its consideration. Before doing so, they
shall publish a notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the
municipality at least seven (7) days before the hearing, advising that the
licensee has filed a petition for a rate increase and the time and place of
the hearing. At the hearing, the burden is on the licensee to prove that
the current rates do not produce a fair return. Within thirty (30) days after
the hearing, the municipal officers shall determine whether the licensee is
B. Service charge per dwelling unit: first outlet, five dollars ($5.) per
month; additional outlets, one dollar ($1.) each per month.
A. The licensee shall provide for reception of the signals of at least the
following local television stations:
Channel Number Call Letters Location
6 WCSH-TV Portland, Maine
8 WMTW-TV Poland Springs, Maine
10 WCBB-TV Augusta, Maine
13 WGAN-TV Portland, Maine
B. He shall also provide for the reception of the signals of any other
television station which may be put in operation within a fifty-mile
radius of the Town of Brunswick.
§ 98-7 CABLE TELEVISION § 98-12
98:77
entitled to a rate increase and the amount of increase allowed. They shall
notify the licensee in writing of their decision.
§ 98-13. Annual statement.
Annually, on April 1, the licensee shall file with the municipal officers an
annual statement, including a balance sheet and a profit and loss statement
as of the end of the licensee's latest fiscal year.
§ 98-14. Free service to municipality.
The licensee shall provide free reception to municipal buildings within his
service area. The municipality shall pay for the installation of the service.
§ 98-15. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
A person who violates this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more
than one hundred dollars ($100.). The municipal officers may enforce this
chapter and any franchise contract by seeking injunctive relief as provided
in 30 M.R.S.A. § 2151, as amended.
§ 98-16. Statutory reference.
See 30 M.R.S.A. § 2151(2)(H).9
Chapter 105
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 191. Zoning — See Ch. 225.
Chapter 109
COSTS OF APPLICATION REVIEWS, RECOVERY OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Blasting — See Ch. 85.
Building construction — See Ch. 91.
Site plan review — See Ch. 175.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 191.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 109-1. Purpose.
9. Editor's Note: 30 M.R.S.A. § 2151(2)(H) was repealed by Chapter 583 of the Laws of 1987.
See now 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3008.
§ 98-12 TOPSHAM CODE § 109-1
105:78
§ 109-2. Planning and Codes Enforcement permit fees.
A. It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to equitably transfer the
related expenses of reviewing development proposals to the applicant,
whenever possible, in order to limit the impact on general tax revenues.
B. Applications initiated by Town officials, boards, agencies or
commissions are exempt from the scope of this chapter. Exempt
applicants, however, shall pay for the cost of any outside reviews
required by the reviewing agency, when those reviews are performed
by contracted firms rather than Town employees.
A. The Board of Selectmen shall create a schedule of permit fees covering
all permits issued by the Planning and Codes Enforcement Office.
B. This Schedule of Fees10 shall be reviewed at least once every five years
for needed revisions. Updates may be made by the Board of Selectmen
at any time, when it is determined that the Schedule of Fees:
(1) No longer provides sufficient revenue to cover the costs of
operating the Planning and Codes Enforcement Office;
(2) Increases in fees are necessary to meet new fee structures required
by the State of Maine; or
(3) When new permits are required via the Planning and Codes
Enforcement Office.
C. Applicable sections of the Topsham Code that require permit
applications accompanied by an application fee include but are not
limited to: Chapter 85, Blasting; Chapter 91, Building Construction;
Chapter 175, Site Plan Review; Chapter 185, Street Design and
Acceptance; Chapter 191, Subdivision of Land; Chapter 225, Zoning,
and include but are not limited to the following applications:
(1) Application for subdivision.
(2) Application for conditional use.
(3) Application for site plan.
(4) Application for blasting permit.
(5) Application for shoreland zoning permit.
(6) Application for administrative exception.
(7) Application for street acceptance.
(8) Application for zoning text amendment.
(9) Application for Zoning Map amendment.
10.Editor’s Note: The schedule is on file in the Town offices.
§ 109-1 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN § 109-2
105:79
Chapter 115
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 91.
§ 115-1. Adoption of code.
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the Clerk
of the Town of Topsham, being marked and designated as the "National
Electrical Code, 2008 Edition," as published by the National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA), Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of
the Town of Topsham in the State of Maine, for the practical safeguarding
of persons and property from hazards arising from the use of electricity and
is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
(10) Inspection of subdivision, site plan, conditional use or shoreland
zoning improvements.
(11) Application for amendments to approved projects.
(12) Site location of development applications.
(13) Stormwater permit application.
(14) Application for a planned mixed-use development.
(15) Appeals to the Board of Appeals from actions of the Codes
Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board related to conditional
use applications.
(16) Historic District certificate of appropriateness.
(17) Building.
(18) Electrical.
(19) Sign.
(20) Plumbing.
(21) Subsurface wastewater.
(22) Street banner.
(23) Transmission tower.
(24) Zoning review.
(25) Other.
§ 109-2 TOPSHAM CODE § 115-1
105:80
this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 115-3 of this chapter.
§ 115-2. Repealer.
The Electrical Code Ordinance of the Town of Topsham entitled the
"National Electrical Code, 1996 Edition," and all other ordinances or parts
of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 115-3. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
A. The Town adopts Article 210.5(C) with the following amendment:
210.5 Identification for Branch Circuits.
(C) Ungrounded Conductors. Where the premises wiring system
has branch circuits supplied from more than one nominal
voltage system, each ungrounded conductor of a branch circuit
shall be identified by phase or line and system at all
termination, connection, and splice points. The means of
identification shall be permitted to be by separate color
coding, marking tape, tagging, or other approved means. The
method utilized for conductors originating within each branchcircuit
panelboard or similar branch-circuit distribution
equipment shall be permanently posted at each branch-circuit
panelboard or similar branch-circuit distribution equipment.
B. The Town adopts Article 210.8(A)(5), Exception to (5), with the
following amendment:
210.8Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection for
Personnel.
(A) Dwelling Units.
Exception to (5): A receptacle supplying only a permanently
installed fire alarm or burglar alarm system shall not be
required to have ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection. A
single receptacle connected to an individual branch circuit
supplying a sump pump shall not be required to have groundfault
circuit-interrupter protection, provided that a GFCI
protected receptacle is located within 900 mm (3 ft) of the non-
GFCI-protected receptacle.
C. The Town adopts Article 215.12(C) with the following amendment:
§ 115-1 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN § 115-3
105:81
215.12Identification of Feeders.
(C) Ungrounded Conductors. Where the premises wiring system
has feeders supplied from more than one nominal voltage
system, each ungrounded conductor of a feeder shall be
identified by phase or line and system at all termination,
connection, and splice points. The means of identification shall
be permitted to be by separate color coding, marking tape,
tagging, or other approved means. The method utilized for
conductors originating within each feeder panelboard or
similar feeder distribution equipment shall be permanently
posted at each feeder panelboard or similar feeder distribution
equipment.
D. The Town adopts Article 334.10(3) with the following amendment:
334.10 Uses Permitted.
(3) Other structures permitted to be of Types III, IV, and V
construction except as prohibited in 334.12.
E. The Town does not adopt Article 334.12(A)(2), Uses Not Permitted.
F. The Town adopts Article 338.10(4)(a) with the following amendment:
338.10Uses Permitted.
(4) Installation Methods for Branch Circuits and Feeders.
(a) Interior Installations. In addition to the provisions of this
article, Type SE service-entrance cable used for interior
wiring shall comply with the installation requirements of
Part II of Article 334, except that the ampacity need not
be in accordance with the 60°C (194°F) conductor
temperature rating.
G. The Town adopts Article 338.12(B) (1) and (2) with the following
amendment:
338.12 Uses Not Permitted.
(B) Underground Service-Entrance Cable.
(1) For interior wiring of branch circuits and feeders
originating and terminating within the same building.
(2) For aboveground installations except where USE cable
emerges from the ground and is terminated in an
enclosure at a location acceptable to the Authority Having
Jurisdiction and the cable is protected in accordance with
300.5(D).
H. The Town adopts Article 342.30 with the following amendment:
§ 115-3 TOPSHAM CODE § 115-3
105:82
342.30Securing and Supporting. IMC shall be installed as a
complete system in accordance with 300.18 and shall be
securely fastened in place and supported in accordance with
342.30(A) and (B).
I. The Town does not adopt Article 342.30(C), Unsupported Raceways.
J. The Town adopts Article 344.30 with the following amendment:
344.30Securing and Supporting. RMC shall be installed as a
complete system in accordance with 300.18 and shall be
securely fastened in place and supported in accordance with
344.30(A) and (B).
K. The Town does not adopt Article 344.30(C), Unsupported Raceways.
L. The Town adopts Article 352.30 with the following amendment:
352.30 Securing and Supporting. PVC conduit shall be installed as
a complete system in accordance with 300.18 and shall be
fastened so that movement from thermal expansion or
contraction is permitted. PVC conduit shall be securely
fastened and supported in accordance with 352.30(A) and (B).
M. The Town does not adopt Article 352.30(C), Unsupported Raceways.
N. The Town adopts Article 355.30 with the following amendment:
355.30Securing and Supporting. RTRC shall be installed as a
complete system in accordance with 300.18 and shall be
securely fastened in place and supported in accordance with
355.30(A) and (B).
O. The Town does not adopt Article 355.30(C), Unsupported Raceways.
P. The Town adopts Article 358.30 with the following amendment:
358.30 Securing and Supporting. EMT shall be installed as a
complete system in accordance with 300.18 and shall be
securely fastened in place and supported in accordance with
358.30(A) and (B).
Q. The Town does not adopt Article 358.30(C), Unsupported Raceways.
R. The Town adopts Article 702.5(B)(2) with the following amendment:
702.5 Capacity and Rating
(B) System Capacity.
(2) Automatic Transfer Equipment. For other than singlefamily
dwellings, where automatic transfer equipment is
used, an optional standby system shall comply with (2)(a)
or (2)(b).
§ 115-3 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN § 115-3
105:83
S. In Section 90-4, Enforcement, insert at the end of the paragraph the
following:
(1) Electrical Inspector. The Electrical Inspector shall enforce this
Code. The Electrical Inspector shall be appointed by the Town
Manager annually. During temporary absence or disability of the
Electrical Inspector, the Town Manager shall designate an acting
Electrical Inspector.
(2) Any person who begins any work for which a permit is required
without first having obtained a permit shall pay the normal fee plus
fifty dollars ($50). This provision shall not apply to emergency work
when it shall be proven to the satisfaction of the Code Official that
such work was urgently necessary and that it was not practical to
obtain a permit therefor before the commencement of work. In all
cases, a permit must be obtained as soon as it is practicable to do
so, and if there shall be an unreasonable delay in obtaining such
permit (three days), a fifty-dollar fee ($50) will be added to the
normal permit fee.
(3) Inspections.
(a) The Electrical Inspector shall inspect all wiring at appropriate
times during its installation to see that it is in compliance with
this code. (Temporary service, permanent service, rough in and
final).
(b) The Electrical Inspector may enter and examine any property
at reasonable hours and enter any structure with the consent
of the property owner, occupant or agent, to inspect the
property or structure for compliance with this chapter and
code.
(c) The electrical contractor or property owner shall give the
Electrical Inspector 24 hours' advance notice when an
electrical installation is ready for inspection.
(d) Electrical installations, alterations or additions for which a
permit is required may not be used until an inspection is
conducted and approval is given by the Electrical Inspector.
(4) Schedule of Fees for Original Installations. The Electrical Inspector
shall collect fees from applicants for permits required in 90-4(b) as
follows: For the purpose of establishing fees for electrical permits,
refer to the Code of The Town of Topsham § 109-7, Codes
enforcement permit fees.
(a) All permit fee computations shall be rounded off to the nearest
dollar amount.
(b) Gross floor area square footage shall be calculated using the
exterior dimensions of the building or structure at the floor
§ 115-3 TOPSHAM CODE § 115-3
105:84
§ 115-4. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the electrical code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause or causes of actions
acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 115-2 of this chapter, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 115-5. Conflict with other provisions.
Whenever the requirements of this chapter are inconsistent with the
requirements of any other ordinance, code or statute, the more restrictive
requirements shall apply.
level of each story. Unfinished basements and attics shall not
be included.
(5) Schedule of Fees for Alterations or Additions to Existing Electrical
Equipment. The Electrical Inspector shall collect fees from
applicants for permits required in 90-4(b) as follows:
(a) Service and meter, or replacement: $10; each additional meter
on same service: $5.
(b) Fixtures or outlets.
Number of Fixtures or
Outlets Fee
1 to 10 $10.00
11 to 20 $15.00
21 to 30 $20.00
(c) Anything over 30 fixtures or outlets shall be computed at 1/2
the rates for original installations based on the area of the
addition or alterations.
(d) All permit fee computations shall be rounded off to the nearest
dollar amount.
(e) Municipal property, including schools, are exempt from permit
fees.
(6) Violation penalties: A person who shall violate a provision of this
code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
who shall install electrical materials or equipment in violation of an
approved plan or directive of the Electrical Inspector or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall be guilty
of a civil violation, punishable by a fine in accordance with 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day that a violation continues after due
notice has been served shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
§ 115-3 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN § 115-6
105:85
§ 115-6. Severability.
Should any section or provisions of this chapter be declared by any court to
be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision
of this chapter.
§ 115-7. Effective date.
The Town Clerk shall certify to the adoption of this chapter and cause the
same to be published as required by law, and this chapter shall take full
force and effect upon approval at Town Meeting on November 13, 2008.
Chapter 124
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 91.
§ 124-1. Adoption of code.
The Town of Topsham adopts the current edition of the BOCA National
Fire Prevention Code as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators, Inc., as the fire prevention code of the Town of Topsham for
the control of buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA
National Fire Prevention Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, in sections F100.1, F103.6 and F104.2.1.
§ 124-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
A. Amend Section F100.1 to read as follows:
Section F100.1 Title: These regulations as set forth herein shall be
known as the "Fire Prevention Code of the Town of Topsham" and are
herein referred to as such as "this code."
B. Amend Section F103.6 to read as follows:
Section F103.6 Permits: Permits shall be obtained from the Fire
Department for those activities specified in this code. Permits shall at
all times be kept in the premises designated therein and shall at all
times be subject to inspection by the Code Official.
C. Amend Section F104.2.1 to read as follows:
§ 115-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 124-2
105:86
Chapter 125
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 124.
Section F104.2.1 Qualifications: Members may be drawn from but
are not limited to professional engineers or architects or specialists in
fire prevention and control, and there should not be more than two (2)
members selected from the same profession or business.
D. Amend Section F106.7 to read as follows: [Added 6-1-1993 STM, Art.
15; 5-21-2008 STM, Art. 12]
Section F106.7 Payment of fees: A permit shall not be issued until
the designated fees have been paid. The fees shall be as established by
the Topsham Board of Selectmen, per § 109-7.
§ 124-2 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN § 124-2
105:87

ARTICLE I
Sale of Consumer Fireworks
[Passed at referendum 6-12-2012]
§ 125-1. Applicability.
This article shall govern the sale of consumer fireworks and fireworks as
defined herein, as in 8 M.R.S.A. §§ 221A through 237.
§ 125-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSUMER FIREWORKS — Shall have the same meaning as in 8 M.R.S.A.
§ 221A through 237, as may be amended from time to time.
§ 125-3. Sale of consumer fireworks prohibited.
The sale of, or offer to sell, consumer fireworks shall be prohibited within
the Town of Topsham.
§ 125-4. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, individual, corporation, company, association, firm,
partnership, society, joint-stock company or any other organization who
sells or offers to sell consumer fireworks in the Town of Topsham shall
be punished by a penalty of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00),
plus costs associated with prosecuting the violation, for a first offense.
For second and subsequent violations, a penalty of not less than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), plus costs, shall be imposed.
B. Any penalties assessed under this article shall inure to the Town of
Topsham.
C. The Town of Topsham may seize consumer fireworks that the Town has
probable cause to believe are being sold or are to be sold in violation of
this article. Upon conviction for selling or offering to sell consumer
fireworks, any seized fireworks shall be forfeited to the Town. Forfeited
consumer fireworks shall be forwarded to the State of Maine for
disposal.
§ 125-1 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN § 125-4
105:89

ARTICLE II
Use of Consumer Fireworks
[Passed at referendum 6-12-2012]
§ 125-5. Applicability.
This article shall govern the use of consumer fireworks and fireworks as
defined herein, as in 8 M.R.S.A. §§ 221A through 237.
§ 125-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSUMER FIREWORKS — Shall have the same meaning as in 8 M.R.S.A.
§§ 221 through 237, as may be amended from time to time.
§ 125-7. Use of commercial fireworks prohibited.
The use, discharge or ignition of consumer fireworks shall be prohibited
within the Town of Topsham.
§ 125-8. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, individual, corporation, company, association, firm,
partnership, society, joint-stock company or any other organization who
uses, discharges or ignites consumer fireworks in the Town of Topsham
shall be punished by a penalty of not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00) and not more than four hundred dollars ($400.00), plus costs
associated with prosecuting the violation and any response from the
Topsham Fire Department made necessary by such violation, for a first
offense. For second and subsequent violations, a penalty of not less than
three hundred dollars ($300.00) and not more than six hundred dollars
($600.00) per violation, plus costs, shall be imposed.
B. Any penalties assessed under this article shall inure to the Town of
Topsham.
C. The Town of Topsham may seize consumer fireworks that the Town has
probable cause to believe are to be used, when located at the site of a
suspected violation of this article. Upon conviction for illegal use of
consumer fireworks, any seized fireworks shall be forfeited to the Town.
Forfeited consumer fireworks shall be forwarded to the State of Maine
for disposal.
§ 125-5 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN § 125-8
105:91
Chapter 137
INNKEEPERS, VICTUALERS AND LODGING HOUSES
§ 137-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted municipalities
under 30 M.R.S.A. §§ 1917 and 2751 et seq., as amended and as
recodified,11 that all innkeepers, victualers and lodging houses be licensed
by the Municipal Licensing Board consisting of the Selectmen.
§ 137-2. Definitions.
The terms "innkeepers," "victualers," "lodging houses" and "Licensing
Board" shall be defined the same as defined by state statutes, except that
the term "victualer" shall also include any person who serves food or drink
prepared for consumption by the public either on or off premises.
§ 137-3. Fee schedule.
The fee for innkeepers, victualers and lodging houses licenses shall be in
accordance with the following schedule:
§ 137-4. Violations and penalties.
No person shall operate as an innkeeper, victualer or tavernkeeper without
a license, under penalty of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.).
§ 137-5. Severability.
It is the intention of this municipality that each separate section of this
chapter shall be deemed independent of all sections herein and it is further
the intention of the municipality that if any provisions of this chapter shall
be declared invalid, all of the remaining sections thereof shall remain valid
and effective.
A. Victualers.
(1) Premises not serving alcohol: fifty dollars ($50.).
(2) Premises serving alcohol: one hundred dollars ($100.).
B. Innkeepers: fifty dollars ($50.).
C. Lodging houses:
(1) Ten (10) rooms or fewer: ten dollars ($10.).
(2) More than ten (10) rooms: thirty dollars ($30.).
11.Editor's Note: 30 M.R.S.A. § 1917 was repealed by Chapter 583 of the Laws of 1987. See
now 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001. 30 M.R.S.A. § 2751 et seq. was repealed by Chapter 737 of the
Laws of 1987. See now 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3801 et seq.
§ 125-8 TOPSHAM CODE § 137-5
137:92
Chapter 150
MARIJUANA BUSINESS LICENSING
§ 137-5 INNKEEPERS, VICTUALERS AND LODGING § 137-5
137:93

ARTICLE I
Marijuana Businesses
[Adopted 5-15-2019 ATM, Art. 19]
§ 150-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for and regulate the issuance of
licenses for marijuana businesses as defined in this article and by the State
of Maine under the Marijuana Legalization Act, 28-B M.R.S.A. § 101 et seq.
and the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act, 22 M.R.S.A. § 2421 et seq., as
may be amended.
§ 150-2. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by 28-B M.R.S.A.
§ 101 et seq., as may be amended, 22 M.R.S.A. § 2421 et seq., as may be
amended, and the Town's home rule authority under Chapter VIII, Part 2,
Section 1 of the Maine Constitution.
§ 150-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section.
ADULT USE MARIJUANA — As that term is defined in 28-B M.R.S.A.
§ 102(1), as may be amended.
ADULT USE MARIJUANA PRODUCT — As that term is defined in 28-B
M.R.S.A. § 102(2), as may be amended.
APPLICANT — A person that has submitted an application for licensure as
a marijuana business pursuant to this article.
CULTIVATE or CULTIVATION — The planting, propagation, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, and trimming or other processing of
marijuana for use or sale. It does not include manufacturing.
HARVESTED MARIJUANA — The plant material harvested from a mature
marijuana plant, except the stalks, leaves and roots of the plant that are not
used for a qualifying patient's medical use. "Harvested marijuana" includes
marijuana concentrate and marijuana products.
LICENSED PREMISES — The premises specified in an application for a
license pursuant to this article that are owned or in possession of the
licensee and within which the licensee is authorized to cultivate,
manufacture, distribute, sell, or test adult use marijuana, adult use
marijuana products, medical marijuana or medical marijuana products in
accordance with the provisions of this article and the requirements of state
law and regulations.
LICENSEE — A person licensed pursuant to this article.
MANUFACTURE or MANUFACTURING — The production, blending,
infusing, compounding or other preparation of marijuana products,
§ 150-1 INNKEEPERS, VICTUALERS AND LODGING § 150-3
137:95
including, but not limited to, marijuana extraction or preparation by means
of chemical synthesis. It does not include cultivation.
MARIJUANA — Leaves, stems, flowers and seeds of a marijuana plant,
whether growing or not. "Marijuana" includes marijuana concentrate.
MARIJUANA BUSINESS — A marijuana cultivation facility, a marijuana
products manufacturing facility, or a marijuana testing facility. The term
"marijuana business" does not include registered caregiver retail stores.
MARIJUANA CONCENTRATE — The resin extracted from any part of a
marijuana plant and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture
or preparation from such resin, including, but not limited to, hashish. In
determining the weight of marijuana concentrate in a marijuana product,
the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare a
marijuana product may not be included.
MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY — A facility licensed to cultivate,
prepare and package adult use and/or medical marijuana and to sell adult
use and medical marijuana to marijuana manufacturing facilities, marijuana
stores, and other cultivation facilities. A marijuana cultivation facility is
not authorized as an accessory use, and only where expressly allowed as a
permitted or conditional use.
MARIJUANA PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING FACILITY — A facility licensed
to purchase adult use and/or medical marijuana from a marijuana
cultivation facility or another marijuana products manufacturing facility;
to manufacture, label and package adult use and/or medical marijuana
products; and to sell adult use and/or medical marijuana products to other
marijuana products manufacturing facilities and to registered caregiver
retail stores.
MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY — A medical marijuana testing facility or
adult use marijuana testing facility, as described within this definition. A
marijuana testing facility is not authorized as an accessory use:
MEDICAL MARIJUANA — The medical use of marijuana, with the term
"medical use" as defined in 22 M.R.S.A. § 2422(5), as may be amended.
ADULT USE MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY — A facility licensed
under this article to develop, research and test adult use marijuana,
marijuana products and other substances.
A.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY — A public or private
laboratory that:
Is authorized in accordance with 22 M.R.S.A. § 2423-A, Subsection
10, to analyze contaminants in and the potency and cannabinoid
profile of samples; and
(1)
Is accredited pursuant to standard ISO/IEC 17025 of the
International Organization for Standardization by a 3rd-party
accrediting body or is certified, registered or accredited by an
organization approved by the State of Maine.
(2)
B.
§ 150-3 TOPSHAM CODE § 150-3
137:96
OWNER — A person whose beneficial interest in a marijuana business is
such that the person bears risk of loss other than as an insurer, has an
opportunity to gain profit from the operation or sale of a marijuana business
and has a controlling interest in a marijuana business.
PERSON — A natural person, partnership, association, company,
corporation, limited-liability company or organization or a manager, agent,
owner, director, servant, officer or employee thereof. "Person" does not
include any governmental organization.
QUALIFYING PATIENT — A person who has been a resident of the state for
at least 30 days and who possesses a valid written certification regarding
medical use of marijuana in accordance with 22 M.R.S.A. § 2423-B.
REGISTERED CAREGIVER — A person or an assistant of that person that
provides care for a qualifying patient and who is registered by the State of
Maine pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 2425-A.
REGISTERED CAREGIVER RETAIL STORE — A facility operated by a single
medical marijuana registered caregiver and licensed to sell harvested
marijuana to qualifying patients for the patients' medical use and may
include an area for consultation with patients.
STATE LICENSE — Any license, registration or certification issued by the
state licensing authority.
STATE LICENSING AUTHORITY — The authority (or authorities) created
by the state for the purpose of regulating and controlling the licensing
of the cultivation, manufacture, distribution, testing and sale of adult use
marijuana, adult use marijuana products, medical marijuana and/or medical
marijuana products in this state.
§ 150-4. Distribution of licenses.
The Selectboard shall only issue a limited number of marijuana business
licenses in accordance with this article. Licenses are apportioned for each
category of activity where allowed in the land use code, § 225-16.
A. Number of licenses allowed per use: The Selectboard is authorized to
issue the following marijuana business licenses:
(1) Marijuana cultivation facility:
(a) Tier 1 < 30 plants, < 500 square feet of plant canopy:
maximum of two licenses.
(b) Tier 2 > 501 square feet > 2,000 square feet of plant canopy:
maximum of two licenses.
(c) Tier 3 > 2,001 square feet < 7,000 square feet of plant canopy:
maximum of two licenses.
(d) Tier 4 > 7,001 square feet < 20,000 square feet of plant
canopy: maximum of two licenses.
§ 150-3 INNKEEPERS, VICTUALERS AND LODGING § 150-4
137:97
§ 150-5. Marijuana businesses permitted.
Marijuana businesses are permitted pursuant to a license issued by the
Selectboard and subject to the requirements and restrictions of this article
and Chapter 225 of this Code.
§ 150-6. Prohibited activities.
§ 150-7. (Reserved)
§ 150-8. License required.
(e) Nursery < 1,000 square feet of plant canopy: maximum of two
licenses.
(2) Marijuana products manufacturing facility: maximum of six
licenses.
(3) Marijuana testing facility: maximum of 10 licenses.
B. Number of licenses allowed per business: The Selectboard shall issue
no more than one marijuana business license per business/individual/
owner for each category of business activity.
C. Prioritization of license review.
(1) Marijuana businesses that were operating with Town approval
prior to December 13, 2018, shall have a priority of review for
license issuance by the Selectboard, provided that the owner/
operator of the business submits a completed application for a
license within 19 days of enactment of this article. Such businesses
shall be included in the maximum number of licenses permitted in
each category.
(2) Any change in ownership or change in officers of an owner of an
existing marijuana business license shall have a priority of review
to maintain the issued license, provided that a completed license
application is submitted prior to the change of ownership.
A. No marijuana business shall be established or operated within the Town
without first receiving and then maintaining all approvals required
under this Code, including, but not limited to, this article and Chapter
225 of the Code.
B. No marijuana business shall conduct any activity for which it has not
received any required state license and marijuana business license.
A. State license. Marijuana businesses shall not operate until they receive
all necessary state licenses and all other necessary approvals. Pursuant
to 28-B M.R.S.A. § 402, an applicant seeking to operate an adult use
marijuana business may not submit an application for a marijuana
§ 150-4 TOPSHAM CODE § 150-8
137:98
§ 150-9. Licensing authority.
business license unless the applicant has been issued a conditional
license by the State of Maine to operate the marijuana business.
B. Business license. A marijuana business license issued under the
provisions of this article is required for any marijuana cultivation
facility, marijuana products manufacturing facility, or marijuana testing
facility. No person shall operate a marijuana business, nor shall any
property owner permit the use of his or her premises to be operated as
a marijuana business, without a valid license issued by the Town.
A. Licensing procedures.
(1) Applications shall be reviewed in the order they are received and
determined to be complete. After a completed application packet
and fee is received by the Town Clerk, the Clerk will review the
information and will contact the applicant if clarifications or
updates to the submitted application materials are needed. The
Clerk will notify the applicant whether they have met the standards
necessary to be invited to be reviewed by the Topsham
Selectboard.
(2) The initial application for a license shall be processed by the Town
Clerk but shall be reviewed by the Topsham Selectboard.
Applications shall be made on a form prepared by the Town and
must include all information required by § 150-11 of this article and
by the form.
(3) In the event that the Town Clerk determines that a submitted
application is not complete, the Town Clerk shall notify the
applicant within 10 business days that the application is not
complete and shall inform the applicant of the additional
information required to process the application.
(4) The Town Clerk shall order national background checks of each
applicant and renewal applicant. If the applicant is a business
entity, every officer, director, manager and general partner of the
business entity is required to submit to a criminal history record
check. Failure to submit required releases for a background check
is grounds for denial of a license. The cost of the background check
shall be borne by the applicant above and beyond the application
fee.
(5) Public hearing. A public hearing on an application for a license
shall be scheduled after receipt of a completed application
pursuant to § 150-11. The Town Clerk shall post and publish public
notice of the hearing not less than seven days prior to the hearing.
(6) A renewal application shall be subject to the same review
standards as applied to the initial issuance of the license and the
same notice requirement as a new application. As part of the
§ 150-8 INNKEEPERS, VICTUALERS AND LODGING § 150-9
137:99
§ 150-10. License fees.
Fees for a marijuana business license shall be as set forth in the Schedule of
License, Permit, Inspection and Application Fees established by Selectboard
order and shall be paid annually.
renewal process, the Town Selectboard shall consider compliance
from prior years, and based upon that review, may add conditions
to any future license to correct, abate or limit past problems. The
Town Clerk shall refer action on a renewal application to the Town
Selectboard for public hearing and action.
(7) Applications received after the maximum number of licenses has
been issued shall be placed on a waiting list at the request of the
applicant. Following termination of an existing license, the
Selectboard shall consider applications in order from the waitlist.
B. Responsibilities and review authority.
(1) The Town Clerk shall be responsible for the initial investigation of
the application to ensure compliance with the requirements of this
article. The Town Clerk shall consult with other Town Departments
and any appropriate state licensing authority as part of this
investigation.
(2) The Selectboard shall have the authority to impose any conditions
on a license that may be necessary to insure compliance with the
requirements of this article or to address concerns about
operations that may be resolved through the conditions. The failure
to comply with such conditions shall be considered a violation of
the license.
(3) No marijuana business license shall be granted by the Selectboard
until the Police Chief, the Fire Chief, the Health Inspector, and the
Planning and Code Enforcement Office have all made a positive
recommendation upon the applicant's ability to comply with this
article. Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in
connection with the operation of a licensed business are provided
for or required by ordinance or state law, or are reasonably
necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance provision or
state law, it shall be the duty of the applicant or licensee, or the
person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit any
officer, official, or employee of the Town authorized to make the
inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
C. Confidentiality. Medical marijuana registered caregivers and other
applicants submitting applications and supporting information that is
confidential under 22 M.R.S.A. § 2425-A(12), as may be amended, and
the Maine Freedom of Access Act, 1 M.R.S.A. § 403(3)(F), shall mark
such information as confidential.
§ 150-9 TOPSHAM CODE § 150-11
137:100
§ 150-11. Application.
§ 150-12. License expiration and renewal.
A separate license must be obtained for each marijuana business located
on the same premises. Each license shall be effective for a period of one
year from the date of its issuance. A license must be obtained prior to the
opening of a marijuana business. Applications for renewal licenses shall
A. Application required. Each applicant for a marijuana business license
shall complete and file an application on a form prescribed by the Town
Clerk, together with a license fee as required by § 150-10 of this article
and as specified in the Schedule of License, Permit, Inspection and
Application Fees, together with the following submissions:
(1) If a state license is required for the proposed use, a copy of the
applicant's state license application and supporting documentation
as filed with the state licensing authority, and any amendments
thereto.
(2) Evidence of all state approvals or conditional approvals required to
operate a marijuana business, including, but not limited to, a state
license as defined by this article, a state retail certificate, or a state
health license.
(3) If not included in the applicant's state license application, attested
copies of the articles of incorporation and bylaws if the applicant is
a corporation, operating agreement if the applicant is a limitedliability
company, evidence of partnership if the applicant is a
partnership, or articles of association and bylaws if the applicant is
an association.
(4) If not included in the applicant's state license application, an
affidavit that identifies all owners, officers, members, managers, or
partners of the applicant, their ownership interests, and their
places of residence at the time of the application and for the
immediately preceding three years.
(5) Evidence of a property interest in the premises in which the
marijuana business will be located, along with the written consent
of the owner of the premises for such use if the applicant is not the
owner.
(6) A description of the premises for which the local license is sought,
including a floor plan of the premises showing how the floor space
is or will be used, parking for the premises, total floor area of the
building(s), and the nature and location of any existing or proposed
exterior lighting and signage.
(7) A copy of the applicant's security plan and operations manual.
(8) Evidence that operating requirements of § 150-14 are met.
§ 150-11 INNKEEPERS, VICTUALERS AND LODGING § 150-12
137:101
be submitted at least 90 days prior to expiration of the existing term. Any
licensee that fails to submit a renewal application by the applicable deadline
shall not have authority to operate until a new license is granted and may
lose priority in the issuance of license if the maximum number of licenses
has been issued.
§ 150-13. Denial, suspension or revocation of license.
§ 150-14. Operating requirements.
The licensee shall comply with all of the following requirements during the
term of the local license:
A. A marijuana business license under this article shall be denied to the
following persons:
(1) A person who fails to meet the requirements of this article. Where
an applicant is an entity rather than a natural person, all natural
persons with an ownership interest shall meet the requirements.
(2) A person who has had a license for a marijuana business revoked by
the Town or by the state.
(3) An applicant who has not acquired all necessary state approvals
and other required local approvals prior to the issuance of a local
license.
B. The Town may suspend or revoke a license for any violation of this
article, Chapter 225 or any other applicable building and life safety
code requirements. The Town may suspend or revoke a license if the
licensee has a state license for a marijuana business suspended or
revoked by the state. The licensee shall be entitled to notice and a
hearing prior to any suspension or revocation.
A. Display of license. The current local license shall be displayed at all
times in a conspicuous location within the licensed premises.
B. Compliance with other laws. A marijuana business shall meet all
operating and other requirements of state and local law and regulation.
To the extent the State of Maine has adopted or adopts in the future any
stricter law or regulation governing marijuana business, the stricter
law or regulation shall control.
C. Location.
(1) All licensed premises shall be fixed, permanent locations. Licensees
shall not be permitted to operate marijuana businesses in
temporary locations such as mall kiosks or farm stands.
(2) No marijuana business shall be located within 1,000 feet of the
entrance of a preexisting public or private school. For the purposes
of this article, "school" includes a public school, private school, or
public preschool program as defined in 20-A M.R.S.A. § 1, or any
§ 150-12 TOPSHAM CODE § 150-14
137:102
other educational facility that serves children from
prekindergarten to grade 12. Distance shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest entrance of the school to the nearest entrance of
the marijuana business.
(3) No marijuana business shall be located such that the nearest
entrance to the facility is any closer than 1,000 feet, measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to
the nearest entrance of another marijuana business or registered
caregiver retail store located on a separate parcel of land.
(4) No marijuana business shall be located inside a building containing
residential units, including transient housing such as lodging,
group homes, hotels, motels, and boardinghouses.
D. Operating standards:
(1) No marijuana business is permitted to utilize or provide a drive-up
service window.
(2) Hours of operation may be established by the Selectboard, but in
no event shall a marijuana business be open to the public, and no
sale or other distribution of marijuana shall occur upon the
premises or via delivery from the premises between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(3) No outside storage is permitted for a marijuana business.
(4) Outdoor cultivation of marijuana is prohibited.
(5) A ventilation plan shall be included for marijuana cultivation
facilities, marijuana manufacturing facilities, and marijuana testing
facilities that provides for adequate ventilation so as to prevent
pesticides, insecticides or other chemicals used in the cultivation or
processing of marijuana or marijuana related products from being
dispersed or released outside the premises. The plan shall further
provide for resulting smoke, vapor, fumes, gases and particulate
matter from marijuana or its processing or cultivation to be
effectively confined to the premises.
(6) Marijuana businesses shall provide odor control measures so that
odor generated on site is mitigated at the property line of the lot
containing the marijuana business. Applications must demonstrate
appropriate measures, such as carbon filtration, ventilation and
exhaust systems, facility plans or other additional practices
adequate to mitigate odors for the scale of operations for the uses
proposed.
E. Advertising/signage:
(1) Only one on-site sign per marijuana business is allowed.
§ 150-14 INNKEEPERS, VICTUALERS AND LODGING § 150-14
137:103
§ 150-15. Transfer of ownership and change of location.
Licenses issued under this article are not transferable. Any change in
ownership or change in the officers of an owner shall require a new license.
Licenses are limited to the location for which they are issued and shall
not be transferable to a different location. A licensee who seeks to operate
in a new location shall acquire a new marijuana business license for that
location.
§ 150-16. Appeals.
Any appeal of a decision of the Town Selectboard shall be to the Superior
Court, in accordance with the requirements of Rule 80B of the Maine Rules
of Civil Procedure.
§ 150-17. Violations and penalties.
The operation of any marijuana business without the required marijuana
business license or in violation of the requirements of this article shall be a
violation of this article. Violations shall be subject to fines and/or penalties
under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day of a violation shall constitute a
separate violation. Any such fine may be in addition to any suspension or
revocation imposed in accordance with the provisions of § 150-13 of this
article. In any court action, the Town may seek injunctive relief in addition
to penalties. The Town shall be entitled to recover its costs of enforcement,
including its attorney's fees.
§ 150-18. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any provision shall be
declared to be invalid or void, the remaining provisions shall not be affected
and shall remain in full force and effect.
(2) Maximum size for all signage shall be 75 square feet, or as
permitted by § 225-33, whichever is less.
(3) Any signage is limited to displaying the following information:
name of business; logogram of business; and business' address,
hours of operation and contact information. Other than the
foregoing information, no advertising for marijuana or marijuana
products shall be displayed on any sign in a publicly visible
location.
(4) Portable signs or sandwich board signs located in the public rightof-
way are prohibited.
(5) Electronic message center and internally illuminated signs are
prohibited.
(6) Marijuana plants, products, and paraphernalia shall not be visible
from outside the building in which the marijuana business is
located.
§ 150-14 TOPSHAM CODE § 150-19
137:104
§ 150-19. Other laws.
Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, this article incorporates
by reference the requirements and procedures set forth in the Maine
Marijuana Legalization Act, 28-B M.R.S.A. § 101 et seq. and the Maine
Medical Use of Marijuana Act, 22 M.R.S.A. § 2421 et seq., as may be
amended. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article
and the provisions of the Maine Marijuana Legalization Act or any other
applicable state or local law or regulation, the more restrictive provision
shall control.
§ 150-20. Effective date.
This article shall take effect at a date to be determined by the Board of
Selectmen, but no later than January 1, 2020.
§ 150-19 INNKEEPERS, VICTUALERS AND LODGING § 150-20
137:105

ARTICLE II
Registered Caregiver Retail Stores
[Adopted 5-15-2019 ATM, Art. 18]
§ 150-21. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for and regulate the issuance of
licenses for registered caregiver retail stores as defined in this article and
by the State of Maine under the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act, 22
M.R.S.A. § 2421 et seq., as may be amended, and to provide for and regulate
registered caregivers operating within the Town of Topsham.
§ 150-22. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by 22 M.R.S.A.
§ 2421 et seq., as may be amended, and the Town's home rule authority
under Chapter VIII, Part 2, Section 1 of the Maine Constitution.
§ 150-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section.
APPLICANT — A person that has submitted an application for licensure as
a marijuana business pursuant to this article.
CULTIVATE or CULTIVATION — The planting, propagation, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, and trimming or other processing of
marijuana for use or sale. It does not include manufacturing.
HARVESTED MARIJUANA — The plant material harvested from a mature
marijuana plant, except the stalks, leaves and roots of the plant that are not
used for a qualifying patient's medical use. "Harvested marijuana" includes
marijuana concentrate and marijuana products.
LICENSED PREMISES — The premises specified in an application for a
license pursuant to this article that are owned or in possession of the
licensee and within which the licensee is authorized to cultivate,
manufacture, distribute, sell, or test adult use marijuana, adult use
marijuana products, medical marijuana or medical marijuana products in
accordance with the provisions of this article and the requirements of state
law and regulations.
LICENSEE — A person licensed pursuant to this article.
MARIJUANA — Leaves, stems, flowers and seeds of a marijuana plant,
whether growing or not, "Marijuana" includes marijuana concentrate.
MARIJUANA BUSINESS — A marijuana cultivation facility, a marijuana
products manufacturing facility, or a marijuana testing facility. The term
"marijuana business" does not include registered caregiver retail stores.
MARIJUANA CONCENTRATE — The resin extracted from any part of a
marijuana plant and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture
§ 150-21 INNKEEPERS, VICTUALERS AND LODGING § 150-23
137:107
or preparation from such resin, including, but not limited to, hashish. In
determining the weight of marijuana concentrate in a marijuana product,
the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare a
marijuana product may not be included.
MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY — A facility licensed to cultivate,
prepare and package adult use and/or medical marijuana and to sell adult
use and medical marijuana to marijuana manufacturing facilities, marijuana
stores, and other cultivation facilities. A marijuana cultivation facility is
not authorized as an accessory use, and only where expressly allowed as a
permitted or conditional use.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA — The medical use of marijuana, with the term
"medical use" as defined in 22 M.R.S.A. § 2422(5), as may be amended.
OWNER — A person whose beneficial interest in a marijuana business is
such that the person bears risk of loss other than as an insurer, has an
opportunity to gain profit from the operation or sale of a marijuana business
and has a controlling interest in a marijuana business.
PERSON — A natural person, partnership, association, company,
corporation, limited-liability company or organization or a manager, agent,
owner, director, servant, officer or employee thereof. "Person" does not
include any governmental organization.
QUALIFYING PATIENT — A person who has been a resident of the State for
at least 30 days and who possesses a valid written certification regarding
medical use of marijuana in accordance with 22 M.R.S.A. § 2423-B.
REGISTERED CAREGIVER — A person or an assistant of that person that
provides care for a qualifying patient and who is registered by the State of
Maine pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 2425-A.
REGISTERED CAREGIVER RETAIL STORE — A facility operated by a single
medical marijuana registered caregiver and licensed to sell harvested
marijuana to qualifying patients for the patients' medical use and may
include an area for consultation with patients.
STATE LICENSE — Any license, registration or certification issued by the
state licensing authority.
STATE LICENSING AUTHORITY — The authority (or authorities) created
by the state for the purpose of regulating and controlling the licensing
of the cultivation, manufacture, distribution, testing and sale of adult use
marijuana, adult use marijuana products, medical marijuana and/or medical
marijuana products in this state.
§ 150-24. Distribution of licenses.
The Selectboard shall only issue a limited number of registered caregiver
retail store licenses in accordance with this article and where allowed in the
land use code, § 225-16.
A. Number of licenses allowed. The Selectboard is authorized to issue no
more than two registered caregiver retail store licenses.
§ 150-23 TOPSHAM CODE § 150-24
137:108
§ 150-25. Registered caregiver retail stores permitted.
Registered caregiver retail stores are permitted pursuant to a license issued
by the Selectboard and subject to the requirements and restrictions of this
article and Chapter 225 of this Code.
§ 150-26. Prohibited activities.
§ 150-27. License required.
B. Number of licenses allowed per business. The Selectboard shall issue
no more than one registered caregiver retail store license per business/
individual/owner.
C. Prioritization of license review.
(1) Registered caregiver retail stores that were operating with Town
approval prior to December 13, 2018, shall have a priority of
review for license issuance by the Selectboard, provided that the
owner/operator of the business submits a completed application for
a license within 90 days of enactment of this article. Such
businesses shall be included in the maximum number of licenses
permitted.
(2) Any change in ownership or change in officers of an owner of an
existing registered caregiver retail store shall have a priority of
review to maintain the issued license, provided that a completed
license application is submitted prior to the change of ownership.
A. No registered caregiver retail store shall be established or operated
within the Town without first receiving and then maintaining all
approvals required under this Code, including, but not limited to, this
article and Chapter 225 of the Code.
B. No registered caregiver retail store shall conduct any activity for which
it has not received any required state license and registered caregiver
retail store license.
C. No adult use marijuana retail stores are permitted within the Town of
Topsham.
A. State license. Registered caregiver retail stores shall not operate until
they receive all necessary state licenses and all other necessary
approvals.
B. Business license. A registered caregiver retail store license issued
under the provisions of this article is required for any registered
caregiver retail store. No person shall operate a registered caregiver
retail store, nor shall any property owner permit the use of his or her
premises to be operated as a registered caregiver retail store, without a
valid license issued by the Town.
§ 150-24 INNKEEPERS, VICTUALERS AND LODGING § 150-28
137:109
§ 150-28. Licensing authority.
A. Licensing procedures.
(1) Applications shall be reviewed in the order they are received and
determined to be complete. After a completed application packet
and fee is received by the Town Clerk, the Clerk will review the
information and will contact the applicant if clarifications or
updates to the submitted application materials are needed. The
Clerk will notify the applicant whether they have met the standards
necessary to be invited to be reviewed by the Topsham
Selectboard.
(2) The initial application for a license shall be processed by the Town
Clerk but shall be reviewed by the Topsham Selectboard.
Applications shall be made on a form prepared by the Town and
must include all information required by § 150-21 of this article and
by the form.
(3) In the event that the Town Clerk determines that a submitted
application is not complete, the Town Clerk shall notify the
applicant within 10 business days that the application is not
complete and shall inform the applicant of the additional
information required to process the application.
(4) The Town Clerk shall order national background checks of each
applicant and renewal applicant. If the applicant is a business
entity, every officer, director, manager and general partner of the
business entity is required to submit to a criminal history record
check. Failure to submit required releases for a background check
is grounds for denial of a license. The cost of the background check
shall be borne by the applicant above and beyond the application
fee.
(5) A public hearing on an application for a license shall be scheduled
after receipt of a completed application pursuant to § 150-21. The
Town Clerk shall post and publish public notice of the hearing not
less than seven days prior to the hearing.
(6) A renewal application shall be subject to the same review
standards as applied to the initial issuance of the license and the
same notice requirement as a new application. As part of the
renewal process, the Town Selectboard shall consider compliance
from prior years, and based upon that review, may add conditions
to any future license to correct, abate or limit past problems. The
Town Clerk shall refer action on a renewal application to the Town
Selectboard for public hearing and action.
(7) Applications received after the maximum number of licenses has
been issued shall be placed on a waiting list at the request of the
applicant. Following termination of an existing license, the
Selectboard shall consider applications in order from the waitlist.
§ 150-28 TOPSHAM CODE § 150-28
137:110
§ 150-29. License fees.
Fees for a registered caregiver retail store license shall be as set forth in the
Schedule of License, Permit, Inspection and Application Fees established by
Selectboard order and shall be paid annually.
§ 150-30. Application.
B. Responsibilities and review authority.
(1) The Town Clerk shall be responsible for the initial investigation of
the application to ensure compliance with the requirements of this
article. The Town Clerk shall consult with other Town departments
and any appropriate state licensing authority as part of this
investigation.
(2) The Selectboard shall have the authority to impose any conditions
on a license that may be necessary to insure compliance with the
requirements of this article or to address concerns about
operations that may be resolved through the conditions. The failure
to comply with such conditions shall be considered a violation of
the license.
(3) No registered caregiver retail store license shall be granted by the
Selectboard until the Police Chief, the Fire Chief, the Health
Inspector, and the Planning and Code Enforcement Office have all
made a positive recommendation upon the applicant's ability to
comply with this article. Whenever inspections of the premises
used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business
are provided for or required by ordinance or State law, or are
reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance
provision or State law, it shall be the duty of the applicant or
licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to
admit any officer, official, or employee of the Town authorized to
make the inspection at any reasonable time that admission is
requested.
C. Confidentiality. Medical marijuana registered caregivers and other
applicants submitting applications and supporting information that is
confidential under 22 M.R.S.A. § 2425-A(12), as may be amended, and
the Maine Freedom of Access Act, 1 M.R.S.A. § 403(3)(F), shall mark
such information as confidential.
A. Application required. Each applicant for a registered caregiver retail
store license shall complete and file an application on a form prescribed
by the Town Clerk, together with a license fee as required by § 150-30
of this article and as specified in the Schedule of License, Permit,
Inspection and Application Fees, together with the following
submissions:
§ 150-28 INNKEEPERS, VICTUALERS AND LODGING § 150-30
137:111
§ 150-31. License expiration and renewal.
A license must be obtained prior to the opening of a registered caregiver
retail store. Each license shall be effective for a period of one year from the
date of its issuance. Applications for renewal licenses shall be submitted at
least 90 days prior to expiration of the existing term. Any licensee that fails
to submit a renewal application by the applicable deadline shall not have
authority to operate until a new license is granted and may lose priority in
the issuance of license if the maximum number of licenses has been issued.
§ 150-32. Denial, suspension or revocation of license.
(1) If a state license is required for the proposed use, a copy of the
applicant's state license application and supporting documentation
as filed with the state licensing authority, and any amendments
thereto.
(2) Evidence of all state approvals or conditional approvals required to
operate a registered caregiver retail store, including, but not
limited to, a state license as defined by this article, a state retail
certificate, or a state health license.
(3) Attested copies of the articles of incorporation and bylaws if the
applicant is a corporation, operating agreement if the applicant is a
limited-liability company, evidence of partnership if the applicant is
a partnership, or articles of association and bylaws if the applicant
is an association.
(4) An affidavit that identifies all owners, officers, members, managers,
or partners of the applicant, their ownership interests, and their
places of residence at the time of the application and for the
immediately preceding three years.
(5) Evidence of a property interest in the premises in which the
registered caregiver retail store will be located, along with the
written consent of the owner of the premises for such use if the
applicant is not the owner.
(6) A description of the premises for which the registered caregiver
retail store license is sought, including a floor plan of the premises
showing how the floor space is or will be used, parking for the
premises, total floor area of the building(s), and the nature and
location of any existing or proposed exterior lighting and signage.
(7) A copy of the applicant's security plan and operations manual.
(8) Evidence that operating requirements of § 150-34 are met.
A. A registered caregiver retail store License under this article shall be
denied to the following persons:
§ 150-30 TOPSHAM CODE § 150-32
137:112
§ 150-33. Operating requirements.
The licensee shall comply with all of the following requirements during the
term of the registered caregiver retail store license:
(1) A person who fails to meet the requirements of this article. Where
an applicant is an entity rather than a natural person, all natural
persons with an ownership interest shall meet the requirements.
(2) A person who has had a license for a registered caregiver retail
store or marijuana business revoked by the Town or by the state.
(3) An applicant who has not acquired all necessary state approvals
and other required local approvals prior to the issuance of a
registered caregiver retail store license.
(4) The Town may suspend or revoke a license for any violation of this
article, Chapter 225 or any other applicable building and life safety
code requirements. The Town may suspend or revoke a license if
the licensee has a state license for a registered caregiver retail
store or marijuana business suspended or revoked by the state. The
licensee shall be entitled to notice and a hearing prior to any
suspension or revocation.
A. Display of license. The current registered caregiver retail store license
shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous location within the
licensed premises.
B. Compliance with other laws. A registered caregiver retail store shall
meet all operating and other requirements of state and local law and
regulation. To the extent the State of Maine has adopted or adopts in
the future any stricter law or regulation governing registered caregiver
retail stores, the stricter law or regulation shall control.
C. Location.
(1) All licensed premises shall be fixed, permanent locations. Licensees
shall not be permitted to operate a registered caregiver retail store
in temporary locations such as mall kiosks or farm stands.
(2) No more than one registered caregiver retail store shall be located
on a single parcel of land.
(3) No registered caregiver retail store shall be located within 1,000
feet of the entrance of a preexisting public or private school. For
the purposes of this article, "school" includes a public school,
private school, or public preschool program as defined in 20-A
M.R.S.A. § 1, or any other educational facility that serves children
from prekindergarten to grade 12. Distance shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest entrance of the school to the nearest entrance of
the registered caregiver retail store.
§ 150-32 INNKEEPERS, VICTUALERS AND LODGING § 150-33
137:113
(4) No registered caregiver retail store shall be located such that the
nearest entrance to the facility is any closer than 1,000 feet,
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, to the nearest entrance of another registered
caregiver retail store or marijuana business located on a separate
parcel of land.
(5) No registered caregiver retail store shall be located inside a
building containing residential units, including transient housing
such as lodging, group homes, hotels, motels, and boardinghouses.
(6) No registered caregiver retail store shall be located within 200 feet
of any residence, a building containing residents, or residential
use. Distance shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest entrance of the
residential building or use to the nearest entrance of the registered
caregiver retail store.
D. Operating standards:
(1) No registered caregiver retail store is permitted to utilize or
provide a drive-up service window.
(2) Hours of operation may be established by the Selectboard, but in
no event shall a registered caregiver retail store be open to the
public, and no sale or other distribution of marijuana shall occur
upon the premises or via delivery from the premises between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(3) No registered caregiver retail store shall have a gross floor area
open to the public in excess of 1,500 square feet.
(4) No outside storage is permitted for a registered caregiver retail
store.
(5) Outdoor cultivation of marijuana is prohibited.
(6) Registered caregiver retail stores shall provide odor control
measures so that odor generated on site is mitigated at the
property line of the lot containing the registered caregiver retail
store. Applications must demonstrate appropriate measures, such
as carbon filtration, ventilation and exhaust systems, facility plans
or other additional practices adequate to mitigate odors for the
scale of operations for the uses proposed.
E. Advertising/signage:
(1) Only one on-site sign per registered caregiver retail store is
allowed.
(2) Maximum size for all signage shall be 75 square feet, or as
permitted by § 225-33, whichever is less.
§ 150-33 TOPSHAM CODE § 150-33
137:114
§ 150-34. Transfer of ownership and change of location.
Licenses issued under this article are not transferable. Any change in
ownership or change in the officers of an owner shall require a new license.
Licenses are limited to the location for which they are issued and shall not
be transferable to a different location. A licensee who seeks to operate in a
new location shall acquire a new license for that location.
§ 150-35. Appeals.
Any appeal of a decision of the Town Selectboard shall be to the Superior
Court, in accordance with the requirements of Rule 80B of the Maine Rules
of Civil Procedure.
§ 150-36. Violations and penalties.
The operation of any registered caregiver retail store without the required
License or in violation of the requirements of this article shall be a violation
of this article. Violations shall be subject to fines and/or penalties under
30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day of a violation shall constitute a separate
violation. Any such fine may be in addition to any suspension or revocation
imposed in accordance with the provisions of § 150-13 of this chapter. In any
court action, the Town may seek injunctive relief in addition to penalties.
The Town shall be entitled to recover its costs of enforcement, including its
attorney's fees.
§ 150-37. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any provision shall be
declared to be invalid or void, the remaining provisions shall not be affected
and shall remain in full force and effect.
(3) Any signage is limited to displaying the following information:
name of business; logogram of business; and business' address,
hours of operation and contact information. Other than the
foregoing information, no advertising for marijuana or marijuana
products shall be displayed on any sign in a publicly visible
location.
(4) Portable signs or sandwich board signs located in the public rightof-
way are prohibited.
(5) Electronic message center and internally illuminated signs are
prohibited.
(6) Marijuana plants, products, and paraphernalia shall not be visible
from outside the building in which the registered caregiver retail
store is located.
§ 150-33 INNKEEPERS, VICTUALERS AND LODGING § 150-38
137:115
§ 150-38. Other laws.
Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, this article incorporates
by reference the requirements and procedures set forth in the Maine
Medical Use of Marijuana Act, 22 M.R.S.A. § 2421 et seq., as may be
amended. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article
and the provisions of applicable state or local law or regulation, the more
restrictive provision shall control.
§ 150-39. Effective date.
This article shall take effect at a date to be determined by the Board of
Selectmen, but no later than January 1, 2020.
§ 150-40. (Reserved)
§ 150-38 TOPSHAM CODE § 150-40
137:116
ARTICLE III
Registered Caregiver Registration
[Adopted 5-15-2019 ATM, Art. 20]
§ 150-41. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for and regulate registered
caregivers as defined in this article and by the State of Maine under the
Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act, 22 M.R.S.A. § 2421 et seq., as may be
amended.
§ 150-42. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by 22 M.R.S.A.
§ 2421 et seq., as may be amended, and the Town's home rule authority
under Chapter VIII, Part 2, Section 1 of the Maine Constitution.
§ 150-43. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section.
APPLICANT — A person that has submitted an application for licensure as
a marijuana business pursuant to this article.
MARIJUANA — Leaves, stems, flowers and seeds of a marijuana plant,
whether growing or not, "Marijuana" includes marijuana concentrate.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA — The medical use of marijuana, with the term
"medical use" as defined in 22 M.R.S.A. § 2422(5), as may be amended.
QUALIFYING PATIENT — A person who has been a resident of the state for
at least 30 days and who possesses a valid written certification regarding
medical use of marijuana in accordance with 22 M.R.S.A. § 2423-B.
REGISTERED CAREGIVER — A person or an assistant of that person that
provides care for a qualifying patient and who is registered by the State of
Maine pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 2425-A.
§ 150-44. Registration requirement.
All registered caregivers currently operating within the Town of Topsham
prior to the enactment of this article, or seeking to operate within the
Town, shall register with the Town Clerk's office by completing and signing
a Topsham registered caregiver registration form prescribed by the Town
Clerk. Registered Caregivers who cultivate medical marijuana only for
themselves and/or members of their household are exempt from this
requirement and are not required to register.
§ 150-45. Operating requirements.
Registered caregivers shall meet the following operating requirements:
§ 150-41 INNKEEPERS, VICTUALERS AND LODGING § 150-45
137:117
§ 150-46. Violations and penalties.
All registered caregivers shall register with the Town no later than 90 days
following enactment of this article. Failure to register may disqualify the
Caregiver from applying for or obtaining any marijuana business licenses
from the Town.
A. All registered caregivers within the Town of Topsham shall file a
caregiver registration form with the Town Clerk's office, and be placed
on the Town's caregiver registry.
B. No sales of any marijuana products shall be conducted within a
residential structure, use, or zone within the Town of Topsham;
provided, however, that registered caregivers may deliver medical
marijuana and conduct a sale in a qualifying patient's home.
C. Marijuana products manufacturing and marijuana testing shall be
prohibited from a residential structure, use, or zone.
§ 150-45 TOPSHAM CODE § 150-46
137:118
Chapter 158
PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 91.
§ 158-1. Purpose.
By and through this chapter, Topsham declares as its public purpose the
establishment of a municipal program to enable its citizens to participate
in a Property Assessed Clean Energy ("PACE") program so that owners of
qualifying property can access financing for energy saving improvements to
their properties located in Topsham. Topsham declares its purpose and the
provisions of this chapter to be in conformity with federal and state laws.
§ 158-2. Enabling legislation.
Topsham enacts this chapter pursuant to Public Law 2009, Chapter 591 of
the 124th Maine State Legislature, "An Act To Increase the Affordability
of Clean Energy for Homeowners and Businesses," also known as the
"Property Assessed Clean Energy Act" or "the PACE Act" (codified at 35-A
M.R.S.A. § 10151, et seq.).
§ 158-3. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Town of Topsham
Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance" (the "Ordinance").
§ 158-4. Definitions.
Except as specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall have their customary meanings. As used in this chapter, the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated:
ENERGY-SAVING IMPROVEMENT — An improvement to qualifying
property that is new and permanently affixed to qualifying property and
that:
Will result in increased energy efficiency and substantially reduced
energy use and:
Meets or exceeds applicable United States Environmental
Protection Agency and United States Department of Energy
'Energy Star' program or similar energy efficiency standards
established or approved by the Trust; or
(1)
A.
§ 150-46 INNKEEPERS, VICTUALERS AND LODGING § 158-4
137:119
PACE AGREEMENT — An agreement between the owner of qualifying
property and the Trust that authorizes the creation of a PACE mortgage
on qualifying property and that is approved in writing by all owners of
the qualifying property at the time of the agreement, other than mortgage
holders.
PACE ASSESSMENT — An assessment made against qualifying property to
repay a PACE loan.
PACE DISTRICT — The entire area of Topsham.
PACE LOAN — A loan, secured by a PACE mortgage, made to the owner(s)
of a qualifying property pursuant to a PACE program to fund energy-saving
improvements.
PACE MORTGAGE — A mortgage securing a loan made pursuant to a PACE
program to fund energy-saving improvements on qualifying property.
PACE PROGRAM — A program established under state statute by the Trust
or the Town of Topsham under which property owners can finance energysaving
improvements on qualifying property.
QUALIFYING PROPERTY — Real property located in the Topsham PACE
District.
RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION — A fixture, product, system, device
or interacting group of devices installed behind the meter at a qualifying
property, or on contiguous property under common ownership, that
produces energy or heat from renewable sources, including, but not limited
to, photovoltaic systems, solar thermal systems, biomass systems, landfill
gas to energy systems, geothermal systems, wind systems, wood pellet
systems and any other systems eligible for funding under federal qualified
energy conservation bonds or federal clean renewable energy bonds.
TRUST — The Efficiency Maine Trust established in 35-A M.R.S.A. § 10103
and/or its agent(s), if any.
§ 158-5. Program established.
Involves air sealing, insulating, and other energy efficiency
improvements of residential, commercial or industrial property in a
manner approved by the Trust; or
(2)
Involves a renewable energy installation or an electric thermal storage
system that meets or exceeds standards established or approved by the
trust.
B.
A. Establishment; funding. Topsham hereby establishes a PACE program
allowing owners of qualifying property located in the Topsham PACE
District who so choose to access financing for energy-saving
improvements to their property through PACE loans administered by
the Trust or its agent. PACE loan funds are available from the Trust in
Topsham, if Topsham:
(1) Adopts a PACE Ordinance;
§ 158-4 TOPSHAM CODE § 158-5
137:120
§ 158-6. Conformity with other requirements.
§ 158-7. Program administration; municipal liability.
(2) Adopts and implements a local public outreach and education plan;
(3) Enters into a PACE administration contract with the Trust to
establish the terms and conditions of the Trust's administration of
Topsham's PACE program; and
(4) Agrees to assist and cooperate with the Trust in its administration
of Topsham's PACE program.
B. Amendment to PACE program. In addition, Topsham may from time to
time amend this chapter to use any other funding sources made
available to it or appropriated by it for the express purpose of its PACE
program, and Topsham shall be responsible for administration of loans
made from those other funding sources.
A. Standards adopted; rules promulgated; model documents. If the Trust
adopts standards, promulgates rules, or establishes model documents
subsequent to Topsham's adoption of this chapter and those standards,
rules or model documents substantially conflict with this chapter,
Topsham shall take necessary steps to conform this chapter and its
PACE program to those standards, rules, or model documents.
A. Program administration.
(1) PACE administration contract. Pursuant to 35-A M.R.S.A.
§ 10154(2)(A)(2) and (B), Topsham will enter into a PACE
administration contract with the Trust to administer the functions
of the PACE program for Topsham. The PACE administration
contract with the Trust will establish the administration of the
PACE program, including, without limitation, that:
(a) The Trust will enter into PACE agreements with owners of
qualifying property in Topsham's PACE District;
(b) The Trust, or its agent, will create and record a notice of the
PACE agreement in the appropriate County Registry of Deeds
to create a PACE mortgage;
(c) The Trust, or its agent, will disburse the PACE loan to the
property owner;
(d) The Trust, or its agent, will send PACE assessment statements
with payment deadlines to the property owner;
(e) The Trust, or its agent, will be responsible for collection of the
PACE assessments;
(f) The Trust, or its agent, will record any lien, if needed, due to
nonpayment of the assessment;
§ 158-5 INNKEEPERS, VICTUALERS AND LODGING § 158-7
137:121
Chapter 161
PARKS AND RECREATION
(g) The Trust or its agent on behalf of Topsham, promptly shall
record the discharges of PACE mortgages upon full payment of
the PACE loan.
(2) Adoption of education and outreach program. In conjunction with
adopting this chapter, Topsham shall implement an education and
outreach program so that citizens of Topsham are made aware of
home energy-saving opportunities, including the opportunity to
finance energy-saving improvements with a PACE loan.
(3) Assistance and cooperation. Topsham will assist and cooperate
with the Trust in its administration of the PACE program.
(4) Assessments not a tax. PACE assessments do not constitute a tax
but may be assessed and collected by the Trust in any manner
determined by the Trust and consistent with applicable law.
B. Liability of municipal officials; liability of municipality.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, all
Topsham municipal officers, officials and appointees, including, but
not limited to, and without limitation, elected officials, tax
assessors and tax collectors, are not personally liable to the Trust
or to any other person for claims, of whatever kind or nature, under
or related to a PACE program, including, without limitation, claims
for or related to uncollected PACE assessments.
(2) Other than the fulfillment of its obligations specified in a PACE
administration contract with the Trust entered into under
Subsection A(1) above, Topsham has no liability to a property
owner for or related to energy savings improvements financed
under a PACE program.
§ 158-7 TOPSHAM CODE § 158-7
137:122
ARTICLE I
Use of Areas
[Adopted as Ch. 14 of the Topsham Code, as amended through
1990]
§ 161-1. Trespassing.
It is prohibited to trespass on Town recreation grounds during unauthorized
hours except for organized recreational functions.
§ 161-1 INNKEEPERS, VICTUALERS AND LODGING § 161-1
137:123

ARTICLE II
Use of Facilities
[Adopted 5-16-2001 STM, Art. 38]
§ 161-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide rules and regulations to be enforced
at the Town's recreational facilities for the health, safety and enjoyment of
the visitors to the facilities.
§ 161-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be used when interpreting this article:
LOITERING — If a person remains in a vehicle with or without other
persons without cause; repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop
passersby or motor vehicles without cause; or repeatedly interferes with the
free passage of other persons within the park.
PARK — Any and all of those public areas owned, operated or maintained by
the Town of Topsham and designated as a "park and/or trail" by the Board
of Selectmen.[Amended 5-15-2013 STM, Art. 13]
§ 161-4. Rules and regulations.
A. The following shall be the rules and regulations of all of the recreational
facilities of the Town of Topsham and shall be strictly enforced. It shall
be unlawful for any person in any park, playground, ball field, tennis
court, or any other recreational facilities thereof, owned and controlled
by the Town of Topsham to not abide by the following:
(1) Park hours of operation. [Amended 5-15-2013 STM, Art. 13]
(a) Foreside Recreational Facility: Monday through Sunday, dawn
to dusk, unless using basketball court with lights. (Time then is
11:00 p.m.)
(b) Ponds Area at Topsham Solid Waste Facility:
[1] Dawn to dusk.
[a] Vehicles are only permitted at ponds during Solid
Waste Facility hours.
(c) Head of Tide Park:
[1] Dawn to dusk, unless explicit written agreement with the
Topsham Parks and Recreation Department.
(2) Trespassers entering either area before or after park hours will be
prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.
(3) Littering is expressly prohibited. All trash must be placed in
provided trash receptacles. Under no circumstances will household
§ 161-2 INNKEEPERS, VICTUALERS AND LODGING § 161-4
137:125
garbage or waste generated outside the park be permitted to be
disposed of in the park facilities or on park grounds.
(4) Abusive language/disorderly conduct/fighting will not be tolerated.
This is a family park.
(5) The holding of any exhibition, ceremony or making of any speech
without permission from the Parks and Recreation Department will
not be allowed.
(6) No discharge of firearms, bows and arrows or other projectile
instruments are permitted at the Foreside Recreational Area or the
Head of Tide Park. [Amended 5-15-2013 STM, Art. 13]
(7) Alcoholic beverages and illegal drugs are not allowed on park
grounds. The selling, delivering or attempting to sell or deliver any
alcoholic beverage or illegal substance is prohibited.
(8) Tobacco products of any kind are prohibited.
(9) Obey all traffic signs. All vehicles, including motorcycles, must be
parked in parking areas provided. Service roads and walking paths
are for pedestrians and authorized vehicles only. It shall also be
unlawful to fail to obey all traffic officers or such persons being
authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever
needed in the park.
(10) Vehicles left unattended for more than 24 hours on park property,
will be towed away at the owner's expense.
(11) Defacing or intentionally damaging any Town owned facility or
monument is prohibited.
(12) Soliciting of any kind on park property is prohibited. This includes
the distribution of any handbills or circulars, or posting, placing, or
erecting any bills, notices, paper or advertising devisees not
authorized by the Parks and Recreation Department.
(13) Parks and Recreation Department prohibits vendors from any type
of selling without prior approval and permit.
(14) Cutting, picking, pulling or damaging trees, flowers, plants or other
vegetation is strictly prohibited.
(15) Dogs must be leashed at all times and no more than four feet from
owner. Dogs are not allowed in the children's playground areas.
Please be considerate of others, and owners must pick up dog's
excrement on park grounds. All animal fecal matter must be
removed by the owner and not left on trails, fields or in other public
areas.
(16)Walking trails are used primarily by pedestrians. However, persons
on skateboards, skates and bicycles are welcome, but must use
§ 161-4 TOPSHAM CODE § 161-4
137:126
proper precautions, travel at a safe speed, and stay on walking
trails at all times. All other motorized-type vehicles must be parked
in parking spaces provided. Motorized handicapped wheelchair
(or similar accessory vehicles not to exceed 1,000 pounds) are
allowed on walking trails. Driving or operating ATVs, snowmobiles,
motorbikes or other motor vehicles on trails or park grounds at
Foreside Facility is prohibited. Driving or operating ATVs,
snowmobiles, motorbikes or other motor vehicles on landfill caps
at Solid Waste Facility is prohibited. Additional rules for individual
trails will be posted at the trail heads. [Amended 5-15-2013
STM, Art. 13]
(17) It is unlawful to gather and burn wood on Town property, unless
approved by the Town's Fire Chief. Personal grills in good
operating condition may be used in designated picnic areas only.
No open fires or campfires will be permitted. Erecting tents,
canopies or nailing decorations to park structures is not allowed
without permission from the Parks and Recreation Department.
[Amended 5-15-2013 STM, Art. 13]
(18) Swimming at ponds at Solid Waste Facility is prohibited.
(19) Open water fishing from the banks of Ponds at Solid Waste Facility
is allowed proper Maine license. Observance of Ponds use times
must be observed. No ice skating, commercial bait fishing or ice
fishing is allowed.
(20) Hunting of any kind is prohibited at the Foreside Recreational
Area. [Amended 5-15-2013 STM, Art. 13]
(21) Hitting golf balls is prohibited.
(22) Flying model airplanes on park property is prohibited, unless at an
event approved by the Parks and Recreation Department.
(23) Activities, flea market, garage sales, etc. are not allowed without
proper approval and permit from the Parks and Recreation
Department.
(24) Loitering, indecent conduct or any behavior that interferes with
visitors will not be tolerated.
(25) Use of park areas and facilities is at your own risk. The Town of
Topsham assumes no responsibility or liability for misuse of a park
or of its facilities.
(26) The Parks and Recreation Director or any Town employee
designated by the Town Manager shall have the authority to eject
from any facility any person acting in violation of the rules and
regulations posted for the Foreside Recreation Facility and the
Pond area at the Solid Waste Facility. The interfering with or
hindering in any manner any Town of Topsham employee or
§ 161-4 INNKEEPERS, VICTUALERS AND LODGING § 161-4
137:127
§ 161-5. Lease or rental of facilities.
Any person or persons entering into a lease or rental agreement of any
recreation facility or recreation area agrees to hold harmless the Town of
Topsham. The lessee shall assume full responsibility. Rates shall be charged,
and a rate schedule shall be updated and approved by the Parks and
Recreation Department. Failure to abide by the listed rules and regulations
will result in forfeiture of future rental use of the Town's facilities.
§ 161-6. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of the rules and regulations may be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. The Town of Topsham Police Department
may issue citations or take other legal measures as may be allowed to
enforce the terms and provisions of the rules and regulations set forth for
Topsham Parks and Recreation facilities. Any violation of this article shall be
an infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $50, plus court costs. If
contracted individual from performing his or her official duties is
prohibited.
(27) Audio and musical devices should be operated at a volume not to
disturb other visitors, with the exception of Parks and Recreation
activities and authorized events.
(28) Benches, picnic tables, etc. shall be first-come, first-served unless
otherwise designated by the Parks and Recreation Department.
(29) 12Individuals or groups are prohibited from using a site that is
officially closed or reserved for a public/private function.
(30) The Parks and Recreation Department prohibits the using of any
area or facility for commercial purposes without prior approval.
(31) Horseback riding is not permitted at the Foreside Recreational
Area unless authorized by the Parks and Recreation Director.
[Amended 5-15-2013 STM, Art. 13]
(32) Alteration, modifications and or addition to parks and facilities are
not permitted without prior approval from the Parks and
Recreation Director.
(33) Temporary housing (i.e., motor homes, RV's, tents, house trailers)
may not be parked overnight with occupants inside. Only at the
discretion of the Parks and Recreation Director may overnight
camping be permitted.
(34) Climbing on equipment not designated for such climbing is
prohibited.
12.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(29), pertaining to rock or projectile throwing, was
repealed and Subsection A(30) through (35) redesignated as Subsection A(29) through
(34), respectively, 5-15-2013 STM, Art. 13.
§ 161-4 TOPSHAM CODE § 161-6
137:128
any violation continues, each day's violation may be considered a separate
offense. Flagrant misuse of Parks and Recreation facilities will result in a
forfeiture of future use or reservation privileges.
§ 161-6 INNKEEPERS, VICTUALERS AND LODGING § 161-6
137:129
Chapter 167
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 167-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to define, regulate and license peddlers.
§ 167-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Shall include any person, having no established or fixed place
of business in the town, selling or offering for sale tangible commodities
where delivery is made at the time of the sale. The word "peddler" shall
include the words "hawker" and "huckster."
PERSON — Shall include the singular and the plural, and shall also mean
and include any person, firm or corporation, association, club, partnership,
society and bona fide charitable, service, religious and municipal
organizations or agencies.
§ 167-3. Licenses and permits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler as
defined in § 167-2 of this chapter within the limits of the Town of Topsham
without first obtaining a permit and license therefor as provided herein.
§ 167-4. Application.
A. Applicants for licenses under this chapter must file with the Town Clerk
a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the Town
Clerk which shall give the following information:
(1) Name and description of the applicant.
(2) Address (legal and local).
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold.
(4) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
appropriate written evidence of the applicant's employment status.
(5) The length of time for which the permit is desired.
(6) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with
license number or other means of identification.
(7) A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days
immediately prior to the date of filing of the application.
§ 161-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 167-4
167:130
§ 167-5. Investigation; issuance of license.
(8) The names of at least two (2) reliable property owners of the town
who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business
responsibility or, in lieu of the names of references, any other
available evidence as to the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to
properly evaluate such character and business responsibility.
(9) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance,
the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed
therefor.
(10) Full description of the location peddling is to be carried out of if
within a stationary location and a letter of agreement from the
owner of record of the property that the applicant will be located
on.
B. At the time of filing the application a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.) for
a resident and fifty dollars ($50.) for a nonresident shall be paid to the
Town Clerk to cover the cost of investigation and administration of this
chapter.
A. Upon receipt of such application, the original shall be referred to the
Chief of Police or his designee, who shall cause such investigation of the
applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems
necessary for the protection of the public good.
B. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police
shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for
the same and return said application to the Town Clerk, who shall notify
the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit and
license will be issued.
C. If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Chief of
Police shall endorse on the application his approval and return said
application to the Town Clerk, who shall, upon payment of the
prescribed license fee, deliver to the applicant his license. Such license
shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show
the name, address and photograph of said licensee, the kind of goods to
be sold thereunder, the date of issuance and the length of time the same
shall be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying
description of any vehicle used in such peddling. The Town Clerk shall
keep a permanent record of all licenses issued.
D. The Chief of Police shall have forty-eight (48) hours from application
date to fulfill Subsections A, B and C of this section.
§ 167-4 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 167-6
167:131
§ 167-6. License transfer.
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be used at any
time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued.
§ 167-7. License exhibition.
Peddlers are required to exhibit their licenses at the request of any citizen.
§ 167-8. Revocation of license.
§ 167-9. Exemption from fees.
§ 167-10. Appeals; violations and penalties.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or the Town
Clerk in the denial of an application for a permit or license or exemption
from fee as provided in this chapter shall have the right of appeal to the
Board of Selectmen. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Board of
Selectmen, within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action complained
of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement
A. Permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked by the Board of Selectmen after notice and hearing for any of
the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as a peddler.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
(5) Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in
such a manner as to constitute a menace to the health, safety or
general welfare of the public.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time
and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, certified mail, return
receipt requested, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known
address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing.
A. Upon presentation of any and all verification required to satisfy the
Municipal Clerk as to the authenticity of the person, the fee shall be
waived for the following: bona fide charitable, service, religious and
municipal organizations or agencies.
B. Though the fee is waived a license is still required by all organizations
or agencies before operation may begin.
§ 167-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 167-10
167:132
setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Board of Selectmen shall
set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing
shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in § 167-8 of
this chapter for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of
the Board of Selectmen on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
§ 167-11. License expiration.
All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire three (3)
months after the date of issuance.
Chapter 168
TAXICAB LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 185. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 210.
§ 168-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to define, regulate and license taxicabs in the
Town of Topsham.
§ 168-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TAXICAB — Every motor vehicle used or to be used for the conveyance of
persons for hire with driver, that has a seating capacity of fewer than five
people behind the driver, within the town, except a motor vehicle subject
to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the state and motor
vehicles collecting fares by tickets or coupons for interstate transportation.
§ 168-3. License required.
It is unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated in the Town
of Topsham any taxicab without having first obtained a license to do so. It
shall not be deemed to be the operation of a taxicab or the causing of a
taxicab to be operated within the meaning of this section if:
A. An individual, partnership or corporation licensed to operate a taxicab
in any municipality which grants the same rights as are granted herein
to taxicabs licensed in passengers from this town shall, upon previous
call therefor, take passengers from this town to the municipality in
which the taxicab is licensed; or
B. Any person licensed to operate a taxicab in any municipality which
grants the same rights as are granted herein to taxicabs licensed in the
§ 167-10 TAXICAB LICENSING § 168-3
168:133
§ 168-4. Application for license.
Application for a license to operate any taxicab shall be made on forms
provided by the town and approved by the municipal officers and shall,
among other things, set forth:
§ 168-5. Issuance of licenses; fee.
The Town Clerk shall issue to the owner of the taxicab, provided that he/
she shall comply with the further conditions of this chapter, a license for its
operation upon payment of a license fee of $50 per year or part thereof for
each taxicab. All licenses issued under this chapter shall continue in force
until the first day of the following April.
§ 168-6. Inspection of taxicabs.
Before a license is issued to the owner of any taxicab, or whenever the Chief
of Police may require it, the owner shall deliver it to the Chief of Police
for inspection. The Chief of Police, or some person designated by him, shall
inspect the taxicab and determine whether it is safe and suitable for taxicab
service. Any taxicab service which is declared to be unsafe or unsuitable for
taxicab service may be immediately ordered out of service at any time by
the Police Chief until it has been made safe or suitable.
§ 168-7. Certification of vehicle safety.
No license shall be issued for any taxicab until the Chief of Police or his
designee certifies to the Town Clerk that it is safe and suitable for taxicab
service.
town shall, upon delivery to this town of a bona fide passenger from the
municipality where the taxicab is licensed, take passengers from the
point of delivery in this town to the municipality where the taxicab is
licensed without parking, standing or cruising in this town to obtain the
passengers.
A. The name, address and date of birth of the applicant.
B. The number of taxicabs actually owned and actually operated in the
town by the applicant on the date of application.
C. The number of taxicabs for which the license is desired.
D. The make, year of manufacture and passenger seating capacity of each
taxicab for which application for a license is made.
E. A description of the proposed color scheme, insignia, style or any other
distinguishing characteristics or proposed taxicab design.
§ 168-3 TOPSHAM CODE § 168-8
168:134
§ 168-8. Insurance required.
No license shall be issued for any taxicab until the owner has filed with
the Town Clerk a certificate of insurance from an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state showing that the taxicab is insured
for the period of the license covering liability for injuries to person and
property resulting from the use and operation of the taxicab and that the
required fee has been paid. The insurance policy shall be issued for the
principal sum sufficient to proved indemnity for personal injury equal to or
greater than established in 29A M.R.S.A. § 1611.
§ 168-9. Identification.
A taxicab shall be conspicuously marked, in letters not less than four inches
in height, with the word "TAXI" or "TAXICAB" and the owner's name or
trade name. The design or monogram must be at least eight inches in
diameter.
§ 168-10. Taxicab drivers' applications and license fees.
It is unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab unless he first obtains a
license. An application for the license must be made on the form furnished
by the town and shall set forth under oath such information as the municipal
officer may require. The license shall be signed by the Town Clerk after
approval to grant the license has been given by the Chief of Police or his
designee. Each license must be numbered in the order granted and shall
continue in force until the first day of the following April. The license fee is
$25 per year or part thereof. No such license shall be granted to any person
unless he can read, write and speak the English language intelligently.
No license shall be granted to any person unless he shall present a valid
driver's license issued to him by the state. The applicant must be at least
18 years of age. He must furnish to the Town Clerk with his application two
recent photographs of himself. Any person whose driver's license has been
suspended for a period of 10 days or more by any state shall not be eligible
to apply for a taxi operator's license until one year following the date of
restoration of the suspended driver's license. No license shall be issued to
any person who has been convicted of a vehicle violation which imposes a
sentence of imprisonment exceeding a period of one year.
§ 168-11. Town Clerk to furnish badge and identification card.
Upon issuance of a license to a taxicab driver, the Town Clerk shall deliver
to the licensee an identification card bearing a recent photograph of the
licensee, the number of the license and the licensee's name. The
identification card shall be posted within the taxicab driven by the licensee
in plain view of the passenger at all times.
§ 168-12. Additional passenger restricted.
No driver of a taxicab shall carry any person other than the first passenger
engaging without the latter's consent.
§ 168-8 TAXICAB LICENSING § 168-13
168:135
§ 168-13. Rates of fare.
No owner or driver of a taxicab shall charge any passenger any rate for
service within the limits of the town in excess of the rates posted as
provided for in this section:
§ 168-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a civil
offense and shall be punished by a civil penalty not more than $250.
§ 168-15. Suspension or revocation.
The revocation or the suspension of the license to operate a motor vehicle
by any state for more than 10 days automatically revokes a taxicab driver's
license issued by the town.
§ 168-16. Qualifications.
In order to be eligible for any license, an applicant shall meet any
qualifications established by law and shall pay any arrearage for taxes, fees
or other obligations to the Town of Topsham.
Chapter 175
SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 41.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 185.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 191.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
A. Posting of rates. A plainly printed card setting forth the rates of fare
shall be conspicuously displayed in every taxicab so that it can be seen
by a passenger day or night. Failure to display such card or proof of
charging in excess of the posted rates shall be grounds for revoking the
license of the driver.
B. Taximeters. Every taxicab equipped with a taximeter shall be checked
and approved by the sealer of weights and measures of the town at least
once every year, and the owner or the operator of such taxicab will
submit the vehicle owned by him for such inspection to the sealer of
weights and measures, or to any other properly authorized
representatives of the town when required to do so by the sealer of
weights and measures, the Chief of Police or the Town Manager.
§ 168-13 TOPSHAM CODE § 175-1
168:136
§ 175-1. Purpose.
Substantial development or major changes in the uses of land can cause
a profound impact upon the cost and efficiency of municipal services and
upon the environment of the town. Such development can impact schools,
sewers, water lines and other public utilities; recreational facilities; liquid
and solid waste disposal; police and fire protection; open space; road
systems and circulation; placement of building(s) and structure(s); property
values; water quality; the aesthetic and visual characteristics of the
neighborhood and town; and the general health, safety and welfare of
the community. It is the purpose of this chapter to avoid such impacts
when caused by development [including commercial, retail, industrial,
institutional buildings and structure(s) and multiple-family dwellings
consisting of three or more attached dwelling units].
§ 175-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A subordinate use of a building, other
structure or land, or a subordinate building or other structure:
AGRICULTURAL LAND MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Those devices and
procedures utilized in the cultivation of land in order to further crop and
livestock production and conservation of related soil and water resources.
ALTERATION — A structural change, rearrangement, change of location or
addition to a building or structure, other than repairs and modification in
building equipment, involving more than a twenty-five-percent increase in
the overall floor space or bulk of the building or structure at any time or in
total since the effective date of this chapter.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof or partial roof supported by
columns or walls used for a shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods
or property of any kind. A "building" shall include a multiple-family
dwelling.
COMMERCIAL — Connected with buying or selling of goods or services or
the provisions of facilities for a fee.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or suite of rooms designed and equipped
exclusively for use by one family as a habitation and which contains
Customary. Whose use is customary in connection with the principal
building, other structure or use of land;
A.
Incidental. Whose use is clearly incidental to the use of the principal
building, other structure or use of land; and
B.
Same lot. Which is located on the same lot with the principal building,
other structure or use of land, or on a lot adjacent to such lot if in the
same ownership or part of the same establishment.
C.
§ 175-1 TAXICAB LICENSING § 175-2
168:137
independent living, cooking, sleeping, bathing and sanitary facilities. The
term includes manufactured housing but not recreational vehicles.
FISHERIES — Areas identified by a government agency such as the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, Atlantic Salmon Authority,
Department of Marine Resources, the town or identified in the town's
Comprehensive Plan as having significant value as fisheries.
FOREST MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES — Includes timber cruising and other
forest resource evaluation activities, pesticide application, timber stand
improvement, pruning, timber harvesting and other forest harvesting,
regeneration of forest stands and other similar associated activities, but not
the construction, creation or maintenance of land management roads.
HISTORIC OR ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES — Areas identified by a
government agency such as the Maine Historic Preservation Commission or
the town as having significant value as historic or archaeological resources
and any areas identified in the town's Comprehensive Plan.
INDUSTRIAL — Connected with the assembling, fabrication, finishing,
manufacturing, packaging or processing of goods or the extraction of
minerals.
MIXED USE BUILDING — A single structure with residential and
professional / commercial uses.[Added 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building(s) containing three or more
dwelling units, such building being designed exclusively for residential
use and occupancy by three or more families living independently of one
another, the number of families not exceeding the number of dwelling units.
NATURAL COMMUNITIES AND NATURAL AREAS — Areas identified by
a governmental agency such as the Maine Department of Conservation
Natural Areas Program or the town as having significant value as a natural
area and any areas identified in the town's Comprehensive Plan.
PERSONS — Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation,
municipal or other local governmental entity, quasi-municipal entity, state
agency, educational or charitable organization or institution or other legal
entity.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle or vehicular attachment for
temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons which is not a
dwelling and which may include a pickup camper, travel trailer, tent trailer
and motor home.
RETAIL — Connected with the sale of goods to the ultimate consumer for
direct use and consumption and not for trade.
STACKED PARKING — Parking arrangements where cars are arranged in a
manner that one or more cars are parked behind each other and not all cars
can directly access a travel lane or driveway.[Added 5-20-2009 STM, Art.
15]
STREETSCAPE — An overall coordinated and designed exterior public
space with zones delineated for pedestrians, landscaping/street trees,
§ 175-2 TOPSHAM CODE § 175-2
168:138
vehicles and bicyclists. In general, streetscapes are located within the
public right-of-way in front of a building, but may be on the adjacent
fronting parcel or within both the public right-of-way and the parcel.[Added
5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
Streetscape elements include but are not limited to street trees, benches,
bollards, public trash receptacles, movable tables and chairs, light posts,
planters, bicycle racks and on-street parking. These components are
intended to create a pedestrian-friendly zone parallel to the street. The
width of the streetscape zone varies depending on the nature of the
development and available space between the building and the edge of the
travel way.
Streetscapes should reinforce an integrated plan including architecture,
signage, on-street parking and traffic-calming measures such as curb bump
outs and raised or reflective sidewalks. In all cases, a minimum six footwide
pedestrianway shall be maintained clear of obstacles.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
a fixed location on or in the ground or an attachment to something having
a fixed location on the ground, including buildings, billboards, signs,
commercial park rides and games, carports, porches and other building
features, but not including sidewalks, fences, driveways and parking lots.
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT — An expansion of the development of a
site, to include floor space, parking, seating capacity and outdoor storage
areas by more than 25% at any time or in total since the effective date of
this chapter.
VARIANCE — A relaxation of the terms of this chapter, where such
"variance" would not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to
conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the
applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary
or undue hardship. A financial hardship shall not constitute grounds for
granting a "variance." The crucial points of "variance" are undue hardship
and unique circumstances applying to the property.
WILDLIFE HABITAT — Areas identified by a governmental agency such
as the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or the town as
having significant value as habitat for animals and any areas identified in
the town's Comprehensive Plan.
§ 175-3. Authority and administration.
A. Authority.
(1) Home rule. This chapter is adopted pursuant to home rule powers
as provided for in Article VIII-A of the Maine Constitution13 and 30
M.R.S.A. § 1917.14
13.Editor's Note: See Article VIII, Part Second of the Maine Constitution.
14.Editor's Note: 30 M.R.S.A. § 1917 was repealed by Chapter 583 of the Laws of 1987. See
now 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001.
§ 175-2 TAXICAB LICENSING § 175-3
168:139
§ 175-4. Applicability. [Amended 5-16-2001 STM, Art. 23;
11-13-2008 STM, Art. 5]
(2) Title. This chapter shall be known as the "Site Plan Review
Ordinance of the Town of Topsham, Maine," adopted and effective
by vote of the Town Meeting on March 1, 1982.
B. Administration.
(1) Planning Office. The Planning Office of the Town of Topsham shall
administer this chapter. Staff shall carry out initial review and shall
then forward applications to the Board as appropriate. Staff may
approve the application and issue permits without submission to
the Board for projects as specified below. An applicant may appeal
a staff decision to the Planning Board. [Amended 11-13-2008
STM, Art. 5]
(2) Other permits. No building permit or plumbing permit or certificate
of occupancy shall be issued by the municipal officers or Code
Enforcement Officer for any use or development within the scope of
this chapter until a site plan of development application has been
reviewed and acted upon.
A. This chapter shall apply to all:
(1) Proposals for new construction, alterations or substantial
enlargement of commercial, retail, industrial or institutional
buildings or lots;
(2) Change of use within existing buildings and structures to
commercial, retail, industrial or institutional uses;
(3) Proposals for new construction or conversion of existing structures
to multifamily dwellings;
(4) Changes to development previously approved under this chapter;
(5) Proposals for land uses requiring site plan review under Chapter
225, Zoning, Article VI, of the Code;
(6) Changes of land cover related to agricultural uses are exempt from
this section.
B. Threshold of review. When determining what level of site plan review is
necessary, the Planning Office shall use the following criteria to
determine what level of review is required:
(1) Changes of use to existing structures, and new ground disturbance
of less than 5,000 square feet shall be reviewed and approved by
the Planning Director.
(2) Uses requiring the ground disturbance of 5,000 square feet or
more shall be subject to full Planning Board review.
§ 175-3 TOPSHAM CODE § 175-4
168:140
§ 175-4.A. R4 Zone. [Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 8]
Areas within the R4 Zone shall be subject to site plan review under the
following criteria:
§ 175-4.1. Delegated review authority; site location of development;
stormwater permits. [Added 9-8-2005 STM, Art. 3; amended
5-17-2017 STM, Art. 13]
Developments needing approval under Title 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 420 and 481
through 500, to the degree permitted under § 489A, shall be reviewed
under the procedures of the Topsham Town Code, Chapter 175, Site Plan
Review, under the Town's delegated review authority, and shall meet the
development standards of Title 38 M.R.S.A., §§ 420 and 481 through 502,
as may be amended from time to time, as well as those in the regulations
of the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, including Chapters
371 through 377, and others that may be issued by the MEDEP, which
are hereby adopted by reference for projects falling under this article.
Projects subject to this section shall also meet the standards of the Topsham
Zoning Ordinance, including the provisions of § 225-34, Stormwater
management.15 Topsham will provide notice to the MEDEP upon the
submission of any projects subject to this article.
(3) Architectural changes to existing buildings shall be subject to an
architectural review by the Town Planner, unless the review is
conducted as part of a larger project review.
(4) At any time, the Planning Staff can elevate a project to full Board
review if it is deemed necessary.
A. Changes of use to existing structures, and new ground disturbance of
less than 5,000 square feet shall be reviewed and approved by the
Planning Director.
B. Uses requiring the ground disturbance of more than 5,000 square feet,
but less than 10,000 square feet shall be reviewed by the Planning
Director, and the MidCoast Regional Redevelopment Authority Design
Review Board.
C. Uses requiring the ground disturbance of 10,000 square feet or more
shall be subject to full Planning Board and Design Review Board
reviews and approvals. This review shall be conducted via a joint
Topsham Planning Board/DRB meeting.
D. Architectural changes to existing buildings shall be subject to an
architectural review by the Town Planner and the DRB, unless the
review is conducted as part of a larger project review.
E. At any time, the Planning Staff can elevate a project to full Board review
if it is deemed necessary.
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 175-4 TAXICAB LICENSING § 175-5
168:141
§ 175-5. Site plan content and application procedures. [Amended
7-31-2000 STM, Art. 6]
The formal site plan or development application shall include as a minimum:
A. Map. A map or maps prepared at a scale of not less than one inch to 100
feet and shall include:
(1) Name and address of the applicant or his authorized agent and
name of proposed development and any land within 500 feet of the
proposed development in which the applicant has title or interest.
(2) Existing soil conditions as described by either a soil scientist,
geologist, engineer or SCS medium-intensity soil surveys.
(3) Municipal tax maps and lot numbers and names of landowners
within 200 feet of the boundaries of the proposed development.
(4) Perimeter survey of the parcel made and certified by a registered
land surveyor relating to reference points, showing true North,
graphic scale, corners of parcel and date of survey and total
acreage.
(5) Areas within 200 feet of the proposed development site, which shall
include existing and proposed locations and dimensions of any
utility lines, sewer lines, waterlines, easements, drainageways and
public or private rights-of-way.
(6) Location of buildings and other structures on parcels abutting the
site.
(7) If the site is not to be served by a public sewer line, then an on-site
soils investigation report by a licensed soils evaluator shall be
provided. The report shall contain the types of soil, location of test
pits and proposed location of the best practical subsurface disposal
system for the site.
(8) Location and dimensions of on-site pedestrian and vehicular
accessways, parking areas, loading and unloading facilities, design
of ingress and egress of vehicles to and from the site onto public
streets and curb and sidewalk lines.
(9) Landscape plan showing location, type and approximate size of
plantings and location and dimensions of all fencing and screening.
(10) Topography indicating contours at an interval of two (2) feet in
elevation or as specified by the Planning Board. [Amended
5-15-2002 STM, Art. 14]
(11) Location of floodplains, aquifers and aquifer recharge areas, if
mapped.
(12) All revised plans will have a revised plan date and comments which
reflect the changes.
§ 175-5 TOPSHAM CODE § 175-5
168:142
(13) Location of wetlands and vernal pools. [Added 5-18-2016 STM,
Art. 14]
B. Statement by applicant. A written statement by the applicant that shall
consist of:
(1) Evidence by the applicant of his title and interest in the land for
which the application covers. Such evidence shall consist of a deed
or a purchase and sales agreement.
(2) A description of the proposed uses to be located on the site,
including quantity and type of residential unit, if any.
(3) Gross floor area and ground coverage of each proposed building
and structure, percentage of lot covered by each building or
structure and percentage of lot remaining in vegetation.
(4) Summary of existing and proposed easements, restrictions and
covenants placed on the property.
(5) Method of solid waste disposal.
(6) Erosion and sedimentation control plans and stormwater
management plans in conformance with § 225-34, Stormwater
management, which have been approved by the Androscoggin
Valley Soil and Water Conservation District or the Town's
designated review engineer. [Amended 5-17-2017 STM, Art. 13]
(7) (Reserved)16
(8) A statement from the Fire Chief as to the availability and adequacy
of fire hydrants and/or fire ponds or provisions of fire protection
services.
(9) If public water and/or sewer are to be used, a statement from the
water and/or sewer district or utility as to the availability of public
water and/or sewer lines.
(10) A recommendation from the Town Engineer, Public Works Director
or Road Commissioner on proposed road or street design and
layout.
(11) An estimate of the date when construction will start and when the
development will be completed.
(12) Performance guarantee method and draft instrument. [Added
5-21-2003 STM, Art. 11]
(13) If there is a vernal pool(s) on the property, a statement indicating
how the site has been designed to minimize the impact on the
vernal pool and its adjacent habitat except for projects involving
16.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(7), which required copies of letters to certain
landowners and Town officials, was repealed 5-15-2002 STM, Art. 15.
§ 175-5 TAXICAB LICENSING § 175-5
168:143
§ 175-6. Procedures for site plan review. [Amended 7-31-2000 STM,
Art. 6]
vernal pool mitigation in accordance with § 225-20.2, Vernal Pools
Overlay District. If the vernal pool(s) is subject to state or federal
regulation, evidence of compliance with those regulations must
be included. If the applicant is proposing to use the provisions
of § 225-20.2, Vernal Pools Overlay District (VPO District), with
respect to vernal pool mitigation, evidence of payment of the vernal
pool mitigation fee or the completion of permittee-responsible
mitigation activities shall be provided. [Added 5-18-2016 STM,
Art. 14; amended 5-17-2017 STM, Art. 14]
A. Preapplication conference.
(1) Sketch plan required. Before submitting a formal application for
approval, the applicant or his agent shall appear before the
Planning Board to discuss the proposed development. A sketch plan
shall be delivered to the Planning Office 21 days prior to a
scheduled Planning Board meeting. The sketch plan shall serve as
the basis for informal review by the Planning Board. The applicant
shall make arrangements for the Planning Board to inspect the site.
[Amended 5-16-2001 STM, Art. 24]
(2) Contents. The sketch plan should include a rough outline of the
proposed development showing the proposed layout of streets,
buildings and other features which may be of assistance to the
Board in understanding the proposal.
(3) Nonbinding. No binding commitments shall be made between the
applicant and the Board at this stage. The purpose of the
preapplication meeting shall be to understand what is proposed,
what is possible and what is acceptable.
(4) Prerequisite to formal application. A formal application will not be
accepted unless a preapplication conference has been held within
the previous four months.
B. Application.
(1) Submission; notice of completeness. The original and 18 copies of
the formal application and applicable plan shall be delivered to the
Planning Office 21 days prior to a scheduled Planning Board
meeting for filing with the Planning Board for review at a regular
monthly meeting of the Board. Within 30 days of the review of the
formal application, the applicant shall be notified, in writing, either
that the application is a complete application or, if the application is
not complete, the specific additional material needed to make a
complete application. After the Planning Board has determined
that a complete application has been filed, the Planning Office shall
notify the applicant, in writing, and the Planning Board shall begin
§ 175-5 TOPSHAM CODE § 175-6
168:144
§ 175-7. Fees.
its review of the proposed development. [Amended 5-16-2001
STM, Art. 24]
(2) Public hearing. The Planning Board may hold a public hearing
within 30 days of determining the application is a complete
application. The Planning Board shall publish the time, date and
place of the hearing at least two times, the date of the first
publication to be at least seven days prior to the hearing in a
newspaper of area-wide circulation. At least five days prior to the
public hearing, the applicant will notify by first class mail all
property owners within 200 feet of the boundaries of the proposed
development. Public hearings by the Planning Board shall be
conducted according to the procedures outlined in 30 M.R.S.A.
§ 2411, Subsections 3(A), (B), (C), (D) and (E).17
(3) Decision. Within 30 days of the public hearing or 60 days after the
Planning Board has determined the application is complete, the
Planning Board shall either approve, approve with conditions or
disapprove the application. The time limit for review may be
extended by mutual agreement between the Planning Board and
the applicant.
(4) Notice of decision. Within seven days after a decision has been
reached the Planning Office shall notify the applicant, in writing, of
any action taken and the reason for taking such action.
C. Applicant representative. The applicant may be represented before the
Planning Board by an architect, engineer, attorney or other designated
individual. The representative must present a letter signed by the
applicant stating the name and address of the representative and his/
her capacity with regards to the proposed development. The
representative must be fully empowered to speak on behalf of the
applicant, and the applicant is bound to abide by all the terms and
conditions agreed to by his representative.
A. Application fee. All applications for site plan review shall be
accompanied by a fee and deposit as indicated in Chapter 109 of the
Town Code. [Amended 5-20-2004 STM, Art. 16]
B. Performance guarantees. [Amended 5-21-2003 STM, Art. 11]
(1) At the time the Planning Board grants final or conditional site plan
approval, the applicant shall agree to meet all terms and conditions
of approval, and to complete all improvements in accordance with
the approved plans and supporting documentation, and with these
regulations and standards, unless otherwise waived in accordance
with this ordinance.
17.Editor's Note: 30 M.R.S.A. § 2411 was repealed by Chapter 737 of the Laws of 1987. See
now 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691.
§ 175-6 TAXICAB LICENSING § 175-7
168:145
(2) All performance guarantees shall include a construction schedule,
itemized cost estimates for each element of the project, provisions
for inspections of each phase of construction, provisions for the
release or partial release of the guarantee to the developer, and a
date after which the developer will be in default and the Town will
have access to any remaining funds to finish construction of site
improvements.
(3) The amount shall be at least equal to the total cost of furnishing,
installing, connecting and completing all of the street grading,
paving, storm drainage, soil erosion controls, utility extensions, offsite
improvements, landscaping and other site improvements
specified on the final plan within two years of the date of the
performance guarantee.
(4) The performance guarantee shall consist of one or more of the
following forms, or other forms as may be found acceptable to the
Planning Board:
(a) Escrow account: Funds deposited with the Town of Topsham,
deposited into a joint savings account between the applicant
and the Town, or used for the purchase of a joint certificate of
deposit. Withdrawals by the applicant shall only be allowed
following approval by the Planning Office. Withdrawals by the
Town of Topsham shall be permitted without the applicant's
approval, pursuant to the performance schedule and default
dates in the performance guarantee.
(b) Letter of credit: An irrevocable letter of credit, issued by a
state or federally chartered bank or credit union in the name of
Town of Topsham, shall indicate that funds have been set aside
for the construction of all site work and may not be used for
any other portion of the project. The Town may draw from the
fund if construction is inadequate or incomplete. The Town will
determine in its sole judgement the adequacy of the letter of
credit and the issuing institution.
(c) Occupancy restriction: A statement signed by the developer
that he/she will not seek a certificate of occupancy until all site
improvements are completed in accordance with the approved
plans, as determined by the Town Planner.
(5) Extension. The Planning Board may recommend a maximum
extension of 12 months to the guaranteed performance period
when the applicant can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the
Board and the municipal officers, good cause for such extension.
Such recommendation shall be referred to the municipal officers
for official action.
(6) Release. Before an applicant may be released from any obligation
requiring his guaranty of performance, the Planning Board will
require certification from appropriate municipal officers and
§ 175-7 TOPSHAM CODE § 175-7
168:146
§ 175-8. Performance standards.
The following standards are to be used by the Planning Board in judging
applications for site plan reviews and shall serve as minimum requirements
for approval of the site plan. The Planning Board shall also use the
performance standards contained in Chapter 225, Zoning, Articles VII and
VIII, of the Code when reviewing applications under this chapter. The site
plan shall be approved, unless in the judgment of the Planning Board the
application is not able to reasonably meet one or more of the standards in
this section or in Chapter 225, Zoning, Articles VII and VIII. In all instances,
the burden of proof shall be on the applicant and such burden of proof shall
include the production of evidence necessary to complete the application.
consultants, if any, to the effect that all improvements have been
satisfactorily completed in accordance with all applicable
standards (state, federal and local codes, ordinances, laws and
regulations).
C. Consultant fees.
(1) The Planning Board reserves the right to obtain an independent
evaluation of a proposed development, to assist it in making
necessary findings of fact. If the Planning Board deems such study
necessary, it will request a reasonable additional sum from the
applicant to defray the cost of such study or studies. Any funds not
utilized for consultant studies will be returned to the developer.
(2) The Planning Board may require that the applicant establish an
escrow or other type of fund to cover the cost of conducting
reasonable inspections of the proposed development to ensure
compliance with all conditions of the approved application.
A. Preserve and enhance the landscape. The landscape shall be preserved
in its natural state insofar as practicable by minimizing tree removal,
disturbance of soil and retaining existing vegetation during
construction. After construction is completed, landscaping shall be
designed and planted that will define, soften or screen the appearance
of off-street parking areas from the public right-of-way and abutting
properties and/or structures in order to enhance the physical design of
the building(s) or site and to minimize the encroachment of the
proposed use on neighboring land uses. Landscaping shall conform to
the provisions of § 175-10.
B. Relationship of the proposed buildings to environment. Proposed
structures shall be related harmoniously to the terrain and to existing
buildings in the vicinity which have a visual relationship to the
proposed buildings. Special attention shall be paid to the bulk, location
and height of the building(s) and such natural features as slope, soil
type and drainageways. The architectural design of the project shall
conform to the provisions of § 175-11.
§ 175-7 TAXICAB LICENSING § 175-8
168:147
C. Vehicular access. The proposed site layout shall provide for safe access
and egress from public and private roads by providing adequate
location, numbers and control of access points, including site distances,
turning lanes and traffic signalization when required by existing and
projected traffic flow on the municipal road systems.
D. Parking and circulation. The layout and design of all means of vehicular
and pedestrian circulation, including walkways, interior drives and
parking areas shall provide for safe general interior circulation,
separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, service traffic, loading
areas and arrangement and use of parking areas. The design of parking
lots shall conform to the provisions of § 175-12.
E. Surface water drainage. Adequate provision shall be made for surface
drainage in conformance with § 225-34, Stormwater management, so
that management of surface waters will not adversely affect
neighboring properties, downstream water quality, soil erosion or the
public storm drainage system. Whenever possible, on-site absorption of
runoff waters shall be utilized to minimize discharges from the site.
Green roof technologies, gray water systems and porous pavement
systems may be utilized to minimize discharge from the site and provide
on-site irrigation. In general, low-impact development standards as
established by the Maine DEP and defined elsewhere are encouraged to
mitigate on-site and off-site impacts of stormwater. [Amended
5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15; 5-17-2017 STM, Art. 13]
F. Existing utilities. The development shall not impose an unreasonable
burden on sewers, sanitary and storm drains, water lines or other
public utilities.
G. Advertising features. The size, location, design, lighting and materials
of all exterior signs and outdoor advertising structures or features shall
not detract from the design of proposed buildings and structures and
the surrounding properties.
H. Special features of the development. Exposed storage areas, exposed
machinery installation, service areas, truck loading areas, utility
buildings and similar structures shall have sufficient setbacks and
screening to provide an audiovisual buffer sufficient to minimize their
adverse impact on other land uses within the development area and
surrounding properties.
I. Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting shall be designed to minimize
adverse impact on neighboring properties. Exterior lighting shall
conform to the provisions of § 175-9.
J. Emergency vehicle access. Provisions shall be made for providing and
maintaining convenient and safe emergency vehicle access to all
buildings and structures at all times.
K. Municipal services. The development will be considered in terms of its
impact on municipal services, including municipal road systems, Fire
§ 175-8 TOPSHAM CODE § 175-8
168:148
Department, Police Department, solid waste program, sewage
treatment plant, schools, open spaces, recreational programs and
facilities and other municipal services and facilities.
L. The development will not result in undue water pollution. In making
this determination it shall at least consider the elevation of land above
sea level and its relation to the floodplains, the nature of soils and
subsoils and, if necessary, their ability to adequately support waste
disposal and/or any other DEP approved licensed discharge; the slope
of the land and its effect on effluents; the aquifers and aquifer runoff;
and the applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, codes and
regulations.
M. The development will not result in undue air pollution. In making this
determination it shall consult federal and state authorities to determine
applicable air quality laws and regulations.
N. Water; future needs. The development has sufficient water available for
the reasonably foreseeable needs of the development.
O. Existing water supply. The development will not cause an unreasonable
burden on an existing water supply, if one is to be utilized.
P. Erosion. The development will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or
reduction in the capacity of the land to hold water so that a dangerous
or unhealthy condition may result.
Q. Sewage. The development will provide for adequate sewage waste
disposal.
R. Natural beauty; historic sites; habitat. The development will not have
an undue adverse effect on the scenic or natural beauty of the area,
aesthetics, historic sites, significant habitats, or rare and irreplaceable
natural areas. [Amended 5-18-2016 STM, Art. 14]
(1) If any portion of the land within the proposed development has
been identified as containing historic or archaeological resources
by the Comprehensive Plan, the Town of Topsham Historic District
Commission or the Maine Historic Preservation Commission, the
development proposal shall include appropriate measures for
protecting these resources, including but not limited to
modification of the proposed design of the site, timing of
construction and limiting the extent of excavation.
(2) If any portion of the land within the proposed development is
located within a medium or high potential archaeology zone as
delineated on the Cultural Resource Protection Zone Map and the
Comprehensive Plan, a Phase I reconnaissance level archaeological
survey shall be conducted, unless those lands have previously been
surveyed in accordance with Maine Historic Preservation
Commission guidelines.
§ 175-8 TAXICAB LICENSING § 175-8
168:149
(a) The requirement for a survey may be waived for those lands
which are proposed to be left in their natural state,
undisturbed or undeveloped. The plan shall, by notes on the
final plan and deed restrictions, prohibit the development of
those areas designated on the plan.
(3) If any portion of a proposed development lies within:
(a) Two hundred fifty (250) feet of the following areas identified
and mapped by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife
or the Comprehensive Plan as:
[1] Habitat for species appearing on the official state or
federal lists of endangered or threatened species;
[2] High and moderate value waterfowl and wading bird
habitats, including nesting and feeding areas;
[3] High and moderate value fisheries habitat, including
spawning and nursery areas;
(b) One thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet of an area
identified and mapped by the Department of Inland Fisheries
and Wildlife or other agency or report as a high or moderate
value deer wintering area or travel corridor;
(c) Or other important habitat areas identified in the
Comprehensive Plan, the applicant shall demonstrate that
there shall be no adverse impacts on the habitat and species
which it supports. A report prepared by a qualified wildlife
biologist with demonstrated experience with the wildlife
resource being impacted shall be submitted. This report shall
assess the potential impact of the development on the
significant habitat and adjacent areas that are important to the
maintenance of the affected species and shall describe
appropriate mitigation measures to ensure that the
development will have no adverse impacts on the habitat and
the species which it supports.
(4) If the development site contains one or more vernal pools, all
activities shall be carried out to minimize the impact on the vernal
pools except for projects involving vernal pool mitigation in
accordance with § 225-20.2, Vernal Pool Overlay District. All
development activities shall be located to conserve the vernal pools
plus the necessary terrestrial amphibian post-breeding habitat
adjacent to each pool to the maximum extent reasonable consistent
with the proposed use of the property unless vernal pool mitigation
is proposed.
S. Shoreland areas. Whenever situated in whole or in part within 250 feet
of any pond, lake, river or tidal waters, the development will not
§ 175-8 TOPSHAM CODE § 175-8
168:150
§ 175-9. Additional lighting standards.
Lighting should conform to the following standards if deemed practicable
by the Planning Board:
adversely affect the quality of such body of water or unreasonably affect
the shoreline of such body of water.
A. General lighting design.
(1) All light fixture specifications and light levels shall at least meet the
minimum standards established by the Illuminating Engineering
Society of North America (IESNA) for each particular land use.
(2) Parking lot, roadway, pedestrian, signage and exterior building
lighting shall provide safe passage for vehicles and pedestrians as
well as selectively accent buildings and the landscape. Light
pollution to abutting uses shall be minimized by using minimum
required light levels and by using cut off fixtures.
(3) The style of the light fixtures and standards shall be consistent with
the architectural style of the principal building and/or streetscape.
(4) Lighting design shall reinforce pedestrian and vehicle circulation
systems and accent intersections and entrances.
(5) Lighting with a lumen output equal to or greater than a twohundred-
watt mercury light shall not be directed towards the sky
or adjacent properties.
(6) No rotating or flashing lights or signs, except safety signaling
devices required by law, are permitted.
B. Site plan approval. A lighting plan, prepared by a registered engineer,
shall be submitted as part of site plan approval that includes the
following:
(1) A site plan showing buildings, landscaping, parking areas and all
proposed exterior fixtures.
(2) A written narrative describing the intent of the lighting plan.
(3) Photometric analysis plan which shows light distribution and
footcandle levels.
(4) Proposed mounting heights and specifications for all mixtures.
C. Energy conservation. Timers, photosensors, dimmers and other energysaving
devices should be utilized to conserve energy and limit negative
impacts of lighting.
D. Glare.
§ 175-8 TAXICAB LICENSING § 175-9
168:151
(1) All light fixtures shall be shielded to a maximum of 90° above
horizontal. Seventy-five degrees above horizontal is recommended.
(2) Lighting fixtures shall be shielded or hooded so that the lighting
elements are not exposed to normal view by motorists, pedestrians
or from adjacent dwellings.
(3) Direct or indirect illumination shall not exceed 0.5 footcandle upon
abutting residential properties.
E. Roadway lighting.
(1) Light poles and fixtures shall be on the same side of the street as
the sidewalk, wherever practicable.
(2) Height of freestanding fixtures shall not exceed the height of the
principal building.
F. Parking lot lighting. Parking lot lighting shall be kept to a minimum to
avoid glare and sky glow from pavement reflection and shall not visually
compete with surrounding commercial uses and signage.
(1) Parking lots for a typical commercial use shall have a minimum of
0.2 footcandle and a maximum of 2.0 footcandles unless a different
standard is established in Chapter 225 for the zone in which the
use is located. Light distribution shall have a uniformity ratio of 4 to
1. (The average footcandle for the lights cannot be more than four
times greater than the minimum footcandle.) [Amended
5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15]
(2) Light poles shall be placed in locations to avoid damage from
vehicles. Consideration shall be given to the growth of trees which
might affect the distribution of light.
(3) Height of freestanding fixtures shall not exceed the height of the
principal building and shall be held to the scale of the project. The
limitation on fixture height shall not apply within the BP Zone and
the CC 196 Zone but fixtures shall be located at the lowest
reasonable height that allows for illumination that complies with
the uniformity ratio of Subsection F(1) above and is in keeping with
the scale of the project. [Amended 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15]
(4) Parking lot lights for clubs in an R-1 or R-2 Zoning District shall be
shielded to 75 degrees, with no lenses visible below the housing.
[Added 5-24-2006 STM, Art. 15]
G. Pedestrian lighting
(1) The use of bollard lights and decorative pole-mounted fixtures is
encouraged. The height of fixtures shall be less than parking lot
lighting to create more human-scaled spaces.
§ 175-9 TOPSHAM CODE § 175-9
168:152
§ 175-10. Additional landscaping standards.
(2) Walkways should have a 0.6 average footcandles, and steps and
accessible ramps shall have an average of 10.0 footcandles.
Entrance areas should have a minimum of 5.0 footcandles and
maximum of 10 footcandles.
H. Gas station/canopy lighting.
(1) Canopy lights shall be recessed flush into the ceiling of the canopy
to reduce glare.
(2) The area around gas pumps shall have an average horizontal
illuminance of 30.0 footcandles or less. Maximum light levels shall
only apply to the area below the canopy and within 20 feet of the
canopy.
(3) Parking areas, walkways and drives associated with the service
station shall follow light level guidelines established elsewhere in
this section.
(4) Illumination for building facades and other active service
structures shall not exceed 5.0 footcandles.
(5) Lights shall not be mounted on the sides or top of canopies.
I. Building/landscape lighting.
(1) Maximum building illumination shall not exceed 5.0 footcandles.
(2) Facade lighting that is aimed downwards is preferred. Any lighting
aimed up to illuminate a facade or landscaping shall be properly
shielded to avoid sky glow and glare on adjacent walkways, roads
or properties.
(3) Wall mounted lights on clubs in an R-1 or R-2 Zoning District shall
be fully shielded with no light spillage above seventy-five degrees.
Lenses shall not be visible below the housing. [Added 5-24-2006
STM, Art. 15]
A. General landscape design.
(1) Landscaping (trees, shrubs, perennials, annuals, evergreens,
grasses and site structures) shall be part of the site plan and shall
be detailed in a landscape plan submitted as part of site plan
review. Landscaping shall conform to following standards if
deemed practicable by the Planning Board. The landscape plan
shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect or qualified
landscaping firm.
(2) The landscape plan shall include:
(a) The location, type and size of all existing trees a four-inch
caliper and greater measured six inches above the ground and
§ 175-9 TAXICAB LICENSING § 175-10
168:153
general areas and types of understory shrubs and ground
cover.
(b) The location and type of all proposed plantings.
(c) A matrix detailing the type, size and spacing of proposed plant
materials.
(3) Trees, shrubs and other plant materials shall reinforce pedestrian
and vehicle circulation systems, provide seasonal interest, break
down large spaces into smaller spaces, accent buildings and screen
parking and loading areas.
(4) Plant material native to the Midcoast area and tolerant of local
climatic conditions are recommended.
(5) The mature form and size of trees and shrubs and other plant
material shall not interfere with pedestrian and vehicular
circulation, signage, lighting and above ground and buried utilities.
(6) All plantings shall be selected with an understanding of their
maintenance requirements. Leaf and seed litter, strength of
branches, fertilizer and irrigation requirements shall be taken into
consideration when preparing a landscape plan.
(7) Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the applicant shall
furnish the Town of Topsham a bond, letter of credit or other form
of security. The security shall be filed with the Planning Office at
the time of the submission of the final plan. The security shall be in
an amount sufficient to defray all expenses. The bond shall be
binding for a minimum of three years and shall be subject to the
condition that required plantings be maintained in accordance with
the terms of the site plan approval and in good and healthy
condition. Notwithstanding the requirement of a bond from the
applicant, the owner of any premises approved by the Planning
Board under any section of this chapter shall have a continuing
obligation to maintain required plantings in accordance with the
terms of the site plan approval and in good and healthy condition.
B. Parking lot landscape design. The provisions of this subsection shall not
apply to development within the BP Zone and the CC 196 Zone. The
Planning Board may require that new development in these two zones
comply with some or all of these requirements to the extent that they
are consistent with the planned use. [Amended 5-24-2007 STM, Art.
15]
(1) Trees and shrubs within and surrounding parking areas should be
part of the overall design concept for a site plan. Berms are not
recommended as a screening technique.
(2) Canopy trees in parking lots shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches to
three inches caliper measured six inches off the ground.
§ 175-10 TOPSHAM CODE § 175-10
168:154
(3) Trees in parking lots and pedestrian ways shall be of a sufficient
type and height and maintained so that lower branches are eight
feet above the ground.
(4) One canopy tree shall be planted every 14 parking spaces
throughout the interior of parking lots. Trees required for the
interior of the parking lot cannot count towards trees required for
buffering or front setback landscaping. Parking lots with less than
14 spaces will have a minimum of four street trees spaced evenly
around the lot.
(5) A landscape island, minimum width the same as the required width
of a parking space, is required every other row of parking. Grass or
groundcover is recommended for the islands.
(6) All rows of parking shall end in a landscaped island the same size
as a required space. One street tree shall be planted in each end
landscaped island. In the case of a double row of parking, the end
island will be the size of two parking spaces. Trees required for end
island(s) cannot count towards the required one tree per 14 spaces.
(7) Trees and shrubs planted within parking lot islands shall be a
minimum of four feet from the edge of a parking or drive lane.
(8) Areas for snow storage shall be included in the landscape plan.
(9) For appropriate parking lot trees, see § 175-10B(2).
C. Street tree landscape design.
(1) Canopy trees shall be planted within the public right-of-way every
30 feet of street frontage and shall not be located directly under
overhead utilities in order for the tree to develop its mature form. If
a pattern of street trees exists on a street then the spacing and type
of new street trees shall match the existing spacing and form. The
intention is to create a well-defined and consistent street corridor.
Street trees installed in the LV, VC, LI, BP2 and R4 Zones within a
hardscape streetscape design shall be planted in five foot by five
foot (5') tree pits with tree grates or landscaped beds with the tree
trunk a minimum of two feet (2') from the curb. This requirement
does not apply to the Rural Commercial Use and Industrial Zones.
[Amended 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
(2) Canopy trees planted as street trees should be a minimum of three
inches to 3 1/2 inches caliper six inches off the ground. Canopy
trees planted as in parking lots should be a minimum of 2 1/2
inches to three inches caliper measured six inches off the ground.
Recommended canopy trees include, but are not limited to:
§ 175-10 TAXICAB LICENSING § 175-10
168:155
Common Name Latin Name
Green ash Fraxinus pennsylvanica
Shademaster honeylocust Gleditsia triacanthos inermis
Shademaster
Norway maple Acer platanoides
Red maple Acer rubrum
Red oak Quercus rubra
(3) Trees should be planted a minimum of three feet from sidewalks
and 10 feet from sewer or water lines.
(4) Trees and overhead and buried utilities shall be coordinated as to
not interfere with each other.
D. Landscape specifications. The following are minimum sizes for required
plantings (caliper measured six inches above the ground):
Plant Type Size of Plant
Material Adjacent to
Vacant Land
All Other Plantings
Canopy Tree (CT) 1 1/2 inch caliper Minimum 2 inches
caliper
Understory tree (UT) 4 feet (height) 1 1/2 inches caliper
Multistem clump
(MSC)
6 feet (height) 8 feet (height)
Evergreen tree (ET) 3 feet (height) 5 to 7 feet (height)
Deciduous shrub (DS) 15 inches (height) 24 inches (height)
Evergreen shrub (ES) 12 inches (height) 18 inches (height)
E. Planting setback requirements for Commercial Corridor, Limited
Industrial, Mixed Use Commercial, including the MUC-1, Mixed-Use
Limited and Rural Commercial Use Zones. [Amended 5-20-2007
STM, Art. 18; 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15; 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
(1) For the Commercial Corridor, Limited Industrial and Mixed-Use
Commercial, including the MUC-1, Mixed-Use Limited and Rural
Commercial Use Zones, setbacks shall only be used as a landscape
buffer except for access drives which run perpendicular to the
setback. Setback planting requirements are separate from interior
parking lot planting and street tree requirements. For the Limited
Industrial Zone, these standards are required for any parcel with
frontage on Route 201, even if the Route 201 frontage is not
considered the front setback for the parcel.
(2) After creating the allowable number of driveways per lot, 80% of all
trees over four inches caliper measured at a six-foot height shall be
maintained. Within the Rural Commercial Use and Mixed-Use
§ 175-10 TOPSHAM CODE § 175-10
168:156
Limited Zones in addition to preserving 80% of all trees over a fourinch
caliper measured at a six-foot height, 50% of all underbrush,
evenly distributed through the setback shall be saved. Trees can
be limbed up to eight feet. If existing vegetation is saved [and at
least meets the minimum requirements of § 175-10E(4)] within the
setbacks, part or all of the required plantings can be waived by the
Planning Board. Healthy, existing vegetation of appropriate size is
preferred over new plantings. If the existing condition of the site
is bare of trees and/or shrubs then the planting requirements in
§ 175-10E(4) shall be met.
(3) Existing developments coming before the Planning Board for
improvements shall be required to install a five-foot minimum wide
landscaped buffer at the front property line, unless waived by the
Planning Board in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance. One-half
(rounding up) of the setback planting requirements as outlined in
the revised performance standards, § 175-10E(4), planting setback
requirements, shall be required.
(4) The following planting guidelines shall be followed for setbacks.
Setback planting requirements are separate from requirements for
parking lots. Setback plantings shall be part of the overall design
for the landscape site plan.
(a) For every 100 lineal feet of frontage in the Rural Commercial
Use and Mixed-Use Limited Zones, the following plants are
required:
[1] Four canopy trees 2 1/2 inches minimum caliper.
[2] Three understory trees.
[3] Three multistem clumps.
[4] Twenty deciduous shrubs.
[5] Three evergreen trees.
(b) In the Commercial Corridor, Limited Industrial, Commercial
Corridor 196, Mixed-Use Commercial, Mixed Use Commercial
One Zones for every 100 linear feet of frontage, the following
plants are required:
[1] Two canopy trees at 2 1/2 inches caliper minimum or
required number of street trees at three inches caliper
minimum.
[2] Two understory trees.
[3] Three multistem clumps.
[4] Five evergreen trees.
§ 175-10 TAXICAB LICENSING § 175-10
168:157
(c) For every 100 lineal feet of side and rear lot lines in the Mixed-
Use Commercial, including the MUC-1, Commercial Corridor,
Mixed-Use Limited and Rural Commercial Use Zones, the
following plants are required:
[1] Three multistem clumps.
[2] Ten shrubs.
[3] Ten evergreen shrubs.
[4] Five evergreen trees.
(5) Service areas, loading docks and utilities may require screening
beyond the requirements of this section and shall meet the
requirements of § 175-10E.
F. Commercial buffering. Commercial and industrial uses shall conform to
the following:
(1) Within the CC, RCU, MUL, MUC, MUC-1, MV, R4 and BP2 Zones,
80% of all trees over three inches caliper at a four-and-one-half-foot
height in the front setback shall be maintained, excluding one
twenty-six-foot wide access road. [Amended 5-24-2007 STM,
Art. 15; 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 8; 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
(2) Within the CC, RCU, MUL, MUC and MUC-1 Zones, existing
developments coming before the Planning Board for improvements
shall be required to install a five-foot minimum wide landscaped
buffer (where none currently exists) at the front property line
unless waived by the Planning Board. One-half (rounded up) of the
setback planting standards set out in § 175-10E(4) shall be
required. Existing developments in the LV, MV, VC, LI, R4 and BP2
Zones coming before the Planning Board for improvements shall be
required to install a ten-foot minimum wide landscaped buffer
(where none currently exists) at the front property line. [Amended
5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15; 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15; 11-13-2008
STM, Art. 8; 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
(3) All setbacks in the CC, RCU, MUC, MUL and I Zones shall maintain
a fifty-foot vegetated buffer where the setback is adjacent to a lot in
residential use or a residential zone.
(4) Buffering from clubs in an R-1 or R-2 Zoning District abutting
residential properties shall include a minimum buffer width of 40',
and shall be landscaped to the standards in § 175-10. [Added
5-24-2006 STM, Art. 15]
(5) Within the MUC-1 Zone a residential buffer strip must be provided
in accordance with § 225-60.8 or the planned mixed-use
development requirements of § 225-60.7. [Added 5-24-2007
STM, Art. 15]
§ 175-10 TOPSHAM CODE § 175-11
168:158
§ 175-11. Commercial architectural design standards.
A. General standards. To protect, enhance and perpetuate the town's
historic, cultural and architectural heritage and to enhance the town's
attraction to residents and visitors and to serve as a support and
stimulus to business and industry, construction of a new building or
structure or addition to an existing structure shall be of such design,
form, proportion, mass, configuration, building material, texture, color
and location on a lot as to conform with the following standards as
deemed practicable by the Planning Board. In areas of the town where
structures have little or no historic value (e.g., franchise architecture),
new construction or renovations shall enhance the area rather than
replicate existing structures. These standards shall not apply to the
Industrial Zone. New development in the Business Park and
Commercial Corridor 196 Zones, including additions and renovations to
existing buildings, shall only be required to conform to specific
standards (7) and (8).18 These standards shall apply in the LV, MV, VC,
LI, R4 and BP2 Zones, including the construction of new, or renovation
of existing, multifamily dwellings. [Amended 5-24-2007 STM, Art.
15; 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 8; 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
(1) Applicability. These design standards apply to all new commercial
buildings, structures and additions in the Town of Topsham with the
exception of the Industrial Zone.
(2) Registered architects and engineers. All buildings and additions
shall be designed by a registered architect or engineer in the State
of Maine.
(3) Architecture as advertising. Proposed buildings, improvements and
additions shall not be stylized to the point that the building or
improvements are more an advertisement than an architectural
form.
(4) Overall development. Clusters of buildings or overall developments
should be encouraged rather than lot-by-lot development.
(5) Facade length. Long or continuous facades do not provide visual
interest. Facades shall be articulated every 50 feet using varied
setbacks, rooflines, materials and heights. Within the LV and MV
Zones, the front facade shall be limited to a maximum of 100 feet
and shall be designed to look like more than one building.
B. Specific standards. New construction or renovations shall be visually
appropriate in terms of:
(1) Height.
(a) The height of the proposed building(s) or addition(s) to existing
buildings shall be appropriate with neighboring buildings.
18.Editor's Note: See Subsection B(7) and (8) below.
§ 175-11 TAXICAB LICENSING § 175-11
168:159
(b) In reviewing a proposed new building or structure, or additions
to existing buildings, relate the overall height of new
construction to that of neighboring structures. As a general
rule, construct new buildings to a height comparable to the
average height of existing buildings from the historic period on
the same side of and across the street.
(c) Avoid new construction that greatly varies in height (too high
or too low) from older buildings in the vicinity.
(2) Proportion of buildings front facade and massing.
(a) The relationship of the width of the building to the height of the
front elevation shall be visually compatible with buildings,
structures and open spaces where it is visually related. In
reviewing a proposed new building or structure, or additions to
existing buildings, break up uninteresting box-like forms into
smaller, varied masses comparable to the historic structures or
blocks of buildings from the historic period. Variety of form and
massing are often elements essential to the character of the
historic streetscape.
(b) Avoid single, monolithic forms that are not relieved by
variations in massing. Box-like facades and forms are intrusive
when placed in a streetscape of older buildings that have
varied massing and facade articulation.
(3) Proportion of openings with the facade. The relationship of width of
the windows to height of the windows and doors in a building shall
be visually compatible with those of windows and doors to which
the building is related.
(4) Relationship of solids to voids in front facades.
(a) The relationship of solids to voids in the front facade of a
building shall be visually compatible with that of buildings to
which it is visually related.
(b) In reviewing a proposed new building or structure or addition
to an existing building, respect the recurrent alteration of wall
areas with door and window elements in the facade. Also
consider the width-to-height ratio of bays in the facade. The
placement of openings with respect to the facade's overall
composition, symmetry or balanced asymmetry should be
studied.
(c) Shutters should be the correct scale to the window and not just
decorative elements. A shutter should be half as wide as the
window.
(5) Spaces of buildings on streets. The space between two buildings
shall follow the rhythm and scale of spaces between other adjacent
§ 175-11 TOPSHAM CODE § 175-11
168:160
buildings, where allowable by zoning regulations and lot
constraints.
(6) Entrance and/or porch projection (setback).
(a) The relationship of entrance and porch projections to
sidewalks and streets should be visually compatible with those
of buildings to which it is visually related.
(b) In reviewing a proposed new building or structure or an
addition to an existing building, maintain the historic facade
lines of streetscapes by locating front walls of new buildings in
the same plane as the facades of neighboring buildings when
zoning regulations permit. If exceptions are made, buildings
should be set back into the lot rather than closer to the street.
If existing setbacks vary, new buildings should conform to
historic siting patterns.
(c) Do not violate the existing setback pattern by placing new
buildings in front of or behind the historic facade. Avoid
placing buildings at odd angles to the street, unless in an area
where diverse siting already exists, even if proper setback is
maintained.
(d) When adding a porch or an addition to the front of a building
avoid solid, opaque forms that block the view of the original
structure.
(7) Materials, textures and color. The relationship of materials,
textures and color of the facade of a building shall be visually
compatible with that of the predominant materials used in the
buildings to which it is visually related or traditionally used in the
area. Materials common to New England, such as brick, clapboard
and shingles, are encouraged. Highly reflective materials such as
plastic panels, aluminum and metals shall not be used. Roofs shall
be a unified material and a darker color than the building.
(8) Roof shapes.
(a) The roof shape of a building shall be visually compatible with
that of buildings to which it is visually related. When no clear
pattern exists, a roof pitch of 5/12 or steeper shall be used, or
the building should be designed so as to appear to have a
pitched roof. The design of the roofline or parapet wall shall
screen any air conditioning or other utilities placed on the roof.
(b) Relate the roof forms of the new building to those found in the
area. Although not entirely necessary, duplication of the
existing or traditional roof shape, pitches and materials in new
construction is one way of making new structures more
visually compatible.
§ 175-11 TAXICAB LICENSING § 175-11
168:161
(c) Avoid introducing roof shapes, pitches or materials not
traditionally used in the area.
(d) Where allowed, 45-foot tall buildings with three full floors and
a flat roof clearly defined in the elevation shall have a cornice
above the third floor. The fourth floor shall step back with the
roof pitch not visible from the street. [Added 5-20-2009
STM, Art. 15]
(e) When installing green roof systems, strict adherence to these
standards may be waived by the Planning Board. All green
roofs shall have a cornice or other architectural detail above
the roofline, to conceal any flat roof areas. [Added 5-20-2009
STM, Art. 15]
(9) Scale of buildings.
(a) The size of the building, the building mass in relationship to
open spaces, the windows, door openings, porches and
balconies should be visually compatible with those
characteristics of buildings and spaces to which it is visually
related.
(b) In reviewing a proposed new building or structure, or addition
to an existing building, relate the size and proportions of new
structures to the scale of neighborhood buildings. Although
much larger than its neighbors in terms of square footage, the
building shown maintains the same scale and rhythm as the
existing buildings.
(c) Buildings that in height, width or massing violate the existing
scale of the area shall not be permitted.
(10) Directional expression of front elevation.
(a) A building shall be visually compatible with the building(s),
square(s) and place(s) to which it is visually related in its
directional character, whether this is vertical character,
horizontal character or nondirectional character.
(b) In reviewing a proposed new building or structure, or addition
to an existing building, relate the vertical, horizontal or
nondirectional facade of the character of the new buildings to
the predominant directional expression of nearby buildings.
Horizontal buildings can be made to relate to the more vertical
neighboring structures by breaking the facade into smaller
masses that conform to the primary expression of the
streetscape.
(c) Buildings and additions shall be parallel to the street frontage
wherever practicable.
(11) Linear commercial structures.
§ 175-11 TOPSHAM CODE § 175-11
168:162
§ 175-12. General parking design.
The design of off-street parking lots shall conform to the following standards
if deemed practicable by the Planning Board:
(a) Buildings with multiple storefronts (e.g., strip shopping
centers, one-story office buildings) shall be visually unified
through the use of complementary architectural forms, similar
materials and colors, consistent details and a uniform signmounting
system. The goal is to create an overall sense of
design and scale while avoiding nondescript architecture and
places.
(b) Variations in setback on linear structures adds visual interest,
creates common plaza areas and landscape areas.
(c) Variations in rooflines, gables and building height add visual
interest and break down the scale of the building.
(d) Covered walkways and awnings along the front facade provide
shelter, help scale the building to the pedestrian and visually
unite the structure.
(12) Large-scale structures.
(a) The scale of big-box-type structures shall be broken down
using changes in roof lines, gable ends, towers, colonnades,
architectural details and landscaping.
(b) Blank walls shall be made more visually interesting by
including elements that create shadow lines, changes in
setback, material and rooflines and other architectural details
consistent with the historic patterns in the area as deemed
practicable by the Planning Board.
(c) Parking should be placed to the rear or side of these buildings,
and parking lots shall be landscaped following the
requirements in § 175-10B.
(d) Cart storage shall be integrated into the site using similar
materials.
A. Off-street parking should not be provided in front of a building and
should be placed to the side or rear of buildings wherever practicable
subject to the following requirements:
(1) Within the CC Zone, a maximum of one row of parking and access
driveway may be placed in front of a building, but the required
plantings set forth in § 175-10E(4) shall be increased by 50%.
[Amended 12-13-2006 STM, Art. 10]
(2) Within the LV, MV, VC and R4 Zones, parking shall not be allowed in
front of a building but shall be placed to the rear except as part of a
§ 175-11 TAXICAB LICENSING § 175-12
168:163
common plan of development. In the MV and R4 Zones, parking
may be placed to the side of a building if the applicant
demonstrates that this is the only location where the parking lot
can be built due to the uniqueness of the lot. In the BP2 Zone, new
parking lots shall be located to the side or rear of new structures.
Existing parking areas may be maintained, but shall be brought
into conformance with all applicable standards. In the LI Zone, and
that portion of the CC fronting on Rt. 201, parking shall be located
in accordance with Section 225-60.11.F. [Amended 11-13-2008
STM, Art. 8; 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
(2.1) On-street parking shall be utilized in the in the LV, VC, LI, BP2 and
R4 Zones where allowed to calm traffic, create a village-scaled
street and minimize the need for off-street parking. Stacked
parking is allowed in the LV, MV, VC, LI, R4 and BP2 Zones. Stacked
parking management plans shall be approved by the Planning
Board. [Added 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
(3) Within the MUC and MUC-1 Zones, parking for larger buildings
should not be the dominant foreground feature of the site. This can
be accomplished by locating a significant share of the parking to
the side or rear of major buildings or by locating smaller
freestanding buildings or major landscape features between the
front faade of major buildings and the primary access street. To
accomplish this objective, the following standards apply to
buildings that are located outside of the streetscape zone,
streetscape zone being the area immediately adjacent to the
primary access street and extending to a depth of one-hundred fifty
(150) feet: [Added 12-13-2006 STM, Art. 10; amended
5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15]
(a) Not more than sixty (60) percent of the required parking may
be located in the “storefront parking area” unless the site
meets the requirements of Subsection A(3)(b). The balance of
the parking must be located outside of the “storefront parking
area” preferably to the side or rear of the building. The
“storefront parking area” encompasses the parking spaces
between the front of the building and the primary access street
included within the area formed by lines extending outward at
a 45 degree angle from the end corners of the front wall of the
building to the front property line or primary access street.
(b) The share of parking allowed within the “storefront parking
area” may be increased if the site design provides for the
location of one or more smaller, freestanding buildings or
major landscape features within the streetscape zone in front
of the major building. The building(s) or major landscape
feature(s) must be located entirely within the one hundred fifty
(150) foot wide streetscape zone. The share of parking allowed
within the “storefront parking area” may be increased ten (10)
percent for each freestanding building or major landscape
§ 175-12 TOPSHAM CODE § 175-12
168:164
feature up to a maximum of ninety (90) percent of the required
parking. If the lot upon which the building or project is located
has more than eight hundred (800) feet of frontage on the
primary access road, the number of buildings or features
required to utilize the increase shall be increased by one for
every additional five hundred (500) feet of frontage or portion
thereof.
(c) A freestanding building must have a minimum footprint of two
thousand (2,000) square feet and be located entirely within the
streetscape zone to count toward the increase in the share of
storefront parking allowed.
(d) A major landscape feature is intended to provide “near-field”
visual interest, soften the visual impact of the parking areas,
and provide an attractive amenity for shoppers and other users
of the site. A major landscape feature must consist of a heavily
landscaped area that is at least sixty (60) feet by sixty (60) feet
in size. A major landscape feature must be suitably landscaped
with flowers, shrubs, ornamental and shade trees (both
evergreen and deciduous) at least 5 inches dbh and
incorporate pedestrian facilities such as benches and sitting
areas, picnic tables, bicycle racks, fountains and sculptures,
and similar amenities. The Planning Board may alter the size of
a major landscape feature or allow for major landscape
features that are outside the streetscape zone if it finds that
the intent of this provision will still be met.
B. Parking shall be broken into small areas using landscaping, buildings,
roads, wall and fences and changes in topography. For parking lot
landscaping requirements see § 175-10B, landscaping.
C. Parking areas on corner lots shall not be placed between the principal
building and frontage(s). If the lot is used only for parking, no parking is
allowed in the setback and all setbacks must be the maximum required
for the zone. Adequate screening of parking is required to maintain a
street edge and to screen parking from roads and sidewalks. Access to a
parking area on a corner lot shall be off the less traveled frontage.
D. Shared parking and driveways are encouraged to limit curb cuts and
maintain architectural continuity. The width of driveways shall be kept
to the minimum requirement.
E. Lot-to-lot and interior connecting roads are encouraged behind
buildings.
F. Site plans shall provide for future connections to adjacent lots.
G. A four-space bike rack is required for all commercial developments.
Bike racks shall be located so as to not interfere with pedestrian or
vehicular circulation.
§ 175-12 TAXICAB LICENSING § 175-13
168:165
§ 175-13. Waiver; conditional agreement; time limits.
§ 175-14. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Waiver. The Planning Board may modify or waive any of the above
application requirements or performance standards when the Planning
Board determines that because of the special circumstances of the site
such application requirements or standards would not be applicable or
would be an unnecessary burden upon the applicant and not adversely
affect the abutting landowners and the general health, safety and
welfare of the town.
B. Conditional agreement. The Planning Board may require the execution
of a conditional agreement with the municipality of the applicant.
C. Conformance with site plan. All construction performed under the
authorization of a building permit or certificate of occupancy issued for
development within the scope of this chapter shall be in conformance
with the approved site plan.
D. No plan shall be approved by the Board as long as the applicant is in
violation of a previously approved site plan within the municipality.
E. Work or construction, or occupancy if no construction is involved, shall
commence within 12 months of the date of final approval by the
Planning Board of a site plan. If work or occupancy is not commenced
within this period, the site plan approval shall be null and void. The
deadline may be extended for one additional six-month period by the
Planning Board upon the written request of the applicant. The written
request for extension must be submitted prior to the date of expiration
of the site plan approval. If the final approval by the Planning Board is
appealed to the courts the deadline may be extended for a reasonable
time as determined by the Planning Board. After the site plan has
expired or an extension request has been denied by the Planning Board,
the applicant may reapply for site plan review at any time without
prejudice. The Planning Board shall approve a request for an extension
unless the Board has become aware of one of the following:
(1) Additional information that indicates that the plan does not meet
the standards of Chapter 225, Zoning, or this chapter.
(2) Failure of the applicant to meet a condition of approval.
(3) An amendment in Chapter 225, Zoning, or this chapter which
prohibits or alters the proposed site plan.
A. Violation and enforcement. The Planning Board, the Selectmen or the
appropriate municipal official, upon finding that any provision of this
chapter or the condition(s) of a permit issued under this chapter is
being violated, is authorized to institute legal proceedings to enjoin
violations of this chapter.
§ 175-13 TOPSHAM CODE § 175-14
168:166
§ 175-15. Notices; appeals; repetitive applications. [Amended
5-15-2013 STM, Art. 10]
§ 175-16. Severability; conflict with other provisions.
§ 175-17. Amendments.
This chapter may be amended by a majority vote of the Town Meeting.
Amendments may be initiated by a majority vote of the Planning Board or
by request of the Board of Selectmen to the Planning Board or on petition
of 10% of the votes cast in the last gubernatorial election in the town. The
Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing on any proposed amendment.
§ 175-18. Statutory reference.
See 30 M.R.S.A. § 1917.20
Chapter 179
SOLID WASTE
B. Fines. A person who violates the provisions of this chapter or the
condition(s) of a permit shall be penalized in accordance with 30
M.R.S.A. § 4966.19 Each day such violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. Such persons shall also be liable for court costs and
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the municipality.
A. All decisions of the Planning Board shall be provided to the applicant,
and any others requesting notification, in writing within seven (7) days
of the Planning Board’s decision. Any aggrieved party may appeal such
decision of the Planning Board within thirty (30) days of the date of the
decision to the Superior Court.
B. An applicant shall not be prevented from reapplying to the Planning
Board for a project that has been denied, so long as the application is
determined to be substantially different from the original application,
by the Planning Board.
A. Validity and separability. Should any section or provisions of this
chapter be declared by any court to be invalid, such decision shall not
invalidate any other section or provision of the chapter.
B. Conflict with other ordinances. Whenever the requirements of this
chapter are inconsistent with the requirements of any other ordinance,
code or statute, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.
19.Editor's Note: 30 M.R.S.A. § 4966 was repealed by Chapter 737 of the Laws of 1987. See
now 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
20.Editor's Note: 30 M.R.S.A. § 1917 was repealed by Chapter 583 of the Laws of 1987. See
now 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001.
§ 175-14 SOLID WASTE § 175-18
179:167

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 179-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide the means of handling all waste
generated within the Town of Topsham, Maine. Consideration is given to the
safety and welfare of the citizens of Topsham and to the goal established by
the State of Maine, namely to recycle a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of
the solid waste as generated.
§ 179-2. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to home rule powers as granted by Article
VIII-A of the Maine Constitution, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 et seq. and 38
M.R.S.A. §§ 1305 and 1310-A.21
§ 179-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated. See the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated (M.R.S.A.) for
applicable State of Maine statutes.
BIOLOGICAL WASTE — See "hazardous waste."
BUSINESS — A commercial enterprise located within the boundaries of
Topsham.
COMMERCIAL HAULER — Anyone in the business of transporting solid
waste(s) and/or recyclables.
COMPOST — A mixture of various decaying organic substances such as
dead leaves, grass clippings, wood chips, etc., used for horticulture.
DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS — Any waste wood, bricks,
masonry, asphalt shingles, sheet rock and other similar material.
DISPOSAL — The discharge, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any
materials into or on the land, water or atmosphere.
EXPLOSIVES — Any agent or substance or combination of substances that
can cause an explosion when burned or compressed.
GARBAGE — Any nonrecyclable organic waste other than sewage,
hazardous waste and medical waste.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — A waste substance or material, in any physical
state, designated as hazardous by the Board under 38 M.R.S.A. § 1319-0.
It does not include waste resulting from normal household or agricultural
activities.
HOT LOADS — Any amount of waste which is on fire or presents a fire
hazard when delivered to the solid waste facility.
21.Editor's Note: 38 M.R.S.A. § 1310-A was reallocated to § 1319-P by Chapter 517 of the
Laws of 1987.
§ 179-1 SOLID WASTE § 179-3
179:169
MEDICAL WASTE — See "hazardous waste."
OWNER — The owner and any lessees and tenants of the owner.
PERSON — Any individual, any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation or organization of any kind whatsoever.
RADIOACTIVE — See "hazardous waste."
RECYCLABLE — Any solid waste material/item that can be separated and
reused, as determined by the Town Manager.
REFUSE — See "solid waste" below.
RESIDENT — Any person who is domiciled within the Town of Topsham.
RUBBISH — See "solid waste" below.
SECURED — With respect to carrying waste in/on vehicles shall mean the
use of sufficient cover to adequately and safely contain the load while being
transported within the Town of Topsham.
SEWAGE — Human or animal excrement and liquid waste and wastewater
containing animal, vegetable or mineral matter in suspension (see
"hazardous waste").
SOLID WASTE — Useless, unwanted or discarded solid material with
insufficient liquid content to be free flowing, including, by way of example
and not by limitation, rubbish, garbage, scrap materials, junk, refuse, inert
fill material and landscape refuse, but shall not include septic tank sludge
or agricultural wastes.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY (SWF) — The land area, structures, facilities and
equipment owned and/or operated by the town, used for storing, recovering,
salvaging, processing, reducing, composting, collecting and disposing of
solid wastes.
TOWN — The Town of Topsham, Sagadahoc County, Maine, United States of
America.
WASTE OIL — Any petroleum-based lubricants not containing fuels and
solvents.
WHITE GOODS — Any appliance, including but not limited to refrigerators,
freezers, washing machines, gas or electric clothes dryers, dishwashers, air
conditioners, fans, gas or electric cooking stoves and wood stoves.
§ 179-4. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Enforcement of this chapter is the responsibility of the Topsham Police
Department and the Board of Selectmen.
B. Any person found in violation of this chapter shall be subject to a civil
penalty in an amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.) for each offense, except that the minimum
penalty for a second offense within a twelve-month period shall not be
less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.). If agreed by all parties,
§ 179-3 TOPSHAM CODE § 179-4
179:170
§ 179-5. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any provisions or parts
thereof shall be held invalid, unconstitutional or inapplicable to any person
or circumstance, such invalidity, unconstitutionality or inapplicability shall
not affect nor impair the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 179-6. When effective.
The effective date of this chapter shall be May 1994.
public service time may be scheduled in lieu of a monetary fine. Any
commercial hauler that is found to be in violation for a second time
within a twelve-month period shall also have his permit revoked by the
Selectmen for a minimum period of (3) three months. All fines collected
under this chapter shall inure to the town.
§ 179-4 SOLID WASTE § 179-6
179:171

ARTICLE II
Solid Waste Facility
§ 179-7. Administration.
A. Responsibility. The Town Manager shall be responsible for the safe and
sanitary operation of the solid waste facility. Appropriate personnel
shall be designated by the Town Manager and shall be responsible for
the day-to-day operation of the solid waste facility. At least one (1) solid
waste facility attendant shall be present during all operating hours, and
no disposal shall occur in the absence of the attendant.
B. Solid waste facility log. The solid waste facility director shall be
responsible for maintaining a solid waste facility day-to-day log.
C. Occurrence reports. The solid waste facility director shall be
responsible for the submission of occurrence reports to the Town
Manager within two (2) working days of any of the following incidents:
(1) Bodily injury at the solid waste facility.
(2) Health problems traced to or suspected of being associated with
the solid waste facility.
(3) Any occurrence of fire at the solid waste facility.
(4) Suspicion of hazardous waste disposal at the solid waste facility.
(5) Any unusual or abnormal occurrences.
D. Permits. The use of the Topsham solid waste facility shall be limited to
the disposal of wastes generated exclusively within the Town of
Topsham and shall be regulated by means of a permit system. All
vehicles transporting solid waste to the solid waste facility shall be
required to display (as directed) a solid waste facility permit. All
permits shall be issued by the designated town office upon reasonable
proof that they are a resident or business of the Town of Topsham.
Commercial and contractor permits shall be issued after payment of all
fees and charges and upon reasonable assurance that the waste to be
deposited shall be collected only from within the town.
E. Fee structure. Fees for the use of the solid waste facility shall be
established by the Board of Selectmen following a public hearing. The
fees established shall be such as to defray the expense to the town for
solid waste facility operation and to encourage recycling.
F. Operating hours. The hours of operation of the solid waste facility shall
be established by the Board of Selectmen following a public hearing. No
solid waste shall be deposited at the solid waste facility except during
normal or special scheduled operating hours. Special provisions for
emergency disposal may be made by the solid waste facility director
with the provision that all disposed waste shall be immediately
§ 179-7 SOLID WASTE § 179-7
179:173
§ 179-8. Separation and disposal.
protected. Any single load volume exceeding to cubic yards may require
special scheduling by the solid waste facility director.
G. Fire protection. All hot loads shall be deposited in an area as designated
by the solid waste facility director. All vehicles normally utilized at the
solid waste facility shall be equipped with an adequate fire extinguisher.
H. Security. The access road to the solid waste facility will be controlled
with a lockable gate. This gate shall be locked except for scheduled or
special scheduled operating hours.
I. Scavenging. No person shall, except by permission of the solid waste
facility director, remove any materials which have been accepted at the
solid waste facility.
J. Unauthorized taking of solid waste or recycling items. No person shall
take any solid waste or recyclable item placed by any resident or
business for pickup and removal by the commercial hauler of said
resident or business without the permission of said resident or
business. Any violation shall be subject to fine under § 179-12 of this
chapter. [Added 5-16-2001 STM, Art. 39]
A. Responsibility. It is the responsibility of each resident or business to
provide safe and adequate disposal of all solid waste generated on his/
their premises in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
This responsibility includes safe and adequate on-premises storage
prior to delivery to a permitted commercial hauler or to the Topsham
solid waste facility. All materials accepted at the Topsham solid waste
facility become sole property of the Town of Topsham.
B. Separation. The Town Manager shall develop and make known through
published guidelines and posted notices those rules affecting
separation and recycling of solid waste acceptable at the Topsham solid
waste facility. Unacceptable or prohibited wastes shall not be accepted
at the Topsham solid waste facility as follows:
(1) Non-Topsham waste.
(2) Junk vehicles.
(3) Dead animals.
(4) Sewage (see Article III of this chapter).
(5) Hazardous wastes (see Article IV of this chapter).
(6) Commercial agricultural waste, including crops and crop residue,
animals, animal waste and animal residue, brush and stumps.
(7) Any other items as identified by the Selectmen.
C. Delivery.
§ 179-7 TOPSHAM CODE § 179-8
179:174
(1) All delivery of waste to the solid waste facility shall be in a manner
that will prevent the littering of public ways or private property. All
loads shall be enclosed or secured to prevent spillage.
(2) Permitted commercial haulers are responsible for ensuring that all
solid waste that they deliver to the solid waste facility is drained of
liquid, properly separated and meets all the requirements of this
chapter.
D. Placement. The placement of solid waste at the solid waste facility shall
be as indicated by the solid waste facility director. NOTE: All hot loads
shall be placed in a specially prepared area and shall be extinguished
immediately upon arrival by the transporter (at the expense of the
transporter) and shall then be disposed of as indicated by the solid
waste facility director when all danger of fire has ceased.
§ 179-8 SOLID WASTE § 179-8
179:175

ARTICLE III
Sewage
§ 179-9. Disposal.
Except as provided in 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 1320 and 1321,22 sewage may not
be discharged on the surface of any land within the Town of Topsham. It
may not be discharged into any classified or unclassified waters within the
Town of Topsham. Sludge from a municipal sewage treatment plant must
be disposed of in accordance with Maine Guidelines for Municipal Sewage
Treatment Plant Sludge Disposal on the Land, dated November 1975 and
published by the Life Sciences and Agriculture Experiment Station, the
Cooperative Extension Conservation Commission, copies of which are on
file in the office of the Town Manager.
§ 179-10. Transportation.
A person shall not transport sewage in any vehicle unless it is spillproof
and leakproof. Sewage being transported in any vehicle must be emptied at
the place and in a manner approved by the Trustees of the Topsham Sewer
District, unless disposed at an acceptable site outside the boundaries of the
Town of Topsham.
22.Editor's Note: 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 1320 and 1321 were repealed by Chapter 383 of the Laws of
1979. See now 38 M.R.S.A. § 1301 et seq.
§ 179-9 SOLID WASTE § 179-10
179:177

ARTICLE IV
Hazardous Waste
§ 179-11. Disposal.
Disposal of hazardous waste within the Town of Topsham is prohibited.
§ 179-11 SOLID WASTE § 179-11
179:179

ARTICLE V
Littering
§ 179-12. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The provisions of 17 M.R.S.A. §§ 2261 et seq. as amended are included in
this chapter as if fully set forth herein, and any violation of this Article may
be enforced as any other provision of this chapter, and any fines or penalties
shall inure to the benefit of the town.
§ 179-12 SOLID WASTE § 179-12
179:181
Chapter 184
RIGHT-OF-WAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 185.
§ 184-1. General requirements.
A. Intent and purpose. The purpose of this chapter is the regulation of the
use of public right-of-ways in the interest of public safety and
convenience, and the operation and protection of public works
infrastructure. Excavation and restoration standards are required to
preserve the integrity, operational safety, and function of the public
right-of-way.
B. Administration. The Director of Public Works is the principal Town
official responsible for the administration of the Right-of-Ways Code,
right-of-way permits, and the right-of-ways related thereto. The Town of
Topsham shall establish codes governing street excavations and
implementing this chapter. The Director may delegate any or all of the
duties hereunder.
C. Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this
chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
DIG SAFE — The Underground Protection of Facilities Act, commonly
known as the "Dig Safe Law," found at 23 MRSA § 3360-A. Any
excavation undertaken or authorized by this chapter shall comply with
all requirements of this law. In the State of Maine a one-call system has
been established for obtaining locations of underground facilities prior
to excavation. The utilities required to join the one-call dig safe system
include those who furnish electricity, gas, oil, cable TV, telephone, or
telegraph services by underground lines. Utilities not required to join
are water districts, sewer districts, municipal underground facilities,
and utilities having fewer than five (5) full-time employees or fewer
than three hundred (300) customers. The excavator is solely
responsible to notify all possible utilities with underground facilities at
least three (3) full business days prior to the start of any excavation,
trenching, or boring work.
DIRECTOR — Public Works Director and/or designee as assigned by
issuing authority.
EMERGENCY — Any event which may threaten public health or safety,
including, but not limited to, damaged or leaking water or gas conduit
systems, damaged, plugged, or leaking sewer or storm drain conduit
systems, damaged underground electrical and communications
facilities, or downed overhead pole structures.
§ 179-12 TOPSHAM CODE § 184-1
184:182
EXCAVATE — To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
FACILITY or FACILITIES — Any tangible asset in the right-of-way
required to provide utility service.
NEWLY CONSTRUCTED, RECONSTRUCTED OR REHABILITATED
STREETS — Any street that has been newly constructed, reconstructed
or rehabilitated within the past five (5) years.
PERMITTEE — A person who has obtained a permit as required by this
chapter.
PERSON — Any natural or corporate person, business association or
other business entity, including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any
kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any of the foregoing, or any other
legal entity.
POLE PLACEMENT — An excavation associated solely with a single
placement or replacement of a utility pole.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, park,
square, plaza, or any other similar public property owned or controlled
by the Town and dedicated to public use, and any dedicated but
unaccepted street or way.
REHABILITATION — That activity of work on any street which provides
structural improvement having a minimum service life of fifteen (15)
years with minor maintenance, which includes pavement overlay of one
and one-half (1 1/2) inches minimum depth, and partial or full depth
reconstruction.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area on, below, or above a public roadway,
highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane and public sidewalk in which the
Town has an interest, including other dedicated right-of-ways for travel
purposes and utility easements of the Town. A right-of-way does not
include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or
other nonwire telecommunications or broadcast service.
TOPSHAM CODE — The Town of Topsham shall establish rules and
regulations governing street excavations and implementing this rightof-
way. The Director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.
SUBSTRUCTURE — Any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, manhole, vault,
buried cable, or wire, utility system appurtenance, or any other similar
structures located below the surface of any public place.
TOWN — The Town of Topsham and/or its Public Works Authority.
UTILITY — A public utility, as defined in 35-A MRSA § 102, as it may
be hereinafter amended and shall specifically include the nonregulated
activities of such a utility.
D. Protective measures and routing of traffic.
§ 184-1 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 184-1
184:183
(1) Safe crossings. The permittee shall in general maintain safe
crossings for two (2) lanes of vehicle traffic where possible and safe
crossings for pedestrians at intervals of not more than two hundred
(200) feet. If any excavation is made across any public street, alley
or sidewalk, adequate crossings shall be maintained for vehicles
and for pedestrians. If the street is not side enough to hold the
excavated material without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, a
passageway at least forty-eight inches (48”) in width shall be
maintained along such sidewalk line.
(2) Barriers and warning devices. It shall be the duty of every
permittee cutting or making an excavation in or upon any public
place, to place and maintain barriers and warning devices
necessary for safety of the general public. Traffic control near all
excavations affecting vehicular, pedestrian and other traffic shall
be subject to final review and approval of the Director or the Police
Chief. Barriers, warning signs, lights, etc., shall conform to the
latest edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD).
(3) Normalization of traffic conditions. The permittee shall take action
appropriate to assure that during the performance of the
excavation work, traffic conditions as near normal as possible shall
be maintained at all times so as to minimize inconvenience to the
occupants of the adjoining property/properties and to the general
public.
(4) Closing of streets. When traffic conditions permit, the Public Works
Director or the Police Chief of the Town may, by written approval
(or by verbal approval in the case of emergency), permit the closing
of streets and alleys to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by
him or her, if in his or her opinion it is necessary. The written
approval of the Director may require that the permittee give
notification to various public agencies and to the general public. In
such cases, such written approval shall not be valid until such
notice is given. In case of emergency work during nonbusiness
hours, the utility company having such emergency shall contact the
Town Dispatch Center at 725-4337 before closing a street to traffic.
(5) Warning signs to channel traffic. Warning signs shall be placed in
accordance with the applicable section of the most current edition
of the MUTCD in advance of the construction operation to alert
traffic within a public street, and cones or other approved devices
shall be placed to safely channel traffic, in accordance with the
instructions of the Director, after his or her review of the proposed
traffic control measures for the project.
(6) Flaggers. Any work being done in Town right-of-ways that involves
disruption of traffic shall have flaggers to direct the flow of traffic
unless deemed unnecessary by the Director or the Police Chief. The
Town reserves the right to have the Director or the Police Chief
§ 184-1 TOPSHAM CODE § 184-1
184:184
require that the police perform the flagging of traffic in areas of
need on main routes in Town. The cost of said flagging is borne
by the contractor or utility performing the work. [Amended
12-18-2003 STM, Art. 3]
E. Relocation and protection of utilities.
(1) The permittee shall not interfere with any existing facility without
the written consent of the Town and the owner of the facility. If it
becomes necessary to relocate an existing facility, this shall be
done by its owner. No facility owned by the Town shall be moved to
accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work is borne
by the permittee with approval from the Director. The cost of
moving privately owned facilities shall be similarly borne by the
permittee unless the permittee makes other arrangements with the
owner of the facility. The permittee shall support and protect by
timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other
apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation work
and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them
under, over, along or across the work. The permittee shall secure
approval of method of support and protection from the owner of the
facility. In case any of the pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus
should be damaged, and for this purpose pipe coating or other
encasement or devices are to be considered as part of a
substructure, the permittee shall promptly notify the owner
thereof. All damaged facilities shall be repaired by the agency or
person owning them and the expense of such repairs shall be
charged to the permittee. It is the intent of this section that the
permittee shall assume all liability for damage to facilities and any
resulting damage or injury to anyone because of such facility
damage, and such assumption of liability is a contractual obligation
of the permittee. The only exception will be such instances where
damage is exclusively due to the negligence of the owning utility.
The Town shall not be made a party to any action because of this
section. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and
location of all underground facilities and protect the same against
damage.
(2) All utility relocations shall be in accordance with the Maine
Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation Policy. Any
field changes made to a relocated utility shall have authorization
from the Public Works Director to complete work. The Director may
take up to three (3) working days to approve such field changes.
The surrounding utilities have two (2) working days following a
decision by the Public Works Director to file an appeal to the Town
Manager for review.
(3) The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to
interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes,
water gates, underground vaults, valve housing structures, traffic
§ 184-1 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 184-1
184:185
signal cables and loops and all other vital equipment as designated
by the Town and/or Dig Safe.
F. Abandonment of structure.
(1) Whenever the use of a substructure is abandoned or becomes an
unusable facility, except the abandonment of service lines designed
to serve single properties, the person or utility owning, using,
controlling, or having an interest therein shall, within thirty (30)
days after such abandonment, file with the Town a statement in
writing giving in detail the location of the substructure so
abandoned. If such abandoned substructure is in the way, or
subsequently becomes in the way, of an installation of the Town or
any other public body, the owner of such substructure, after having
been contacted by the excavator, shall establish if the substructure
is abandoned and make the first cut or tap before allowing the
substructure to be removed by the excavator.
(2) When gas or other flammable service to buildings is discontinued,
the existing service line for such service shall be terminated at a
point outside the building.
G. Protection of public property.
(1) The permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or
shrubs which exist in a public place without first obtaining the
consent of the appropriate Town department or Town official
having control of such property.
(2) Any monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the
lines of any street or property subdivision or a precise survey
reference point, or a permanent survey benchmark within the
Town, shall not be removed or disturbed or caused to be removed
or disturbed without first obtaining permission in writing from the
Town to do so. Permission to remove or disturb such monuments,
reference points or benchmarks shall be granted only when no
alternate route for the proposed substructure or conduit is
available. If the Town is satisfied that no alternate route is
available, permission shall be granted only upon condition, by an
agreement in writing, that the person or utility applying for such
permission shall pay all expenses incident to the proper
replacement of this monument by the Town.
(3) No person or utility shall remove, damage, haul away or cause
misalignment of any curbing, including radius curb and catch
basin, stones for any reason whatsoever without first receiving
written permission from the Town.
(4) No person or utility shall remove, damage, haul away, or otherwise
disturb any manhole and/or catch basin castings, frames, and/or
covers owned by the Town without first receiving written
permission from the Town. Any manhole and/or catch basin
§ 184-1 TOPSHAM CODE § 184-1
184:186
castings, frames and/or covers missing, damaged, or disturbed
shall be repaired and/or replaced by the Town, and the cost will be
charged to the permittee.
H. Prompt completion of work.
(1) After an excavation is commenced, the permittee shall carry out
with diligence and expedition all excavation work covered by the
permit and shall promptly complete such work and restore the
street or sidewalk as specified in this right-of-way and the Topsham
Codes enacted by the Town of Topsham Authority. The permittee
shall perform such restoration work so as not to obstruct, impede
or create a safety hazard to public travel.
(2) All excavations shall be covered or backfilled at the end of each
workday. "Covered" shall mean steel plated over the entire trench
plus two (2) feet around the edges. The steel shall be of strength to
hold pedestrian vehicular traffic. Barriers approved by the Director
must be installed if the excavation is to be plated. All road trenches
must be temporarily paved within twenty-four (24) hours of
backfilling. All driveway crossings must be paved within forty-eight
(48) hours of opening.
I. Urgent work. When traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the
traveling public or the public interest require that the excavation work
be performed as emergency work, the Town shall have the full power to
order, at the time the permit is granted, that a crew and adequate
facilities be employed by the permittee beyond normal working hours,
including up to twenty-four (24) hours a day, to the end that such
excavation work may be completed as soon as possible.
J. Emergency action. Nothing in this Right-of-Way Code shall be
construed to prevent the making of such excavations as may be
necessary for the preservation of life or property or for the location of
trouble in a conduit or pipe which may be a threat to life or property, or
for making emergency repairs, provided that the person making such
excavation shall apply to the Town for such a permit on the first working
day after such work is commenced. Before any excavation work is
started, the person or utility excavating must contact all utilities for onthe-
spot locations.
K. Noise, dust and debris. Each permittee shall conduct and carry out
excavation work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience
and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring
property. To the fullest extent practicable, the permittee shall act to
reduce noise, dust, and unsightly debris in the performance of the
excavation work. Excavation work, including the use of any tool,
appliance, or equipment, shall be performed between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. only, exclusive of emergency work. Time waiver
requests may be submitted to the Public Works Authority for work
outside of this time period and will be subject to neighborhood
§ 184-1 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 184-1
184:187
concerns. Excavation work shall not occur on Sundays, holidays or
on major holiday weekends, unless expressly authorized by the Public
Works Authority or as a result of emergency need.
L. Obstructions in the right-of-way. No person shall place monuments,
boundary stones, trees, lampposts, debris, basketball goals and other
things within the limits of the public ways of the Town so as to
constitute an obstruction as determined by the Public Works Director.
The Board of Selectmen shall have the authority to order the removal of
any such object. The Board of Selectmen may authorize, through the
petition process, the placing of objects deemed necessary by utility
companies within the limits of public ways in the Town. (Refer to
§ 184-2A.)
M. Excavations during winter.
(1) No person or utility shall be granted a street opening permit or
open any street or sidewalk from the time of November 15 of each
year to April 15 of the following year unless an emergency or
special condition exists and permission is obtained in writing from
the Town.
(2) Any person or utility wishing to obtain a street opening permit
between these aforementioned dates shall first explain fully in
writing the emergency situation or special condition existing to the
Public Works Director before a permit may be granted. If an
emergency condition which could endanger life or property exists,
excavation work shall not be delayed by this section; however, a
written explanation shall be delivered to the Town as soon as
possible and a street opening permit obtained for the opening
made.
(3) For the purpose of this section, an emergency shall be defined as
one of the following: damaged or leaking water or gas conduit
systems, damaged, plugged or leaking sewer or storm drain
conduit systems, damaged underground electrical and
communications facilities, or downed overhead pole structures; all
remaining excavations will be considered nonemergency situations
and may only be authorized upon written documentation of special
circumstances.
N. Restoration of streets and sidewalks. All street and sidewalk
restorations, including temporary and permanent work within any
street shall be performed by and at the permittee's sole expense and in
accordance with the Town's Code of Right-of-Ways and according to the
Town Code promulgated by said authority pursuant to § 184-1B of this
chapter. All repairs and restoration work shall be completed by the
permittee in a manner and to the extent deemed acceptable to the
Director.
O. Warranty of work. The permittee shall, for a period of two (2) years
thereafter, be fully liable for all defects in materials and workmanship
§ 184-1 TOPSHAM CODE § 184-1
184:188
relating to such replacement or realignment and shall promptly repair
or replace the same upon notice of the Public Works Authority and to
the satisfaction thereof.
(1) Pavement repairs guaranteed by each permittee shall meet all of
the following conditions in order to remain in conformance with
this right-of-way.
(a) The entire area shall be free from delamination of the approved
surface material.
(b) No distortion of one-half (1/2”) inch or greater shall exist over
more than five percent (5%) of the total surface area of the
repair.
(c) No cracks of one-quarter (1/4”) inch or greater shall exist in
the surface or edges of the repair totaling more than five
percent (5%) of the repair perimeter.
(d) The hot-mixed asphalt within the trench shall not be
completely flushed and bleeding.
(e) Pavement of roadway or street width is divided into four (4)
quarter points. Pavement restoration will be based on these
points. Excavations that disturb or produce voids under or pass
over the first quarter point will require removal of pavement
over that void. Therefore, restoration will be required to the
next quarter point At any time the excavated area moves into
the third quarter point an entire width of roadway shall be
repaved.
(f) There shall never be a paved patch less than ten (10) linear
feet in length. If there is a patch within ten (10) linear feet of
said excavation, pavement between areas shall be removed
and paved as one unit.
(g) All areas of pavement restoration that abut other paved areas
shall have a shelf joint of not less than one (1) foot in width. All
joints shall be tacked for bond.
(h) Pavement thickness will be determined by the Public Works
Director.
(i) Any sidewalk excavation will be restored with pavement of the
entire width of sidewalk for a minimum of ten (10) linear feet in
length.
(2) Nonconformance with any of the above conditions shall constitute a
breach of guarantee and subject the permittee to remedial actions
as provided in the Town Code.
(3) Severe [over one (1”) inch ] distortion conditions shall be
considered tort liability and street defect conditions and shall
§ 184-1 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 184-1
184:189
necessitate that full repairs be completed within twenty-four (24)
hours of notification by the Town.
P. Liability of Town insurance.
(1) This right-of-way shall not be construed as imposing upon the Town
or any official or employee any liability or responsibility for
damages to any person injured by the performance of an excavation
work for which a permit is required under this Right-of-Way Code,
nor shall the Town or any official or employee thereof be deemed to
have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of
inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit, or
the approval of any excavation work. In the case of a dedicated but
unaccepted street or way, this Right-of-Way Code shall not be
construed as authorizing any action which is inconsistent with any
private rights in said street or way, nor shall the issuance of any
permit hereunder be construed as an acceptance of said street or
way by the Town for highway or any other purposes.
(2) For purposes of this section, every excavator shall maintain at all
times comprehensive general liability and property damage
insurance coverage in a suitable amount, not less than $1,000,000
protecting herself/himself, her/his agents and the Town from all
such claims for damages or injuries and naming the Town as an
additional insured. All such insurance shall include, without being
limited to, endorsements for completed operations and special
hazards/underground collapse, and shall be primary to any
insurance or self-insurance of the town. Evidence of such coverage
shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of any license
hereunder and shall be submitted in a form satisfactory to the
Public Works Authority.
Q. Maintenance of excavation areas.
(1) If any part of any excavation, including the excavation, back filling
and repairs fails to conform with the standards of this chapter and
the Town Codes, the Town shall notify the permittee and require
the appropriate corrective actions to be undertaken. The permittee
shall take corrective action within twenty-four (24) hours after the
issuance of notice if the failure could trigger tort liability or liability
for a street defect, as defined in 23 MRSA § 3651, et seq. In all
other instances, the permittee shall have a reasonable time as
provided in § 184-1U to undertake corrective action.
(2) If the permittee fails to respond within the required time period,
the Town shall cause the necessary repairs to be accomplished, and
shall keep an account of the expense thereof, and in such case the
permittee shall be billed an amount equal to one hundred fifty (150)
percent of the whole of the expense incurred by the Town. Bills
rendered in accordance with this section shall be due and payable
by the permittee immediately upon receipt. The Town shall issue no
§ 184-1 TOPSHAM CODE § 184-1
184:190
further or new permits to the permittee until full payment of the
billed costs have been received.
(3) If for any reason, the Town has to perform repair work to an
excavation after the permittee's guarantee period has started, that
guarantee period shall start over again upon completion of the
repairs.
R. Inspections.
(1) The Town shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary
in the enforcement of this Town Code.
(2) The Public Works Authority may order such actions, as it deems
necessary to ensure that this right-of-way and the Town Code
implementing it are not violated.
(3) In the event that any dispute exists as to the amount, nature, or
scope of the work required under this Right-of-Way Code or the
Town Code, the decision and judgment of the responsible Town
official will be final and binding unless appealed to or stayed by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
S. Testing requirements. The Town may order a test on any subsequent
restoration of a street excavation in order to determine if the work has
been or is being completed in accordance with Town specifications and
regulations. The permittee shall pay the cost of the testing and all
required subsequent tests to verify the proper restoration in
accordance with this Right-of-Way Code and the Town Code.
T. Maintenance of drawings. Every person or utility owning, using,
controlling or having an interest in substructures under the surface of
the public way or public property, used for the purpose of supplying or
conveying gas, electricity, communications, water, steam, ammonia or
oil in the Town, shall file with the Town a map or set of maps, each
drawn to a scale of not less than one (1”) inch to fifty (50') feet, showing
in detail the plan, location, size and kind of installation, if known, of all
new or renewed substructures. These maps shall be provided to the
Town no later than sixty (60) days after the completion date of
construction in paper and in digital file form acceptable to the Public
Works Authority.
U. Fees and charges.
(1) Each street opening permit may be assessed one (1) fee; one (1)
twenty-dollar fee per excavation.
(2) All fees shall be enacted by order of the Town Selectmen.
(3) Upon permit application, a fee shall be paid to the Tax Collector
unless waived by the Public Works Authority as provided below. No
permit shall be issued without appropriate payment of fees. Utility
§ 184-1 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 184-1
184:191
applicants in good standing shall be granted the option of being
invoiced by the Town for these fees.
(4) Waiver of fees:
(a) The Director may waive all permit fees in streets or sidewalk/
driveway areas to contractors under contract to the Town or
MDOT.
(b) To promote the use of tunneling, jacking, and boring
technologies, permanent restoration and moratorium/
remaining life fees will not be assessed to any excavation area
achieved by these technologies, which does not result in
pavement damage.
(c) The Town Manager may authorize special waivers of permit
fees if special conditions exist which can be supported by the
Director in writing.
V. Violations.
(1) Any person or utility failing to comply with or violating any
provision of this Right-of-Way Code or the rules shall be served by
the Public Works Authority or the Police Department with written
notice stating the nature of the failure or violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the necessary corrective actions. Such
person or utility shall, within the period of time stated in such
notice, permanently cease or correct all failures or violations.
(2) In order to ensure public safety, the Public Works Authority shall
have the right to verbally notify and with written notification
require immediate corrective actions of any person or utility whose
failure to comply with this Right-of-Way Code or the rules could
cause a safety hazard.
(3) Any person or utility who shall continue any failure or violation
beyond the time limit required for compliance or received notice of
failure or violation given pursuant to this Code or the rules shall be
guilty of a violation of this Right-of-Way Code.
(4) Any person or utility violating any of the provisions of this Code or
the rules shall be liable to the Town for any expense, loss, or
damage occasioned by the Town by reason of such violation. The
Town, by action of the Board of Selectmen, may seek injunctive
relief for the purposes of enforcing this Town Code without
exhausting the administrative remedies set forth in this Code.
(5) Fines.
(a) Any violation of this Code which is also a violation of 35-A
MRSA § 2509 or 2511 or a violation of 23 MRSA § 3353 or 3355
shall subject the permittee or party to a fine as provided in said
statutes, as said statutes may be amended from time to time.
§ 184-1 TOPSHAM CODE § 184-1
184:192
(b) Any violation of this Code other than the violations of state law
prescribed in the preceding subsection shall subject the
permittee or party to a $50 fine per day for each day that a
violation continues.
(6) Any permittee or party who continues to violate any section of this
Code or the rules and fails to correct violations in a timely manner
shall receive no further permits and will be invoiced for permanent
repairs until such time as the Town is satisfied that the permittee or
party shall have corrected all violations in compliance with the
terms of this Town Code.
(7) The Town reserves the right to notify a permittee's insurance and/
or bond carrier of repeated violations.
(8) All roadway trenches must be temporarily paved within twenty-four
(24) hours of back filling and driveway trenches within forty-eight
(48) hours. All trenches not paved within this period of time will be
in violation of this Town Code.
W. Failure to obtain a permit. Any person or utility found to be conducting
any excavation activity within the public right-of-way without having
first obtained the required permit(s) shall immediately cease all activity
(exclusive of actions required to stabilize the area) and be required to
obtain a permit before work may be restarted. A surcharge of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.) shall be required in addition to all
applicable permit fees.
X. Appeals process.
(1) Whenever a person is aggrieved by an order made by the Public
Works Authority, the person may file an appeal to the Town
Manager within ten (10) days of the date of the order, and the
person shall be afforded a hearing on the matter before the Town
Manager or a designee, and unless by their authority the order is
revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith
complied with by the person.
(2) In cases of applicability or interpretation of the Town Code by the
Public Works Authority, the Town Manager may confirm, amend or
revoke such order made by the Public Works Authority.
(3) In cases where compliance with such order made by the Public
Works Authority would cause undue hardship, the Town Manager
may extend the time limit of such order, or may grant exceptions to,
or waive requirements of, or grant a variance from the specific
provisions of the Code, subject always to the Code that the Town
Manager shall give due consideration to the purposes of the Code
in preserving public safety and convenience, integrity of public
infrastructure, and the operational safety and function of the public
right-of-way.
§ 184-1 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 184-1
184:193
§ 184-2. Utility location permit.
Preparation of application for a utility location permit.
(4) If an appeal to the Town Manager does not resolve the issue, any
person aggrieved may appeal the decision to the Superior Court, as
provided by the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPLICATION — A written statement, requesting a location permit
from the licensing authority, describing the work proposed by the
applicant.
GENERAL LOCATION (OR PERMIT AREA) — That portion of the
highway to be occupied or crossed by the proposed installation.
SPECIFIC LOCATION PLAN — A plan or sketch showing the location
within the highway or the principal units of the proposed installation.
B. Application.
(1) The application is designed for publication without plans. The
statement in the application must provide:
(a) Description of the general location.
(b) Description of the proposed installation.
(c) Minimum depth below ground or height above ground.
(2) Four copies of each application shall be submitted to the Public
Works Director, 45 Village Drive, Topsham, Maine 04086.
(3) Any number of general locations and proposed installations may be
included in one application. However, each general location and the
applicable proposed installation shall be stated separately.
C. Plans. Unless otherwise noted, general location maps (provided by the
utility section), four (4) copies showing each or all general locations and
specific location plans, four (4) copies for each specific location, shall be
submitted with the application. An as-built survey of the utility post
construction to a scale of 40' = 1” on a 24” x 36” vellum must be
provided. A digitized electronic drawing file copy, in an approved
format, on a 3 1/2” floppy disk or CD will be required for larger projects
as determined by the Town.
D. General location.
(1) The purpose of the general location (or permit area) description is
to fix the location along the highway, to identify the highway system
and to determine the licensing authority. The location shall be
established by reference to a Town line, readily identified
§ 184-1 TOPSHAM CODE § 184-2
184:194
intersection, major stream crossing, railroad crossing, or bridge
number.
(2) A general location map is required and shall be tied to the highway
system. The map may be a photocopy of a portion of an accurate
area map or sketch traced from such a map.
E. Proposed installation.
(1) Describe the immediate proposed installation and the ultimate
reasonable replacement or addition, which may be anticipated
without seeking a new permit. Indicate the size, type and purpose
of pipes, poles, voltage and phase of electrical line, number of
cables or strands, etc. Mention hydrants, services, protective and
supporting equipment and associated appurtenances or any other
proposed utility not listed above.
(2) In urban or congested areas, the proposed installation should be in
compliance with the existing Municipal Construction Standards. If
not, the application should be accompanied by a statement
indicating reasons for noncompliance.
F. Specific location plan.
(1) The specific location plan or sketch shall show the location of the
principal units of the installation. Longitudinal distances between
control points, bends, manholes, poles, etc. shall be given. Offset
distances from the highway center line, edge of pavement, curb or
other well-defined applicable reference shall be given. Offsets shall
be to the center line of underground installations. Offsets shall be
in feet and inches to the near side of poles, hydrants, etc., which
are less than ten (10) feet from the face of curb or outer edge of
shoulder. The safety minimum offset for the location is acceptable
for all poles, which will be at, or beyond that offset. Edge of
traveled way or assumed right-of-way lines, and other pertinent
highway features shall be indicated.
(2) A separate specific location plan shall be submitted for each
proposed installation. No more than two (2) highways should be
shown on one (1) sheet.
G. Supporting data. The application should contain or be accompanied by
a statement indicating:
(1) That a copy of the application has been given to the municipal
officers.
(2) The newspaper in which the application will be published.
(3) Any proposed joint use or ownership of the facility.
(4) Any existing facility or permit of the applicant at this location.
§ 184-2 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 184-2
184:195
(5) Any existing facility of others with which the proposed installations
may conflict.
(6) Person available to review proposed locations at the site; name,
address, telephone number.
(7) An as-built survey of the utility post construction to a scale of 40' =
1” on a 24” x 36” vellum must be provided. A digitized electronic
drawing file copy on a 3 1/2-inch floppy disk or CD will be required
for larger projects as determined by the Town. The Director shall
approve the format of the digitized file drawing.
H. Publication. Per MSRA Title 35A, Chapter 25, § 2503, the applicant
shall give public notice by publishing the text of the application once in
a newspaper circulated in the municipality or municipalities
encompassing the limits of the proposed location. The publication shall
include a statement equivalent to the following: "Any person, firm, or
corporation claiming to be adversely affected by this proposed location
shall file a written objection with the Town stating the cause of said
objection within fourteen (14) days after the publication of this notice."
Evidence of publication shall be submitted to the Town before a permit
can be issued.
I. Bridges. If the installation is to be made on or close to a bridge, the
application must be accompanied by plans showing the location,
method of construction, clearances and other data pertinent to the
safety and use of the bridge. For detailed requirements and more
information of installations adjacent and/or attachments to bridges,
please contact Bridge Maintenance, Maine Department of
Transportation, in the Augusta office.
J. Highway construction.
(1) In order that an adequate permit may be issued for the location of a
utility plant relocated because of highway construction or retained
within the limits of highway construction, the utility shall submit a
statement in substantially the same form and substance as an
application for a location permit with these exceptions or additions.
(a) Reference shall be made to the highway construction project.
(b) The specific location plan shall show highway stations, except
for a project for which highway construction plans are not
available.
(c) If highway construction is a federal aid project, the specific
location plan shall show the normal edge of pavement, the curb
or outside edge of shoulder, right-of-way line and other
pertinent highway features.
§ 184-2 TOPSHAM CODE § 184-2
184:196
(2) If highway construction is in an urban or congested area, the
Municipal Construction Standards shall be followed with
exceptions only if an undue hardship may be created.
K. Application. The application shall be of sufficient detail to permit review
without the need of a site visit.
L. Permits. As far as practicable, the utility's description and specific
location plan will be made a part of the permit.
M. Highway construction.
(1) Title 35A MSRA § 2503 right-of-way Subsection 8 requires the
licensing authority to issue location permit for facilities relocated
because of highway construction.
(2) Highway construction changes the relationship between existing
utility plant and the new highway without any utility relocation. The
licensing authority should issue a location permit to confirm that
any utility plant which has not been relocated does not impair the
highway improvement or interfere with the free and safe flow of
traffic.
(3) When right-of-way is taken from a utility for highway right-of-way
and the utility must, or chooses to, leave its plant in the public way,
the licensing authority should issue a location permit as evidence of
the legality of the location.
(4) Federal regulations require the equivalent of the above wherever
utility plant is to be retained, relocated or constructed within the
limits of federal aid highway project.
N. Work not requiring a permit.
(1) A new location permit is not requited for:
(a) Replacements, repairs or reconstruction in place. (NOTE: If
the existing installation appears to impair the highway
improvement or to interfere with the free and safe flow of
traffic, and if anything more than a minor replacement or
reconstruction is planned the utility should move its plant to a
location which is in compliance with the current standards.)
(b) Additions provided for in the original permit.
(c) Improvements provided for in the original permit.
(d) Services.
(e) Hydrants, transformers, street lights, valves, switches, etc. and
associated equipment.
(2) The applicant is advised to read the law for conditions under which
a location permit is not required.
§ 184-2 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 184-2
184:197
§ 184-3. Street opening permit.
O. Advance installation.
(1) A conditional location permit for utilities may be issued to allow a
utility to be placed in advance of this permit process, but the
applicant does so at his/her own risk. (NOTE: However, if the
existing installation appears to impair the highway improvement or
to interfere with the free and safe flow of traffic and if anything
more than a minor replacement or reconstruction is planned the
utility should move its plant to a location which is in compliance
with the current standards.) Any conditions, changes, relocations
resulting from the formal permit being issued will be the sole
responsibility of the applicant for compliance. The conditional
permit shall be issued in written letter form on a case-by-case
basis. No formal application is attached.
(2) The Town objects to each application for a utility location permit
pending review by a representative of the Town. Issuance of the
permit shall be evidence that the objection has been withdrawn.
A. Required. No person or utility shall make any excavation, modify, or fill
any excavation excluding previously permitted locations in any public
place without first obtaining a permit to do so from the Town except as
otherwise provided in this chapter. Any excavation within the Town's
streets, sidewalks, esplanades or other public right-of-way shall only be
permitted in accordance with this Code or with this chapter. The
granting of such a permit shall cover all required activities to conform
to this Right-of-Way Code and the Town Code.
B. Application.
(1) No street opening permit shall be issued unless a written
application on a form provided by the Town for the issuance of an
street opening permit is submitted to the Town. The written
application shall contain such information as reasonably required
by the Public Works authority and identified in the Town Code. The
permit shall expire thirty (30) days from the date of issuance.
(2) In order to obtain a permit, the applicant must be current on all of
its financial obligations to the Town.
C. General conditions. Permits shall be granted only if the applicant has
properly notified all utilities, contacted Dig Safe and obtained an
authorization number to proceed. Any conflicts with utilities shall be
the sole responsibility of the applicant and shall be resolved to the
utilities' satisfaction.
D. Annual work program to be submitted by utilities. Each year on or
before March 31, each utility shall submit to the Public Works Authority
its planned work program for the ensuing year, which shall not include
emergencies defined in § 184-1C and normal house service lines.
§ 184-2 TOPSHAM CODE § 184-3
184:198
§ 184-4. Driveway/entrance permit.
Thereafter, the Town shall have the right to deny permit applications for
excavations not contained within each utility's respective planned work
program, except for emergencies and house service lines.
E. Public Works planned work program. Each year on or before March 31,
the Public Works Department shall post in the Town office its planned
work program for the ensuing year and shall take reasonable steps to
notify any utility or property owner affected by the planned work
program. Failure to give such notice shall not impair the right of the
Public Work Department to carry out its work program or amendments
to the work program.
F. Duration. Excavation work must be started no later than thirty (30)
days from the date of issue of the street opening permit. After the
expiration of this thirty (30)-day period, such permit shall become null
and void unless renewed by the Director. Permits can be extended up to
a maximum of one year at the discretion of the Director.
G. Fees and charges. Fees and charges shall be adopted by the Town
Selectmen.
H. Bonds. Bonds or deposits may be required of all applicants other than
utilities in good standing under the Town municipal standards or in
accordance with the Town Code in order to guarantee their
performance. Bonds shall be posted for a minimum of two (2) years and
shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.). The required
bond value shall be equivalent to the estimated cost of the number of
excavations performed in the previous season, or twenty-five thousand
dollars ($25,000.) whichever is less. Instead of a bond, an applicant may
substitute a deposit equal to the anticipated cost of excavation repair
for each application it seeks. Deposits shall be recorded upon approved
completion of all conditions of this chapter and the Town municipal
standards or in accordance with the Town Code.
I. Permits prohibited. No person or utility shall be granted a street
opening permit on streets and sidewalks, esplanades or other public
right-of-ways that have been reconstructed or overlayed for a period of
three (3) years from date of construction except of an emergency. The
street opening for an emergency in these areas shall be approved by the
Public Works Director.
A. Purpose. This section on provides for the review of any entrance onto a
public way for compliance with sound construction and design
practices to ensure that traffic safety, drainage and public
improvements are not adversely affected. A permit is not required for
paving, sealing, or repairs unless the driveway is relocated.
B. Permit required.
§ 184-3 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 184-4
184:199
(1) No driveway, entrance or approach or other improvement within
the limits of the right-of-way for any public road may be
constructed, altered or relocated except in accordance with an
entrance permit issued by the Town upon application.
(2) The Town Selectmen may establish the fee for such permit.
(3) The entrance permit shall be valid for a period of twelve (12)
months from the date of original issue.
(4) No entrance, approach or other improvement constructed on the
right-of-way shall be relocated or its dimensions altered without an
entrance permit from the Town.
(5) The owner is responsible for future maintenance of the entrance
within the limits of the right-of-way and shall maintain the entrance
in accordance with the approved permit.
(6) Some roads and streets outside the urban compact may require a
permit from Maine Department of Transportation. You may see the
Public Works Director for information.
C. Town held harmless. The applicant shall hold harmless the Town and its
duly authorized agents and employees against any action for personal
injury or property damage sustained by reason of the exercise of an
entrance permit.
D. Approval criteria. Entrances should be designed and constructed to
provide safe access to the public way. Applicants are encouraged to
comply with the Access Management Rules for Driveways and
Entrances as developed by the Maine Department of Transportation,
2001.
(1) Applicant. The applicant for a permit shall be the owner of the
property or authorized representative being served. Any driveway
or approach constructed by the owner shall be for the bona fide
purpose of securing access to the owner's property and not for the
purpose of parking or servicing vehicles on the right-of-way.
(2) Sight distance criteria:
(a) All entrances shall be so located such that vehicles
approaching or using the entrance will be able to obtain
adequate sight distance in both directions along the public way
or to maneuver safely and without interference with traffic.
(b) Measurements to determine sight distance shall be made in
the proposed entrance at a point ten (10) feet from the edge of
the shoulder line with the height of eye 3 1/2 feet (3.5) above
the pavement. The sight distance shall be computed from this
point measuring along the roadway to a point where an
approaching height of object four and one-quarter (4.25) feet is
first seen.
§ 184-4 TOPSHAM CODE § 184-4
184:200
(c) Driveway placement shall be such that an exiting vehicle has
an unobstructed sight distance according to the following
schedule:
Highway Speed
(mph)
Recommend
Sight Distance
(in feet)
Minimum Sight
Distance
(in feet)
25 250 175
30 300 210
35 350 245
40 400 280
45 450 315
50 500 350
55 550 385
(3) Geometry.
(a) The entrance shall be designed such that the grade within the
right-of-way does not exceed 10%.
(b) For uncurbed public ways the entrance shall in general slope
away from the road surface at a rate of not less than onequarter
(1/4”) inch per foot, nor more than one (1”) inch per
foot for a distance of not less than the prevailing width of the
existing shoulder, but in no case less than four (4') feet from
the edge of pavement.
(c) The entrance should intersect the traveled way at a horizontal
angle of ninety (90) degrees, but in no case shall the horizontal
angle be less than seventy-five (75) degrees.
(d) No part of the entrance shall extend beyond the property lot
frontage for the lot being served.
(e) The entrance shall not be located close to an intersection and
should be back at least fifty (50) feet.
(4) Drainage.
(a) Existing roadside drainage in gutter or ditch lines shall not be
altered or impeded by the applicant. The applicant must
provide, at his/her expense, suitable and approved drainage
structures at all entrances.
(b) Surface drainage shall be provided so that all surface water on
the areas adjacent to the road shall be carried away from the
roadway.
§ 184-4 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 184-4
184:201
Chapter 185
STREET DESIGN AND ACCEPTANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 191. Zoning — See Ch. 225.
(c) Where a drainage culvert is required to maintain roadside
drainage, the Town must approve the pipe diameter/length and
type of pipe material prior to installation. In any case, the pipe
size shall be at least twelve (12) inches in diameter.
(5) Construction.
(a) The owner is responsible for all construction and restoration of
disturbed areas for the entrance within the limits of the rightof-
way.
(b) The entire portion of any entrance within the limits of the rightof-
way shall be constructed with a minimum fifteen-(15) inch
well graded gravel base course (MDOT Type C).
(c) If the entrance grade within the right-of-way exceeds a five
(5%) percent slope, then the entrance shall have a paved
surface within the limits of the right-of-way.
(6) Curb and sidewalk.
(a) When sidewalk or curb exists at the proposed entrance, the
applicant shall remove and replace such materials at the
applicant's expense. Any granite curb to be removed by the
applicant will remain the property of the Town.
(b) Where curb exists, curb tip-downs shall be provided at each
side of a new entrance.
(c) Where sidewalk is removed to accommodate a new entrance, a
new walk surface of equal type construction is to be provided.
The sidewalk area at all entrances is to meet handicap
accessibility requirements and conform to the Americans with
Disabilities Act guidelines. In general sidewalks shall meet the
following:
[1] The maximum sidewalk longitudinal transition slope is not
to exceed one (1) vertical to twelve (12) horizontal.
[2] The maximum sidewalk cross-slope is not to exceed two
percent (2%).
[3] No abrupt changes in grade are permitted and the
maximum curb reveal crossing a walkway is one-half (1/2)
inch or less.
§ 184-4 TOPSHAM CODE § 184-4
184:202
ARTICLE I
Purpose; Applicability; Definitions
§ 185-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set uniform standards for the design,
construction, and procedures of acceptance for public streets and minimum
design standards for private streets in the Town of Topsham in order to
provide for safe vehicular and pedestrian travel and appropriate service to
adjacent land.
§ 185-2. Applicability.
§ 185-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARTERIAL STREET — A major roadway serving long distance traffic
through and between municipalities and carrying traffic to major centers of
activity. Routes 196, 201, and 24 are examples of an arterial.
COLLECTOR STREET — Collector streets link villages, neighborhoods, and
major facilities to the arterial network. Traffic is collected from local
residential roads and delivered to the nearest arterial. Daily traffic volumes
generally range in the thousands. Meadow Road, River Road, and Mallet
Drive are examples of collectors.
EASEMENT — The authorization of a property owner for the use by another,
and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his property.
LOCAL STREET — A street that provides direct access to residential
neighborhoods, local businesses, agricultural properties and timberlands.
Roads not classified as arterials or collectors are considered local streets.
A. The standards and procedures within Chapter 185, Article I, apply to all
street construction that is intended for acceptance by the Town of
Topsham's legislative body. No street or way shall be laid out and
accepted as a public street or way by the Town of Topsham except in
accordance with the provisions of Articles I and II within this chapter of
the Land Use and Development Code.
B. Any private street that is constructed in the Town of Topsham, and as
further described in Article III, shall meet the minimum standards
found within this chapter.
MINOR ACCESS STREET — Any access street located in a rural district
which serves less than 25 dwelling units and which is projected to have
an average daily traffic (ADT) volume of less than 250 vehicles shall be
constructed to the standards for a minor access street, as presented in
Table 1.23
A.
23.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 185-1 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 185-3
184:203
PRIVATE STREET — Any street that meets the standards found within
Article III and accompanying tables and figures of this chapter, and which
does not serve more than 10 dwelling units.
PUBLIC STREET — Any street that meets the standards found in Article II
and accompanying tables and figures of this chapter, and has been accepted
per the standards of Article I of this chapter by the Town of Topsham's
legislative body.
MAJOR ACCESS STREET — All other streets which are classified as
access streets shall be designed to the standard required for a major
access street, as presented in Table 1.
B.
§ 185-3 TOPSHAM CODE § 185-3
184:204
ARTICLE IA
Acceptance of Streets
§ 185-4. General.
§ 185-5. Street acceptance procedure.
A. All applications for acceptance of a Town way shall be referred to the
Topsham Planning Board to determine whether or not the proposed
Town way complies with the applicable provisions of this article and to
determine whether or not the Planning Board recommends acceptance
or nonacceptance of the proposed Town street.
B. The Topsham Planning Board shall submit its findings and
recommendations, if any, to the Selectmen. If the Selectmen vote to
place the article in the Town Warrant, the recommendations, if any,
from the Planning Board shall be included in the Warrant.
A. A street or way constructed on private lands by the
owner(s)/developer(s) thereof and not dedicated for public travel prior
to the date of enactment of this chapter may be laid out and accepted as
a public street or way by the Town only upon the following conditions:
(1) The owner(s) shall give the Town a warranty deed to the property
within the boundaries of the street at the time of its acceptance by
the Town.
(2) A plan of said street or way shall be recorded in the Sagadahoc
County Registry of Deeds by the applicant at the time of its
acceptance.
(3) An application for the laying out and acceptance of said street or
way shall be submitted to the Town Planner upon a form to be
prescribed by the Town Planner. Said application shall be
accompanied by a plan, profile and cross section of said street or
way as built, including:
(a) A plan drawn when practical to scale of 40 feet to 1 inch, and to
be on one or more sheets of Mylar not exceeding 24 inches by
36 inches in size.
(b) Said plot plan shall show the north point, streetlight lines,
buildings, right-of-way monuments, waterways, topography
(USGS vertical datum) and natural drainage courses with
contours at not greater than 2 foot intervals, all angles and
bearings necessary for the plotting of said street and lots and
their reproduction on the ground, the distance to the nearest
established street line, and any buildings abutting said street
or way, together with the stations of their sidelines.
(c) A profile of said street or way drawn to a horizontal scale not
larger than 40 feet to 1 inch with a corresponding 10 to 1 ratio
§ 185-4 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 185-5
184:205
§ 185-6. Streets offered for acceptance but not accepted.
The Planning Board shall require, as a condition of approval for any
subdivision application that includes the creation of one or more streets,
that the lot owners form a homeowners' association by written agreement
which shall specify the rights and responsibilities of each lot owner with
respect to the maintenance, repair, and plowing of the subdivision street(s),
which shall remain the responsibility of the homeowners' association as
provided under that agreement. This homeowners' association agreement
shall be in a form acceptable to the Town Attorney and, upon approval by
the Planning Board of the subdivision, shall be recorded in the Sagadahoc
County Registry of Deeds within ninety (90) days of the date of subdivision
approval by the Planning Board.
vertical scale. Said profile shall be shown along with the
utilities within the profile area.
(d) All plans shall be sealed by a professional engineer registered
in the State of Maine.
§ 185-5 TOPSHAM CODE § 185-6
184:206
ARTICLE II
Design Standards for Public Streets
§ 185-7. Street design and pedestrian ways.
A. Streets: general principles. Streets must be designed to integrate with
the topography and natural features and provide safe travel for all
users of the street. Streets shall be designed to move vehicle and
pedestrian traffic safely. Any new street or road approved through the
development review process shall be based upon the written
recommendations of the Public Works Director, Town Engineer, Fire
Chief, Police Chief, and Director of Planning and Development, who
shall review the project for safety and the capacity to serve all users.
Design of streets shall address pedestrian and bicycle safety and
movement.
B. All new streets shall be classified based upon the standards found in
Appendix A, Table 1, 24 and incorporate the following standards:
(1) Sight distance. Any intersecting street or road shall be so designed
in profile and grading to provide minimum sight distances
measured in each direction. Measurement shall be from 10 feet
behind the travel way line with the height of eye three and one half
(3.5) feet above the pavement and a height of object of four and one
quarter (4.25) feet.
Allowable Speed
Distance *
(miles per hour)
Minimum Sight
(in feet)
25 200
30 250
35 305
40 360
45 425
50 495
55 570
NOTES:
* Based on MDOT standards, if 30% or more of the traffic are
large trucks, there may be a need for greater sight distances.
(2) Driveways. Driveway placement shall be such that an exiting
vehicle has an unobstructed sight distance according to the above
schedule. Driveways to corner lots shall gain access from the street
24.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 185-7 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 185-7
184:207
of lower classification when a corner lot is bounded by streets of
two different classifications.
(3) Signs. The installation of street name signs and other traffic control
signs shall be the responsibility of the developer as directed by the
Planning Board and in conformance with the requirements of the
Department of Public Works. All signs shall be erected in
conformance with the latest edition of the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).
(4) Curbs. Curbing shall be required where grades require that
stormwater drainage be channeled along the curbline to avoid
shoulder erosion, and with typical sections as noted in this code.
(5) Utility easements. Easements are required for sewers, storm
drains, public water supplies and other utilities located outside of
proposed rights-of-way. Utility easements in general shall not be
less than 20 feet in width and in specific cases may require
increased width, as recommended by the Public Works Director or
the Director's designee.
(6) Sidewalks. At the discretion of the Planning Board, sidewalks may
be provided within all subdivisions or other development review
where a potential connection to the existing sidewalk network is
provided for the safety and convenience of the public, per the
standards in Table 1. The sidewalk location as depicted in the cross
section figures is preferred; however, it may, at the discretion of the
Planning Board, be positioned at curbline with zero esplanade.
Sidewalks, when required, shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in
width.
C. Design characteristics.
(1) The proposed street system shall be integrated within the existing
street network.
(2) The pattern of circulation should be obvious to the motorists, with
local streets subordinate to collector streets. Pavement width,
street alignment, frequency and degree of curves, setback of
homes, landscaping or other means should heighten the distinction
between local and collector streets. Local streets should
discourage through traffic by the use of curves, or other means to
slow traffic speeds.
(3) Street layout shall reflect the natural terrain and special features
and retain those features to the best extent practicable. Areas of
cut and fill shall be minimized to inhibit erosion. Drainage shall
utilize natural systems, where possible, with adequate protection
against erosion.
(4) Reserved streets for future street connections to adjoining
undeveloped property shall be required by the Board to be
§ 185-7 TOPSHAM CODE § 185-7
184:208
§ 185-8. Minimum construction standards for public streets,
sidewalks and utilities.
dedicated to the Town. The developer of the adjoining property
can be required by the Board to connect to and build over the
reserved strips. Reserved strips not to be used shall be dispensed
with according to 23 M.R.S.A. § 3027.
(5) Street design shall conform to the following standards. Road
classification shall be determined by the Planning Board in
accordance with Table 1. Intersections should be at angles in
accordance with Table 1. Distance between street intersections
should be in accordance with Table 1.
A. This section sets the minimum standards for public street, sidewalk and
utilities construction:
(1) Roadway construction materials standards shall conform to the
current "State of Maine Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications."
(2) The Standards and Dimensions contained in Tables 1 and 225 shall
be considered minimums.
B. Construction.
(1) Engineering work. All engineering work, including the setting of
grade stakes necessary for the construction of the street and
sidewalks, and storm sewers, shall be performed by the developer
at his or her expense.
(2) Underground utilities. Any sewers and appurtenances, drains,
including house drains and catch basins which are to be built in the
street or sidewalk, and all underground utilities and their
respective services shall be constructed before any road material is
placed. Underground utilities, although not required, are
encouraged for every new proposed street.
(3) Sewers. Sanitary sewer pipes and appurtenances must be installed
in conformance with the requirements of the Topsham Sewer
District.
(4) Grading. All streets, roads, walks, etc., shall be graded to their full
width by the developer so that pavements and sidewalks can be
constructed on parallel profiles.
(5) Preparation. Before grading is started, the right-of-way area shall
be cleared of all stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable
material and all trees not intended for preservation, as designated
by the Public Works Director of the Director's designee.
25.Editor's Note: Tables 1 and 2 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 185-7 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 185-8
184:209
(6) Cuts. Tree stumps and other organic materials shall be removed to
a minimum depth of 2 feet below the subgrade. Rock and boulders,
when encountered, shall be removed to subgrade.
(7) Fill. All material used in the construction of embankments shall be
of the quality to meet the standards for embankment construction,
Section 203 of the Maine Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications, except that compaction shall not be less than 95% of
maximum density (per ASTM D 1557 Mod.). Excess materials,
including organic materials, soft clays, wet and noncompactable
materials, etc., shall be removed from the street site. The fill shall
be spread in layers not to exceed 8 inches loose and then
compacted. The filling of utility trenches shall be mechanically
compacted.
(8) Side slopes. All side slopes shall not exceed a slope of 3 horizontal
to 1 vertical unless shown otherwise on typical cross sections in
Figures 1 through 3B.26
(9) Bases and pavement. The appropriate sections of the Bases and
Pavements Divisions of the Maine Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications currently in effect at the date of
submission of the preliminary plan shall be applicable to this
section except as follows:
(a) Bases.
[1] Aggregate subbase course. Gravel aggregate subbase
shall meet the requirements of MDOT Specification
703.06.(c) Type D.
[2] Aggregate base course. Crushed aggregate base shall
meet the requirements of MDOT Specification 703.06.(a)
Type A.
(b) Pavement.
[1] Where pavement placed joins an existing pavement, the
existing pavement shall be ground and cut along a smooth
line and to a neat, even, shiplap joint. Broken or raveled
edges will not be permitted, nor deviation from grade. A
tack coat shall be applied to all joints prior to placement of
new pavement.
[2] Bituminous asphalt intended for placement as base or
wearing roadway course shall be an approved MDOT mix.
Mix designs will be provided to the Public Works Director
or the Director's designee, for approval, prior to
placement. Unless otherwise submitted and approved,
26.Editor's Note: Said figures are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 185-8 TOPSHAM CODE § 185-8
184:210
bituminous asphalt cement base and wearing course shall
meet the following specifications:
[a] Surface: "C" mix or HMA 9.5 mm - dense graded.
[b] Base: "B" mix or HMA 19.0 mm - dense graded.
[3] Placement of bituminous pavement will be subject to
calendar and temperature limitation as specified in the
MDOT Standard Specifications Section 401.06 Weather
and Seasonal Limitations for b. Zone 2 or with the
approval of the Public Works Director.
[4] Core samples of the base pavement will be conducted at
the direction of the Public Works Director or the Director's
designee and the cost of the coring will be paid for by the
applicant.
[5] Where the average coring thickness of base pavement is
less than that specified in Table 227 (minimum standards
and dimensions), the shortfall will be calculated and the
resultant tonnage will be added to the specified wearing
course depth in accordance to the correction table as
follows:
BASE PAVEMENT CORRECTION TABLE
Average Coring
Thickness Corrective Action
1 3/4 inch to 2 1/2
inch (up to 3/4 inch
deficient)
Calculated tonnage of pavement
deficiency will be doubled and
added to the specified overlay.
1 3/4 inches or less Additional "2 inch" lift of base
pavement will be the standard
corrective action. However, the
Public Works Director may
require additional corings (the
number will be determined by the
Director of Public Works) which
will be evaluated, by a MDOT
certified lab, for gradation, %
bitumen, and compaction at the
applicant's expense. After an
analysis of results, the Town may
require the initial base pavement
to be removed and a new base
pavement placed in accordance
with appropriate specifications.
27.Editor's Note: Table 2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 185-8 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 185-8
184:211
(10) Curbing.
(a) The following curbing materials shall be allowed, subject to the
recommendation of the Public Works Director or the Director's
designee:
[1] Granite curb: MDOT Type 1.
[2] Slipform concrete curb.
(b) All curbing shall be constructed per Section 609 of the Maine
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, except
as follows:
[1] Granite curbing shall be provided at all street
intersections with radii less than 50 feet where curbing is
proposed or required. All other areas with greater than 50
feet radii will be evaluated as site conditions dictate. A
minimum reveal of 7 inches shall be required.
[2] Cape Cod slipform concrete curbing may be utilized in lieu
of other curbing when approved by the Public Works
Director or the Director's designee.
(11) Sidewalks. Section 608 of the State of Maine Department of
Standard Specifications shall apply. Aggregate to build new
sidewalks shall meet the requirements of Section 703.06(a) Type A.
(12) Driveways. All driveway aprons shall be paved with four (4) inches
of bituminous concrete. The paved apron will extend from the edge
of the existing roadway edge and will extend to the limit of the
public right-of-way. Paved aprons will be a minimum of 12 feet in
width having five (5) foot radii, minimum.
(13) Dead end street turnarounds.
(a) Cul-de-sacs and dead end streets that provide the sole
vehicular access to improved or improvable land shall be
provided with a suitable turning circle or turnaround, as
applicable, at the closed end.
[1] A hammerhead turnaround shall be constructed and paved
to specified street standards, whether temporary or
permanent, for a distance of 50 feet from the roadway
edge at ninety degrees (90°) to the street it serves.
[2] All turning circles shall be paved to specified street
standards and have the following minimum diameter:
[a] Right-of-way: 100 feet.
[b] Outer pavement edge: 85 feet.
[c] Inner pavement edge: 65 feet.
§ 185-8 TOPSHAM CODE § 185-8
184:212
[3] Temporary turnarounds may be allowed where future road
extensions are planned if designed to allow discontinuance
of the turning circle while not creating any lots with less
than the required frontage for the zone in which located.
[4] Loop roads that provide the sole vehicular access to
developable or improved land shall meet the required
centerline radii and minimum tangent distance between
curves shown in Table 128 and shall be constructed and
paved to specified street standards.
[5] Driveways shall not be located off the ends of hammerhead
turnarounds.
C. Storm drainage design standards.
(1) Intent. An adequate piped storm drainage system, including
appurtenances such as catch basins and manholes, shall be
provided for proper drainage of stormwater collected in streets and
areas tributary to the street system. Discharge of the collected
storm drainage shall be by piped system or ditches when approved
by the Planning Board. Appropriate conveyances for outlets to
drainage systems must be provided. Drainage easements must be a
minimum width of 30 feet.
(2) Design standards. All stormwater systems within the subdivision
shall be designed to meet the criteria of two-year and twenty-fiveyear
storms. Flows shall be computed by the TR-55, TR-20, or
Rational methods as appropriate, with design computations being
submitted for approval. All stormwater management plans shall be
completed by, or under the supervision of and signed by, a Maine
registered professional engineer.
(a) Upstream drainage shall be accommodated by an adequately
sized system through the proposed subdivision for existing
conditions and future potential development in the upstream
drainage area or areas tributary to the proposed subdivision,
as determined by the Planning Board.
(b) Existing downstream drainage facilities shall be studied to
determine the effect of the proposed subdivision's drainage.
The developer shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board that the storm drainage from the proposed
subdivision will not, in any way, overload existing storm
drainage systems downstream from the proposed subdivision.
(c) Three hundred feet shall be considered as the maximum length
for carrying open stormwater in a street gutter prior to intake
at a catch basin. No stormwater will be permitted to drain
across a street or across an intersection.
28.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 185-8 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 185-8
184:213
(d) Design standards for drainage systems shall be approved by
the Planning Board. Minimum pipe size for any storm drainage
pipe shall be 12 inches.
(e) Where open ditches, channels, streams or natural drainage
courses are used, either to collect or discharge stormwater,
adequately sized perpetual easements shall be provided.
Minimum width shall be 30 feet. Approval of the Planning
Board shall be required for any open storm drainage system.
(f) Where surficial soils and/or the road typical section are of the
nature requiring an underdrainage system, underdrains shall
be installed and discharged in a positive manner.
(g) House foundation drains may be connected to the storm
drainage system upon approval by and under the direction of
the Director of Public Works.
D. Storm drain construction standards. The following material shall be
utilized for storm drain construction and provided and installed in
accordance with State of Maine Department of Transportation
Standards and Specifications:
(1) Reinforced concrete pipe.
(2) Corrugated metal pipe.
(3) Corrugated smooth bore polyethylene pipe.
(4) Underdrain pipe. Underdrain pipe may be perforated PVC or
HDPE. Minimum diameter of underdrain piping shall be 6 inches
when used to provide roadway subgrade drainage. Perforated
tubing shall not be permitted.
(5) Manholes. Manholes shall be of precast concrete construction.
Precast sections shall meet the requirements of ASTM Designation
C-478. Castings shall be of cast iron meeting Topsham Sewer
District standards for sewer construction.
(6) Catch basins. Catch basins shall be of precast concrete
construction. Castings shall be square cast iron as required for the
particular inlet condition with the gratings perpendicular to the
curbline. All catch basins shall be provided with a Type 1 curb face
inlet when the typical road section is curbed.
E. General construction requirements.
(1) Trenching. All trenching shall be accomplished in accordance with
all appropriate state and federal safety requirements.
(2) Trench width. Trench width at the pipe crown shall be 4/3 the
inside diameter of the pipe plus one foot six inches, with a minimum
trench width of 3 feet.
§ 185-8 TOPSHAM CODE § 185-8
184:214
(3) Pipe bed. Pipe bedding and backfill shall be undertaken in
accordance with MDOT Standard Specifications.
(4) Drain alignment. Drain alignment shall be straight in both
horizontal and vertical alignment unless specific approval of a
curvilinear drain is obtained in writing from the Director of Public
Works or his designee.
(5) Drain outlets. All drain outlets shall be riprapped to prevent
erosion. Facilities for energy dissipation shall be provided.
(6) Underdrains. Underdrains shall be laid with perforations down,
with a crushed stone envelope wrapped in an appropriate
nonwoven fabric, unless it is also functioning as a stormdrain, in
which case perforations would be up.
F. Water district standards. Water pipes and related equipment, such as
hydrants and main gate valves, must be constructed to serve all lots of
the subdivision in conformity with the standards of the Brunswick-
Topsham water district.
G. Utility capacity. All utilities installed must have a capacity judged by the
Planning Board to meet foreseeable future requirements.
H. Backfilling utilities. No subsurface utility installation may be backfilled
until it has been inspected and approved by the appropriate review
authority and confirmed by the Topsham Code Enforcement Officer.
I. Monumentation. The right-of-way lines of streets to be accepted shall
be marked with 3/4 inch diameter iron pins. All other lot corners shall
be marked with iron pipe or rod not less than 3/4 inch in diameter and
36 inches long, set flush with the finished grade.
J. Planting. Lots shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs of a type
natural to the area. These must be planted at a rate of at least two trees
per house lot and be bonded for one year. The Board may, however,
grant variances on this requirement in consideration of natural trees
remaining on the house lot.
K. Inspections. The developer shall coordinate the construction of streets,
drains, sewers, and utilities with the responsible agencies. The Town
Planner shall work with the developer to schedule a preconstruction
meeting. The developer shall present his construction program and
schedule inspections. At a minimum, the Director of Public Works (and/
or his designee), the Superintendent of the Topsham Sewer District
(and/or his designee), and the Town Planner shall be contacted by the
developer to schedule inspections. When a minimum length of 300 feet
(or the entire length of a street if it is less than 300 feet in length) has
been excavated to subgrade and properly prepared for the placement of
gravel, the Public Works Department must be called to perform an
inspection and approval granted before gravel is placed. Gravel shall be
placed in compacted layers of not more than 8 inches. Before any
§ 185-8 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 185-8
184:215
surface material is placed in any area, the work shall again be inspected
by the Director of Public Works. The placement of bituminous concrete
shall be in accordance with this chapter, and be inspected by the
Department of Public Works. Prior to any sewer construction, necessary
permits shall be obtained from the Topsham Sewer District. A
representative of the District shall be present whenever an existing
sewer is to be cut, entered, or in any way disturbed. The Sanitary
District is to be notified immediately if any of its lines are damaged or
in need of repair. All utilities must certify in writing that the work has
been accomplished to their satisfaction prior to acceptance by the Town
of any street or way.
§ 185-8 TOPSHAM CODE § 185-8
184:216
ARTICLE III
Private Roads
§ 185-9. Private roads shall conform to the following standards.
A. Access control. Where a lot has frontage on two (2) or more streets, the
access to the lot shall be provided across the frontage and to the street
where there is lesser potential for traffic congestion and for hazards to
traffic and pedestrians. This restriction shall appear as a note on the
plan and as a deed restriction for the affected lot.
B. Street design and construction standards.
(1) Private streets shall conform to the standards found in Table 1.29
(2) All private street plans must be reviewed for compliance by the
Town Peer Review Engineer and subject to review fees as set forth
in Chapter 109.
(3) Where the applicant proposes improvements within existing public
streets, the proposed design and construction details shall be
approved in writing by the Town Peer Review Engineer or Public
Works Director or the Maine Department of Transportation, as
appropriate.
(4) The following notes shall appear on the recorded plan:
(a) "The Town of Topsham shall not be responsible for the
maintenance, repair, plowing, or similar services for the
private road(s) shown on this plan."
(b) "Any private road shown on this plan shall not be accepted as a
public street by the Town of Topsham unless the way complies
with the standards for public streets included in Chapter 185
of the Topsham Municipal Code."
(5) Turnarounds shall be provided for dead end private roads in
accordance with § 185-8B(13).
29.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 185-9 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 185-9
184:217

ARTICLE IV
Waiver Procedures
§ 185-9.1. Purpose; approval; procedure.
A. The provisions of this chapter are the minimum standards for the
protection of the public welfare. The Planning Board may grant a
waiver from literal compliance with the mandatory provisions of this
chapter if the applicant can demonstrate either 1) that compliance
would cause hardship as it applies to a particular property, or 2) that an
alternative proposal will allow for equal or better results than those
stated in the standards above.
B. The approval of a waiver shall not have the effect of making null and
void the intent and purpose of this chapter. In the approval of a waiver,
the Planning Board may impose such conditions as will, in its judgment,
secure substantially the objectives of the standards and requirements
of this chapter.
C. Procedure for waiver. All requests for waivers shall be processed in
accordance with the following:
(1) A request for a waiver shall be submitted to the Town of Topsham
Planning Office on any business day. The request shall be made in
writing and identify a) the specific section of this chapter which is
requested for waiver; b) the proposed alternative to the
requirement, when applicable; and c) justifications for an approval
of the waiver or appeal.
(2) The Planning staff shall a) schedule the request for consideration
by the Planning Board at a public meeting within sixty (60) days of
receipt and b) provide adequate notice to the applicant and any
other involved parties of the meeting to which consideration of the
request is scheduled.
(3) The Planning staff or Planning Board at their discretion shall refer
the matter to the Town Peer Review Engineer for
recommendations.
(4) The Planning Board shall, following the consideration of the
request, take such public action as it shall deem advisable.
§ 185-9.1 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 185-9.1
184:219

ARTICLE V
Street Naming and Numbering
§ 185-9.2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to enhance the easy and rapid location of
properties by law enforcement, fire, rescue and emergency medical services
personnel in the Town of Topsham.
§ 185-10. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to and consistent with the Municipal Home
Rule Powers as provided for in Article VIII, Part 2, Section 1, of the
Constitution of the State of Maine and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001.
§ 185-11. Administration.
This article shall be administered by the Town of Topsham Addressing
Officer, which is authorized to and shall assign road names and numbers
to all properties, both on existing and proposed roads, in accordance with
the criteria in §§ 185-12 and 185-13. The Office of the Assessor shall be
responsible for maintaining the following official records of this article:
§ 185-12. Naming system.
§ 185-13. Numbering system.
A. An alphabetical list of all property owners as identified by current
assessment records, by last name, showing the assigned numbers.
B. An alphabetical list of all roads with property owners listed in order of
their assigned numbers.
A. All roads that serve two (2) or more properties shall be named
regardless of whether the ownership is public or private. A "road"
refers to any highway, road, street, avenue, lane, private way or similar
paved gravel or dirt thoroughfare. "Property" refers to any property on
which a more or less permanent structure has been erected or could be
placed. A road name assigned by the Town of Topsham shall not
constitute or imply acceptance of the road as a public way.
B. The following criteria shall govern the naming system:
(1) No two (2) roads shall be given the same name (e.g., no Pine Road
and Pine Lane).
(2) No two (2) roads should have similar sounding names (e.g., Beech
Street and Peach Street).
(3) Each new road shall have the same name throughout its entire
length.
§ 185-9.2 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 185-13
184:221
§ 185-14. Compliance.
All owners of structures shall, by the date stipulated in § 185-16, display and
maintain, in a conspicuous place on said structure, the assigned numbers in
the following manner:
A. Numbers shall be assigned every fifty (50) feet along both sides of the
road, with even numbers appearing on the left side of the road and odd
numbers appearing on the right side of the road, determined by number
origin.
B. The following criteria shall govern the numbering system:
(1) All number origins shall begin from the designated center of
Topsham or that end of the road closest to the designated center.
For dead-end roads, numbering shall originate at the intersection
of the adjacent road and terminate at the dead end.
(2) The number assigned to each structure shall be that of the number
interval falling closest to the front door. If the front door cannot be
seen from the main road, the number shall be that of the interval
falling to the driveway of said structure.
(3) Every structure with more than one (1) principal use or occupancy
shall have a separate number for each use occupancy [i.e.
apartments will have one (1) road number with an apartment
number, such as 235 Maple Street, Apt. 2].
A. Number on the structure or residence. Where the residence or
structure is within fifty (50) feet of the edge of the road right-of-way, the
assigned number shall be displayed on the front of the residence or
structure near the front door or entry.
B. Number at the street line. Where the residence or structure is over fifty
(50) feet from the edge of the road right-of-way, the assigned number
shall be displayed on a post, fence, wall, the mailbox or on some
structure at the property line next to the walk or access drive to the
residence structure.
C. Size and color of number. Numbers shall be displayed in a contrasting
color to the background on which they are applied, shall be located to
be visible from the road, and shall be of sufficient size to be easily
readable from the road. The minimum size of any numbers shall be four
(4) inches.
D. Every person whose duty is to display the assigned number shall
remove any different number that might be mistaken for, or confused
with, the number assigned in conformance with this article.
E. Interior location. All residents and other occupants are requested to
post the assigned number and road name next to their telephone for
emergency reference.
§ 185-13 TOPSHAM CODE § 185-15
184:222
§ 185-15. Construction and subdivisions.
All new construction and subdivisions shall be named and numbered in
accordance with the provisions of this article and as follows:
§ 185-16. Effective date.
This article shall become effective by adoption at Town Meeting May 15,
1996. It shall be the duty of the Office of the Assessor to notify by mail each
property owner and the post office of a new address at least thirty (30) days
before the effective date of its use. It shall be the duty of each property
owner to comply with this article, including the posting of new property
numbers, within thirty (30) days following notification. On new structures,
numbering will be installed before final inspection or when the structure is
first used or occupied, whichever comes first.
A. New construction. Whenever any residence or other structure is
constructed or developed, it shall be the duty of the new owner to
obtain an assigned number from the Office of the Assessor. This shall be
done at the time of the issuance of the building permit.
B. New subdivisions. Any prospective subdivider shall show a proposed
road name and lot numbering system with the preliminary plan
submission to the Planning Board. Approved by the Planning Board,
after consultation with the addressing officer, the plan shall constitute
the assignment of road names and numbers to the lots in the
subdivision. On the final plan showing proposed roads, the applicant
shall mark on the plan lines or dots in the center of the streets every
fifty (50) feet to aid in assignment of numbers to structures
subsequently constructed.
§ 185-15 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 185-16
184:223
Chapter 191
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 41.
Building construction — See Ch. 91.
Comprehensive Plan — See Ch. 105.
Site plan review — See Ch. 175.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 191-1. Definitions.
Each word or term defined in this section has the meaning indicated in this
section for the purposes of this chapter, unless a different meaning is clearly
required by the context.
CONSERVATION ORGANIZATION — An organization with the ability to
provide long-term stewardship of conservation restrictions on land. These,
to include: Topsham Conservation Commission, Brunswick-Topsham Land
Trust, Maine Department of Environmental Protection or other similar
organization as identified by the Planning Board.30[Added 5-14-2014
STM, Art. 13]
DIVISION — "Division," when by the context it refers to part of this chapter,
means part of a subparagraph as defined by this section. It is designated by
a small letter.
EASEMENT — The authorization of a property owner for the use by another,
and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his property.31
FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAN — The final drawings on which the subdivider's
plan of subdivision is presented to the Planning Board for approval and
which, if approved, must be filed for record with the County Registry of
Deeds.
INVERT ELEVATION — The elevation of the bottom of a pipe taken inside
the pipe.32
LONGITUDINAL GRADE OR PITCH — One illustrated by a profile.
PERMANENT MARKER — Standard commercial marker or its equivalent.
PRIMARY CONSERVATION AREA — The portion of a site that is generally
unsuitable for development and/or intensive use including:[Added
5-16-2012 STM, Art. 11; amended 5-14-2014 STM, Art. 13]
30.Editor's Note: The former definition of "collector street," which immediately preceded this
definition, and the former definition of "cross section," which immediately followed this
definition, were repealed 5-20-2015 STM, Art. 10.
31.Editor's Note: The former definition of "expressway," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 5-20-2015 STM, Art. 10.
32.Editor's Note: The former definition of "local residential street," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 5-20-2015 STM, Art. 10.
§ 185-16 TOPSHAM CODE § 191-1
184:224
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR — A surveyor legally licensed to practice
land surveying under the laws of Maine.34
SECONDARY CONSERVATION AREA — The portion of a site that is within
a focus area as defined in Topsham Natural Areas Plan (NAP) that is rated
medium or higher in the "Town of Topsham Natural Areas Evaluation Matrix
Analysis with Community Values" in the NAP and that is not a primary
conservation area.[Added 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 11; amended 5-14-2014
STM, Art. 13]
SUBDIVISION — The division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or
more lots within any five (5) year period that begins on or after September
23, 1971, in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4401[4] and as that subsection
may be amended from time to time.[Amended 5-15-2019 STM, Art. 12]
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision containing more than four lots, or
any subdivision requiring any new public street extension or the extension
of water or sewer into a previously undeveloped area.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision containing three or four lots and
not requiring separate access.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more
lots for the purpose, immediate or future, of lease, sale, development or
building, whether this division is accomplished by immediate plotting of
the land by metes and bounds. The term "subdivision" shall include the
subdivision of land for nonresidential purposes and resubdivision of land.
In addition, the definitions of "subdivision" set forth in 30 M.R.S.A. § 495635
shall apply for purposes of these regulations.36
The area within mapped floodways as shown on the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
A.
The area within coastal or freshwater wetlands as defined in 38
M.R.S.A. § 480-B and significant vernal pools subject to the state
Natural Resources Protection Act.
B.
Stream channels, as measured from the top of banks, and other surface
water bodies, as measured from the high water mark.
C.
Contiguous areas of two (2) acres or more with a sustained slope in
excess of thirty-five (35) percent. [Amended 5-20-2015 STM, Art.
10]
D.
E. Areas that are zoned "resource protection."33
33.Editor's Note: The former definition of "profile," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 5-20-2015 STM, Art. 10.
34.Editor's Note: The former definition of "resubdivision," which immediately followed, was
repealed 5-15-2019 STM, Art. 12.
35.Editor's Note: 30 M.R.S.A. § 4956 was repealed by Chapter 737 of the Laws of 1987. See
now 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4401.
36.Editor's Note: The former definitions of "subgrade" and "transverse grade or pitch" were
repealed 5-20-2015 STM, Art. 10.
§ 191-1 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 191-2
184:225
§ 191-2. Approval by Planning Board.
No plan of a division of land within the Town of Topsham which would
constitute a subdivision may be hereafter filed or recorded in the Sagadahoc
County Registry of Deeds until a final plan thereof has been approved by the
Topsham Planning Board in accordance with all of the requirements, design
standards and construction specifications set forth in this chapter, nor until
such approval has been entered on such final plan by the Planning Board.
§ 191-2.1. Delegated review authority; site location of development;
stormwater permits. [Added 9-8-2005 STM, Art. 3; amended
5-17-2017 STM, Art. 13]
Site developments needing approval under Title 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 420 and
481 through 500, to the degree permitted under § 489A, shall be reviewed
under the procedures of the Topsham Town Code, Chapter 191, Subdivision
of Land, under the Town's delegated review authority, and shall meet the
development standards of Title 38 M.R.S.A., §§ 420 and 481 through 500,
as may be amended from time to time, as well as those in the regulations
of the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, including Chapters
371 through 377, and others that may be issued by the MEDEP, which
are hereby adopted by reference for projects falling under this article.
Projects subject to this section shall also meet the standards of the Topsham
Zoning Ordinance, including the provisions of § 225-34, Stormwater
management.37 Topsham will provide notice to the MEDEP upon the
submission of any projects subject to this article.
§ 191-2.2. Preapplication procedures for major subdivisions. [Added
5-16-2012 STM, Art. 11]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the preapplication procedures for a major
subdivision is for the applicant to present general information
regarding the site of the proposed subdivision to the Planning Board
and receive the Planning Board's comments prior to the layout and
design of the subdivision. The Planning Board's review and comments
shall be based on the applicant's choice of the form of the subdivision
(conventional, open space, or large lot).
B. Procedure.
(1) Prior to submitting any materials, the applicant shall meet with the
Town Planner or her/his designee to review the Town's procedures
and requirements.
(2) The preapplication procedures are intended to provide the
applicant, the Planning Board, and the planning staff with a better
understanding of the site and the opportunities and constraints
imposed on its use by both the natural and built environment. The
focus of the preapplication process is on the overall utilization of
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 191-2 TOPSHAM CODE § 191-2.2
184:226
the parcel. It is anticipated that this analysis will result in a
subdivision plan that minimizes the impact of the development
on significant natural and cultural resources while allowing for
development of the parcel.
(3) The Planning Board may waive the preapplication site inventory
and analysis process or reduce the information to be included in
the site inventory and analysis for subdivisions or for amendments
to approved subdivision plans if the Planning Board finds that the
scale or complexity of the project or the characteristics of the site
make the process or information unnecessary to understand the
development opportunities and constraints of the site. The
applicant shall submit any requests for waivers in writing to the
Town Planner prior to the submission of the site inventory and
analysis, and the Planning Board shall act on the requests prior to
the submission of the site inventory and analysis.
(4) After the meeting with the Town Planner or her/his designee the
applicant shall submit a site inventory and analysis consisting of a
site inventory map, site analysis map, and site analysis narrative to
the Planning Department. The submission must be accompanied by
a review fee of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250) plus the
estimated cost for mailing the public notices.
(5) Upon receipt of the site inventory and analysis submission, the
planning staff shall review the material and determine whether all
materials have been submitted, taking into consideration any
waivers granted by the Planning Board. If the submission is
determined to be incomplete, the planning staff shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of this finding, shall specify the additional
material required to make the submission complete, and shall
advise the applicant that the application will not be considered by
the Planning Board until the additional information is submitted.
These steps shall be repeated until all materials have been
submitted. When the submission is determined to be complete, the
planning staff will place the item on the agenda for review by the
Planning Board.
(6) The preapplication review of the site inventory and analysis must
be completed prior to the preparation and submission of a
preliminary application for a major subdivision. The Planning
Board shall review the preapplication submission with the
applicant and shall authorize the submission of the preliminary
application when the site analysis phase is complete.
(7) The Town shall, at the applicant's expense, notify all property
owners within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the property to be
subdivided of the pending application and the date, time, and place
of the meeting at which the Planning Board will review the site
inventory and analysis submission.
§ 191-2.2 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 191-2.2
184:227
(8) Within forty-five (45) days of the first Planning Board meeting at
which the site inventory and analysis is discussed or within another
time limit as may be otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board and
the applicant, the Board shall complete its review of the site
inventory and analysis.
(9) The Planning Board may schedule an on-site inspection of the site
to review the existing conditions, field-verify the information
submitted, and investigate the development site.
(10) The Planning Board shall review the submission to determine if the
information provides a clear understanding of the site and
identifies opportunities and constraints that help determine how
the area should be developed, including identifying areas with
significant natural resource or cultural values that should be
considered in the design and layout of the subdivision. The Board
shall also consider any input received from members of the staff or
public. At the conclusion of the Planning Board review of the
submission, the Board shall identify the issues and constraints that
must be addressed in the formal subdivision application.
C. Submission requirements. The form of the site inventory and analysis
submission shall be determined by the applicant in consultation with
the Town Planner or his/her designee and may include electronic or
paper copies or a combination of the two. The number and size of any
paper copies of the submission will be determined, but in no case will
the applicant be required to provide more than 18 paper copies of the
submission or any part thereof. The submission must include the
following information, unless the Planning Board, by formal vote, has
previously waived the submission of specific items of information based
upon a finding that the information is not needed to determine the
optimal utilization of the parcel:
(1) A site context or locus map drawn at a size adequate to show the
relationship of the proposed subdivision to the adjacent properties
and to allow the Board to locate the subdivision within the
municipality. The location map shall show:
(a) An outline of the proposed subdivision and any remaining
portion of the owner's property if the formal application will
cover only a portion of the owner's entire contiguous holding.
(b) Existing subdivisions that abut the proposed subdivision.
(c) Locations and names of existing streets.
(d) The Tax Map(s) and lot number(s) of the parcel proposed to be
subdivided.
(e) The location of any focus areas identified in the Town's Natural
Areas Plan.
§ 191-2.2 TOPSHAM CODE § 191-2.2
184:228
(2) An accurate scale site inventory plan of the parcel at a scale of not
more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch showing the existing
conditions of the area proposed to be subdivided. The information
on natural features and resources and cultural and historic
features may be based upon published sources and information
available from the Town, including the Natural Areas Plan and/or
from state agencies, except as specifically provided below. The site
inventory plan must show the following information:
(a) The proposed name of the development, North arrow (true
meridian), date, and scale.
(b) The boundaries of the parcel based upon either an accurate
parcel data source with data source cited or a standard
boundary survey prepared by a registered land surveyor and
giving the bearings and distances of all property lines. The
Planning Board may modify this requirement when only a
portion of a parcel is proposed to be subdivided.
(c) Existing restrictions or easements on the site (if none, so
state).
(d) The location of any focus areas identified in the Town's Natural
Areas Plan.
(e) The general topography of the site including an indication of
those areas where the slope is likely to be greater than 35%.
(f) The major natural features of the site, including wetlands,
vernal pools, streams, ponds, floodplains, groundwater
aquifers, significant wildlife habitats, and significant
geological features, or other important natural features,
including habitat for rare plant and animal species and rare
and exemplary natural communities.
(g) The soils on the site through a medium-intensity soil survey.
The Planning Board may require the submission of a highintensity
soils survey if it determines that a high-intensity
survey is needed to evaluate the appropriate use of the
property.
(h) Vegetative cover conditions on the property as depicted on a
recent aerial photo of the site.
(i) The general drainage pattern of the site.
(j) Existing buildings, structures, or other improvements on the
site, including streets, driveways, and cemeteries (if none, so
state).
(k) Locations of all culturally, historically or archaeologically
significant buildings, features, or sites.
§ 191-2.2 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 191-2.2
184:229
§ 191-3. Preliminary and final plans required.
Any subdivider who plans to divide any land within the Town of Topsham
shall prepare and submit to the Planning Board both a preliminary plan
for study, and, if necessary, alteration and modification, and a final plan.
The subdivider shall not prepare the final plan until he has received from
the Planning Office written notice of a vote of a majority of the Planning
Board approving his preliminary plan. Final plan only is required on minor
subdivisions. Notice is to be mailed within 10 days of the vote.
(l) The location and size of existing utilities or improvements
servicing the site (if none, so state).
(m) Any potential sources of fire protection water supply within
one-half mile of the site, including public water mains, existing
fire ponds, or possible sources of water supply.
(n) The location of any conservation land on or adjacent to the
parcel.
(3) A site analysis map at the same scale as the inventory plans [see
Subsection C(2) above] highlighting the opportunities and
constraints of the site in a bubble diagram or annotated format.
This map should enable the Planning Board to determine which
areas of the site may be well suited for the proposed use; which
portions of the site may be unsuitable for development or use
(primary conservation areas); which areas of the site may have
potential natural resource or cultural value (secondary
conservation areas) that should be addressed in the subdivision
plan; and which areas of the site may be subject to off-site conflicts
or concerns (noise, lighting, traffic, etc.) that need to be addressed
in the preliminary application.
(4) A site analysis narrative describing the existing conditions of the
site, the constraints and opportunities created by the site for the
proposed development, and the natural resource and cultural
resources on the site that need to be considered in the design and
layout of the subdivision.
A. Minor subdivisions. The Planning Board may require, where it deems
necessary for the protection of public health, safety and welfare, that a
minor subdivision comply with all or any of the requirements specified
for major subdivisions.
B. Approval expiration. Approval of a preliminary plan and the
accompanying preliminary data expires one year from the date of the
vote. The final plan of a subdivision must be prepared, submitted,
reviewed, approved, attested and recorded in the Sagadahoc County
Registry of Deeds by the subdivider within said year.
(1) Subdivision completion required. Public improvement (example:
roads, drainage, utilities) in a subdivision must be substantially
§ 191-2.2 TOPSHAM CODE § 191-3
184:230
§ 191-4. Work without approval prohibited.
No utility installation, no ditching, grading or construction of roads, no
grading of land or lots and no construction of buildings is to be done on
any part of a subdivision until the final plan has been duly recorded by the
subdivider in the Sagadahoc County Registry of Deeds. No clearing of land
will be allowed until acceptance of the preliminary plan.
§ 191-5. Preliminary plan. [Amended 5-21-1997 STM; 7-31-2000
STM, Art. 7; 5-16-2001 STM, Art. 25]
The subdivider shall submit the original and 18 prints of the preliminary
plan to the Planning Board, each on one or more sheets, with a scale of not
more than 100 feet to the inch. The sheet size is to be 24 inches by 36 inches
maximum. Such submission shall be 21 days prior to a scheduled Planning
Board meeting.
completed [75%] within five years of receiving Planning Board
approval or reapply for approval of the uncompleted portion of the
subdivision. No additional fee would be required.
(a) Any subdivision presently approved that is not substantially
completed [75%] within five years of the enactment of this
chapter must reapply for approval of the uncompleted portion
of the subdivision. No additional fee would be required.
(b) The Planning Office shall instruct the Code Enforcement
Officer not to issue building permits for any lot in a subdivision
where the approval has expired or where public improvements
to a lot in accordance with the subdivision approval have not
been completed. [Amended 5-18-1994 STM, Art. 17]
(2) Extension of deadline. Subdivisions with lots equal to or in excess
of required size at the time of approval expiration may request
extension of completion time by letter without full resubmission.
A. Representation. The subdivider, or his duly authorized representative,
shall attend the meeting of the Planning Board to discuss the plan.
B. Additional information. The subdivider shall submit all of the following
information with the preliminary plan and such additional information
as is necessary to document compliance with the performance
standards contained in Chapter 225, Zoning, Articles VII and VIII, of the
Code.
(1) Name. The proposed subdivision name or title.
(2) Owner. Name of owner of record, subdivider if different and
designer.
(3) Scale. Scale, date and North point.
§ 191-3 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 191-5
184:231
(4) Size; physical features. Number of acres within the proposed
subdivision, location of property lines, existing easements,
buildings, watercourses and other essential existing physical
features, distances and bearings of all lines.
(5) Zoning. State zoning districts where the proposed subdivision is
located.
(6) Adjoining owners. Names of all subdivisions immediately adjacent
and the names of owners of record of adjacent acreage.
(7) Streets. Name, location, right-of-way lines, width, profile, typical
cross section, radius of curves of all existing and proposed streets,
as specified in Chapter 185 of the Topsham Code of Ordinances, at
a scale of one (1) inch equals 50 feet and a vertical scale of one (1)
inch equals five (5) feet unless otherwise approved by the Director
of the Public Works. [Amended 5-15-2002 STM, Art. 14;
5-20-2015 STM, Art. 10]
(8) Stormwater management. A stormwater management plan
conforming to the requirements of § 225-34, Stormwater
management. [Amended 5-17-2017 STM, Art. 13]
(9) Utilities. Location of existing and proposed underground utilities.
Evidence of submission of a stormwater management plan to the
Androscoggin Valley Soil and Water Conservation District.
[Amended 5-15-2002 STM, Art. 16]
(10) Sewers; soils.
(a) Existing and proposed location, size, profile and typical cross
section of sanitary sewers; or description, plan, location of
other means of sewage disposal with evidence of soil
suitability.
(b) A soils report identifying the soils boundaries and names in the
proposed development with the soils information
superimposed upon the plot plan in accord with USDA Soil
Conservation Service National Cooperative Soil Classification.
The intensity of this study must identify changes in soil
conditions down to 1/8 acre. A lot by lot soils suitability
determination for house building with septic disposal or, if
appropriate, house building with public sewage disposal will
be made in accordance with the Soil Suitability Guide for Land
Use Land Use Planning in Maine and will accompany the plot
plan soils study. Plotting of soils type is not required if public
sewer is proposed above.
(11) Lot dimensions. Lines and dimensions of lots; and identification
system for all lots and blocks.
§ 191-5 TOPSHAM CODE § 191-5
184:232
(12) Contours. Contour lines at intervals of two (2) feet or at such other
interval as the Planning Board may require, based on United States
Geological Survey datum or other suitable survey. [Amended
5-15-2002 STM, Art. 14]
(13) Sidewalks; building lines. Proposed location and widths of
sidewalks, alleys, easements and building lines.
(14) Culverts. Preliminary designs for any bridges or culverts which
may be required.
(15) Dedicated land. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to
public use and the conditions of such dedication.
(16) Preserved areas. The location of all natural features or site
elements to be preserved.
(17) Erosion. Evidence of submission of a soil erosion and sediment
control plan to the Androscoggin Valley Soil and Water
Conservation District. [Amended 5-15-2002 STM, Art. 16]
(18) Housing type. The developer must state type of housing (ex. single,
duplex, multi, etc.).
(19)Wetlands and vernal pools. The location of all wetlands and vernal
pools on the site. If there is a vernal pool(s) on the property, a
statement indicating how the site has been designed to minimize
the impact on the vernal pool and its adjacent habitat except for
projects involving vernal pool mitigation in accordance with §
225-20.2, Vernal Pools Overlay District. If the vernal pool(s) is
subject to state or federal regulation, evidence of compliance with
those regulations must be included. If the applicant is proposing to
use the provisions of § 225-20.2, Vernal Pools Overlay District (VPO
District), with respect to vernal pool mitigation, evidence of
payment of the vernal pool mitigation fee or the completion of
permittee-responsible mitigation activities shall be provided.
[Added 5-18-2016 STM, Art. 14; amended 5-17-2017 STM,
Art. 14]
C. Updated site inventory and analysis. If the applicant was required to
submit a site inventory and analysis as part of the preapplication
procedures of § 191-2.2, the applicant must submit an updated version
based upon any field investigations or new information developed after
the initial site inventory and analysis review by the Planning Board.
[Added 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 11]
D. Compatibility analysis. The applicant must submit an analysis that can
be in the form of a plan and/or narrative demonstrating how the design
and layout of the subdivision is compatible with the site inventory and
analysis, how the issues addressed in the Planning Board’s review of
the site inventory and analysis have been addressed, and how the
impact on significant natural resources, including primary and
§ 191-5 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 191-5
184:233
§ 191-6. Dead-end roads. [Amended 5-21-2003 STM, Art. 13;
5-19-2010 STM, Art. 14]
secondary conservation areas, will be minimized. [Added 5-16-2012
STM, Art. 11]
A. All proposed roads shall be designed as through roads, and shall
connect at both ends to different public roads. [Amended 5-20-2015
STM, Art. 10]
(1) The Board may approve a new subdivision road that connects to the
same public road in more than one location under the following
circumstances:
(a) The size or shape of the parcel to be subdivided does not allow
for a through road to be constructed;
(b) The two points of connection to the public road are separated
by at least 500 feet;
(c) The parcel to be subdivided has no access to a second public
road, or will not likely have access in the future; or
(d) No lot within the subdivision is located more than 2,000 feet
from the connecting point on the public road.
B. The prohibition on dead-end roads (roads with a single connection to a
public road) may be waived by the Board under the following
circumstances:
(1) Lot location and/or configuration does not provide for connection to
an existing public road;
(2) Constraints on the subdivided parcel are such that no connections
to existing public roads can be made;
(3) The road is part of a phased project, and subsequent approved
phases would provide for connection to public roads;
(4) Existing natural features and resources are located in such a
fashion to prevent connections to a public road; or
(5) Valuable open spaces or natural resources can be preserved by
eliminating a second entrance into the property.
C. When the Board waives the dead-end restriction, the following
standards shall apply:
(1) No dead end shall exceed the following size limitations:
(a) In the R-1 District, no dead end shall exceed 1,500 linear feet,
or 30 lots.
§ 191-5 TOPSHAM CODE § 191-6
184:234
(b) In the R-2 District, no dead end shall exceed 1,875 linear feet,
or 30 lots.
(c) In the R-3 District, no dead end shall exceed 2,250 linear feet
or 30 lots.
(d) In the R-4 district, no dead end shall exceed 1,125 linear feet or
30 lots.
(2) The Board may allow "lollipop" roads, which provide a single
connection to a public road, and have a looped design within the
subdivision, such that the distance from the public road to the split
in the subdivision road is less than 1,500 linear feet in the R-1 and
R-2 Districts, less than 2,000 linear feet in the R-3 District, and less
than 1,000 linear feet in the R-4 District, and that no homes are
more than 2,000 linear feet from the split in the subdivision road.
(3) No more than two driveways, each serving a single home, may be
built off of any turnaround.
(4) Dead-end roads, where practical, shall be designed to terminate, or
approach, within 25 feet of neighboring lots. At such a point, the
right-of-way shall be extended to the neighboring property line for
future extension. The right-of-way shall be included in the street
dedication to the Town. This shall be labeled "Future Road
Extension" on all plans of the project and noted in all deeds. Deadend
roads shall also be designed with "Future Road Extensions"
every 500 feet along both sides of the dead end, connecting to the
adjacent parcels.
D. The Board may approve the extension of a dead-end road beyond the
length restrictions of Subsection C(1) of this chapter, if a secondary
emergency access is provided or if the subdivider can demonstrate that
adequate fire protection measures have been included in the design of
the subdivision or in the construction of the individual homes, to meet
the needs of the Fire Chief. Where a secondary emergency access is
provided, it shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide, with at least 15 inches
of gravel, and shall be kept open and maintained on a year-round basis
by the owner of record.
E. If a dead end is proposed, the Board shall require a traffic study for the
specific subdivision, with no levels of service at the point of connection
with the public road below LOS D from the subdivision road, and no
LOS on the public road lower than C allowed. In addition, the traffic
study shall evaluate traffic on the connecting public road, with an
analysis of the existing and anticipated cumulative impacts.
F. Dead ends shall be designed with a hammerhead turn around. Dead
ends shall include 50 foot wide right-of-way extensions to adjoining
parcels at the approximate half way point, and at the end of the dead
end. These rights-of-way shall be written to provide rights to the
§ 191-6 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 191-6
184:235
§ 191-7. Other studies.
In addition to the preliminary plan the Planning Board may require the
subdivider or others to provide any studies it deems necessary or desirable
to protect and secure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
the Town of Topsham, including the future occupants of the subdivision,
whether residential, commercial or industrial.
§ 191-8. Public hearing. [Amended 5-20-1998 STM, Art. 32;
7-31-2000 STM, Art. 7]
The Planning Board may hold a public hearing on an application for
subdivision approval. If the Planning Board decides to hold a public hearing,
it shall hold the hearing within 30 days of the date the Planning Board
determines that it has received a completed application. A public hearing
may also be held at any other time deemed appropriate by the Planning
Board and in the public interest. The applicant shall publish the time, date
and place of the hearing at least two times. The first publication must
be at least seven days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of area-wide
circulation. The abutting landowners shall be notified of the hearing by first
class mail at least five days prior to the hearing.
§ 191-9. Notices.
The Planning Office shall notify the subdivider in writing within 30 days of
receipt of the preliminary plan of the vote of the Board on each plan, and
of any conditions voted, and shall transmit to the subdivider one copy of
each drawing or data sheet approved, with the conditions, if any were voted,
endorsed on each drawing or data sheet.
§ 191-10. Final plan. [Amended 5-18-1994 STM, Art. 17; 5-21-1997
STM, Art. 25; 7-31-2000 STM, Art. 7; 5-16-2001 STM, Art. 25]
The developer shall submit the original and 18 complete sets (prints) of
development plans for review 21 days prior to a scheduled Planning Board
meeting. All must be of the same scale and size as the preliminary plan and
contain the following information:
adjoining properties, or to the Town, for the future construction of a
connecting road, or an extension of the present subdivision road.
G. The provisions of this section are not waivable under the standards of
§ 191-20.
A. Minor subdivision. All the information required in § 191-5B(l), (2), (3),
(4), (5) and (11), plus items required for major subdivision below.
B. Major subdivision. All of the information required for the preliminary
plan in § 191-5B(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (11), (13) and (15), plus
items below:
§ 191-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 191-10
184:236
§ 191-11. Accompanying data with final plan. [Amended 5-21-1997
STM, Art. 26; 7-31-2000 STM, Art. 7]
The subdivider shall submit the following data with the final plan:
(1) Data to determine exact location. Sufficient data to determine the
location, direction and length of every street and way line, lot line
and boundary line and to establish these lines on the ground.
(2) Location of markers. Location of all permanent monuments
properly identified as to whether existing or proposed.
(3) Restriction and conditions. Private restrictions, easements,
conditions of sale and trusteeships and their periods of existence,
to be lettered on the plan, or on separate instruments referred to
on the plan, with copy attached.
(4) Space for approval. Suitable space to record on the plan final
approval by the Planning Board, with conditions, if any, and also the
date of such approval, as follows:
(5) Certification by registered land surveyor. A certification by a
registered land surveyor that none of the land in the proposed
subdivision is part of any other approved subdivision (unless the
proposed plan is an amendment to a prior approved plan); that the
lot lines and ownership depicted on the plan are correct and
current as of the date of the plan; and that the surveyor's work has
been conducted in accordance with applicable standards.
Approved: Town of Topsham Planning Board
_______________________________________ Chairman
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________ Date
A. Statement from Water District. If public water is to be used, a statement
from the Superintendent of the Brunswick and Topsham Water District
that sufficient capacity exists or will be available for the foreseeable
needs of the subdivision. If public water is not available, a statement
from a certified well driller or hydrogeologist assuring adequate water
supplies for the foreseeable needs of the subdivision.
B. Statement from the Fire Chief. A statement from the Fire Chief of the
Town of Topsham approving the number and location of hydrants
proposed.
§ 191-10 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 191-11
184:237
§ 191-12. Fee. [Amended 5-18-1994 STM, Art. 16; 5-20-2004 STM,
Art. 16]
All applications for subdivision review shall be accompanied by a fee and
deposit as indicated in Chapter 109 of the Town Code.
§ 191-13. Improvements and performance guaranty. [Amended
5-18-1994 STM, Art. 18]
C. Statement from the Sewer District. If public sewer is proposed, a
statement from the sewer district as to the conditions on which the
Sewer District will provide sewer service and approving the design of
the sanitary sewers proposed within the subdivision, plus a statement
that the district has sufficient capacity for the foreseeable needs of the
subdivision.
D. Approval for septic tanks and fields. Approval of the Topsham Plumbing
Inspector if other than public sewage disposal is proposed, with
evidence of soil suitability for such disposal.
E. Corrected plan. The subdivider shall provide a revised plan showing
that all required changes have been made. The applicant shall provide
one complete inked Mylar set of development plans, one inked Mylar of
the final plat and one complete set of prints of the development plan.
The plan will indicate the revision date(s) and the changes reflected by
the revision(s).
F. State approval when required. The approval of the State of Maine
Department of Environmental Protection shall be secured, in writing,
before approval of the final plan if the proposed subdivision in any way
falls within the jurisdiction of and is subject to review by the State of
Maine Department of Environmental Protection. [Amended
5-15-2002 STM, Art. 17]
G. Completion date. The estimated completion date for the subdivision.
H. Final approval from the Soil Conservation Service for soil erosion and
sedimentation control plans and stormwater management plans as
required.
A. Completion of improvements. All applicants shall be required to
complete, in accordance with the Planning Board's approval and to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Director or Town Engineer, all street,
drainage and other improvements servicing lots and buildings within
the development, as required in these regulations specified on the final
plan, and to dedicate the same to the Town of Topsham, free and clear
of all liens and encumbrances, unless specified otherwise by the Board.
All improvements shall be completed prior to the conveyance of any lot
within the subdivision unless the developer has been granted a
conditional agreement by the Board or approval has been granted by
the Board for development to occur in separate and distinct phases.
§ 191-11 TOPSHAM CODE § 191-13
184:238
Notice of such agreement and any such conditions shall appear on
the final plan which is recorded at the Sagadahoc County Registry of
Deeds.
B. Performance guarantees. [Amended 5-21-2003 STM, Art. 11]
(1) At the time the Planning Board grants final or conditional
subdivision approval, the applicant shall agree to meet all terms
and conditions of approval, and to complete all improvements in
accordance with the approved plans and supporting
documentation, and with these regulations and standards, unless
otherwise waived in accordance with this ordinance.
(2) All performance guarantees shall include a construction schedule,
itemized cost estimates for each element of the project, provisions
for inspections of each phase of construction, provisions for the
release or partial release of the guarantee to the developer, and a
date after which the developer will be in default and the Town will
have access to any remaining funds to finish construction of site
improvements.
(3) The applicant may shall be required to post a performance
guarantee in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of
construction, installation and dedication of approved
improvements, including but not limited to the construction of the
streets, stormwater management facilities, public sewage
collection or disposal facilities, landscaping, public water systems
and erosion and sedimentation control measures. The period within
which the required improvements must be completed shall be
specified by the Planning Board in the resolution approving the
final plan and shall be incorporated in the performance guarantee
and shall not in any event exceed five (5) years from the date of
final approval. The performance guarantee shall be approved and
accepted by the Board as to the amount, surety and other
conditions. The Board may extend the period of the performance
guarantee by one (1) additional year if unusual circumstances delay
construction.
(4) The performance guarantee shall consist of one or more of the
following forms, or other forms as may be found acceptable to the
Planning Board:
(a) Escrow account: Funds deposited with the Town of Topsham,
deposited into a joint savings account between the applicant
and the Town, or used for the purchase of a joint certificate of
deposit. Withdrawals by the applicant shall only be allowed
following approval by the Planning Office. Withdrawals by the
Town of Topsham shall be permitted without the applicant's
approval, pursuant to the performance schedule and default
dates in the performance guarantee.
§ 191-13 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 191-13
184:239
§ 191-14. Street design and pedestrianways. [Amended 5-18-1994
STM, Art. 15; 5-21-2003 STM, Art. 13; 5-20-2015 STM, Art. 10]
§ 191-15. Minimum construction standards for streets, sidewalks
and utilities. [Amended 5-18-1994 STM, Art. 15; 5-21-1997 STM,
Art. 26; 11-18-1997 STM, Art. 7; 5-20-2015 STM, Art. 10; 5-17-2017
STM, Art. 13]
All proposed construction shall meet the standards found within Chapter
185 of the Topsham Code of Ordinances and the requirements of § 225-34,
(b) Letter of credit: An irrevocable letter of credit, issued by a
state or federally chartered bank or credit union in the name of
Town of Topsham, shall indicate that funds have been set aside
for the construction of the all site work and may not be used for
any other portion of the project. The Town may draw from the
fund if construction is inadequate or incomplete. The Town will
determine in its sole judgement the adequacy of the letter of
credit and the issuing institution.
(c) Deed restriction. A statement included on the plan and made
part of all deeds, restricting the sale of any lot within the
subdivision until such time as all public improvements are
completed in accordance with the approved plans, as
determined by the Town Planner.
C. Phasing of development. The Board may approve plans to develop a
major subdivision in distinct phases. This may be accomplished by
limiting final approval to those lots abutting that section of the
proposed subdivision street which is covered by a performance
guaranty. When development is phased, road construction shall
commence from an existing public way. Final approval of lots in
subsequent phases shall be given only upon satisfactory completion of
all requirements pertaining to previous phases.
D. Release or reduction of performance guaranty. The Town will not accept
dedication of required improvements, nor release or reduce the
performance guaranty, until the Public Works Director or Town
Engineer issues a certificate of completion stating that all the
improvements have been satisfactorily completed, and until "as-built"
drawings indicating the location, dimension, grade and material of all
public improvements have been filed with the town.
E. A performance bond may be reduced upon satisfactory completion of
portions of the required improvements but in no event shall the amount
be reduced below 10% of the original amount. The remaining 10% shall
continue in force for one year after completion of the improvements to
be used in the event of unforeseen failures.
A. All proposed street improvements shall meet the standards found
within Chapter 185 of the Topsham Code of Ordinances.
§ 191-13 TOPSHAM CODE § 191-15
184:240
Stormwater management. Where there is conflict between the provisions
of Chapter 185 and § 225-34, Stormwater management, the provisions of §
225-34, Stormwater management, shall apply.
§ 191-16. Final approval and inspection procedure. [Amended
5-18-1994 STM, Art. 17; 5-20-2004 STM, Art. 16]
All improvements within the subdivision shall be inspected by the Public
Works Director, Town Engineer, Planning Director or Codes Enforcement
Officer on a timely basis and progress reported on said improvements to
the Board. Where improvements are not constructed in accordance with
approved plans, the inspector shall notify the applicant to correct the
deficiency within a specified time or, if not remedied, then issue a stop-work
order until either the construction conforms to the approved plans or an
amended plan is approved by the Board. Upon completion of any road being
offered to the Town for acceptance, the applicant shall apply to the Planning
Board for a recommendation on acceptance. The application shall include
as-built plans of the completed road, a deed description of the road and any
land to be given to the Town, along with the appropriate fee and deposit as
indicated in Chapter 109 of the Town Code.
§ 191-17. Easements.
The Planning Board may require easements for sewage, drainage, stream
protection and other utilities. In general, all easements must be at least 30
feet wide, and wider easements may be required by the Planning Board.
Such easements should be delineated on the final plan. All easements
required by the Planning Board shall be described by metes and bounds.
§ 191-18. Public open space and protection of natural resources.
[Amended 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 14]
The subdivider shall be required to reserve land for parks or playgrounds,
or other recreational or open space facilities commensurate with the
increased demands the proposed development will have on public facilities.
Reserved land acceptable to the Board and developer shall be deeded
over to the Town or local land trust, with conservation restrictions as a
condition of approval and shown on the plan as “Reserved for Conservation
or Recreational Purposes.” Where the Board determines that land proposed
for set aside is not suitable, based on the standards in § 191-18A or D,
a payment-in-lieu of dedication shall be provided as further described in
§ 191-18C. The Planning Board may seek input from the Conservation
Commission and Recreation Committee in determining the conservation
and/ or recreational value of any proposed open space.
A. Recreation. Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be of a
character and location suitable for use as a playground, playfield or
other recreational purpose. Each reservation shall be a minimum of two
acres and shall be of suitable size, dimension, topography and soils and
shall have adequate road access.
§ 191-15 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 191-18
184:241
§ 191-19. Lots.
Side lines of lots must be at right angles to straight street lines or radial
to curved street lines unless the Planning Board decides that variation of
this rule will give a better plat. In all other respects, lots must conform to
Chapter 225, Zoning.
§ 191-20. Variations and exceptions. [Amended 5-18-1994 STM, Art.
17]
B. Other. Other public uses, such as natural resource preservation, scenic
vistas or traditional land uses, necessitating land reservation may be
required as determined by the Board. Where alternative land
development planning techniques make provisions for public or private
use space, land dedication requirements may be waived by the Board.
C. Payment-in-lieu calculation. Land reservations are calculated on the
basis of 1,300 square feet of land per unit. The applicant shall multiply
the total number of units by the per unit land reservation amount (1,300
square feet per unit) to achieve the total square footage of land to be
preserved. The total land reservation square footage shall be divided by
43,560 (1 acre) to determine the total acreage of land reservation. The
applicant shall obtain from the Tax Assessor the current average per
acre assessed value of single family residential land values within the
Town of Topsham. This value per acre shall then be multiplied by the
number of acres required for land reservation purposes. This will
provide the payment-in-lieu fee, which shall be paid before final
approval, and shall be dedicated for conservation and/or recreational
purposes. [Amended 5-20-2015 STM, Art. 11]
D. In determining the need for such land and reviewing the location and
appropriateness of an area reserved for park, playground, open space
or other public purposes, the Planning Board shall consider:
(1) The presence, absence, or expansion of any existing open spaces,
parks or playgrounds in the neighborhood;
(2) The conservation and protection of significant wildlife and natural
or scenic resources;
(3) The protection of historic or archaeological sites;
(4) The meeting of neighborhood and/or community-wide recreational
needs;
(5) The focus areas identified in the Topsham Natural Areas Plan, with
special consideration to those areas rated medium or higher in the
"Town of Topsham Natural Areas Evaluation Matrix Analysis with
Community Values"; [Amended 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 11]
(6) Any plans adopted by the Parks and Recreation Committee.
§ 191-18 TOPSHAM CODE § 191-20
184:242
§ 191-21. Enforcement.
A. Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or
is surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict
application of the requirements contained in these regulations would
result in substantial hardships or unjustices, the Planning Board may
vary or modify such requirements so that the subdivider is allowed to
develop his property in a reasonable manner, but so at the same time
the public welfare and interests of the Town are protected and that the
intent and spirit of these regulations, Chapter 225, Zoning, and the
Comprehensive Plan are preserved.
B. When a variation or exception is granted to any of the improvements
required by these regulations, the final plan shall indicate variances or
exceptions granted and the date on which they were granted.
A. Recording of unapproved plan. No plan of a subdivision of land within
the municipal boundaries which would constitute a subdivision as
defined herein shall hereafter be filed or recorded in the Registry of
Deeds until a final plan thereof shall have been approved by the
Planning Board in accordance with all of the requirements, design
standards and construction specifications set forth elsewhere in these
regulations, nor until such approval shall have been entered on such
final plan by the Planning Board.
B. Conveyance in unapproved subdivision. No person, firm, corporation or
other legal entity may convey, offer or agree to convey any land in a
subdivision which has not been approved by the Planning Board and
recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
C. Fine. Any person, firm, corporation or legal entity who conveys, offers
or agrees to convey, sells, leases, develops, builds upon or conveys for
consideration any land in a subdivision which has not been approved as
required by this section shall be penalized in accordance with 30
M.R.S.A. § 4966. The Attorney General, the municipalities or
appropriate municipal officials may institute proceedings to enjoin the
violation of this section.
D. Utility connection. No public utility, water district, sanitary district or
any utility company of any kind shall serve any lot in a subdivision for
which a final plan has not been approved by the Planning Board.
E. Site preparation. Not only is making a subdivision without Planning
Board approval a violation of law, but so also within such a subdivision
is grading or construction of roads, grading of land or lots or
construction of buildings until such time as final plan of such
subdivision shall have been duly prepared, submitted, reviewed,
approved and endorsed as provided in these regulations, and until the
original copy of the final plan so approved and endorsed has been duly
recorded in the Sagadahoc County Registry of Deeds.
§ 191-20 RIGHT-OF-WAYS § 191-22
184:243
§ 191-22. Severability.
If any part or provision of this chapter is judged invalid by the court, such
judgment shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts or sections of
this chapter.
§ 191-23. Appeals. [Added 5-18-1994 STM, Art 17]
An aggrieved party may appeal any decision of the Board under these
regulations to the Sagadahoc County Superior Court, within 30 days of the
date of the decision.
§ 191-24. Statutory reference.
See 30 M.R.S.A. §§ 1917 and 4956.38
Chapter 199
TRAFFIC IMPACT FEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 91.
Site plan review — See Ch. 175.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
191.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 199-1. Purpose.
This chapter imposes an impact fee on land development requiring review
under the Town's subdivision, site plan or conditional use regulations. These
fees will be used to provide new roads and related facilities necessitated
by new development that impacts traffic in the Topsham Fair Mall Area of
the Town, as defined herein. It also provides for the placement of impact
fee revenues into a road impact fee trust fund established for that purpose
and for the administration of the Impact Fee Ordinance, including the
expenditure of funds derived from road impact fees and the refunds of
unexpended funds.
§ 199-2. Legislative findings.
The Town Meeting of Topsham, Maine, finds, determines and declares as
follows:
A. To maintain adequate levels of service in the Topsham Fair Mall area
the existing road system must be expanded to accommodate future
traffic increases. New development in the Topsham Fair Mall area and
38.Editor's Note: 30 M.R.S.A. § 1917 was repealed by Chapter 583 of the Laws of 1987. See
now 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001. 30 M.R.S.A. § 4956 was repealed by Chapter 737 of the Laws of
1987. See now 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4401 et seq.
§ 191-22 TOPSHAM CODE § 199-2
199:244
§ 199-3. Title, authority, and applicability.
§ 199-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
elsewhere that affects traffic in the Topsham Fair Mall Area must be
accommodated safely and without decreasing current levels of service.
This must be done to promote and protect the public health, safety and
welfare;
B. The State of Maine has authorized municipalities to adopt impact fees
for various purposes, including the construction of off-site capital
improvements such as roads and traffic control devices, pursuant to
30-A M.R.S.A. 4354;
C. The imposition of impact fees is a preferred method of insuring that
new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital
investments necessary to accommodate such development. Appropriate
locations for new development in the Town and the capital
improvements necessary to accommodate such development are
identified in the Town's Comprehensive Plan and capital improvements
program;
D. New development generates additional traffic, necessitating the
acquisition of rights-of-way, road construction and road improvements;
E. Fees established by § 199-6 hereof are derived from, are based upon,
and do not exceed the costs of providing additional rights-of-way, road
construction and road improvements necessitated by the new
developments for which the fees are levied.
F. The report entitled "Traffic Impact Fee Development Plan," dated
March 2004, sets forth in more detail a reasonable methodology and
analysis for the determination of the impact of new development on the
need for additional rights-of-way, road construction and road
improvements in the Town.
A. Title. This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Topsham
Traffic Impact Fee Ordinance."
B. Authority. The Town Meeting of the Town of Topsham has the authority
to enact this ordinance pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. 4354 and its statutory
and constitutional home rule powers.
C. Applicability. This ordinance shall apply to all new development seeking
subdivision or site plan approval, the extension of previously approved
subdivisions or site plans, or any change in use when the proposed
development is located in the Topsham Fair Mall area if a building
permit is issued on or after the date this Ordinance is enacted.
§ 199-2 TRAFFIC IMPACT FEE § 199-4
199:245
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT —
DEVELOPER — A person or entity commencing a land development activity
which generates or attracts traffic in the Topsham Fair Mall area and which
requires subdivision or site plan approval from the Town of Topsham.
DEVELOPMENT — Any change in land use or any construction of buildings
or structures or any change in the use of any structure within the Topsham
Fair Mall area which leads to increased traffic generation.
EXPANSION OF ROAD CAPACITY — All road and intersection capacity
enhancements, including but not limited to extensions, widening,
intersection improvements, upgrading signalization, and expansion of
bridges.
INDEPENDENT FEE CALCULATION STUDY — The traffic engineering and/
or economic documentation prepared by a developer to allow the
determination of the impact fee other than by the use of the methodology
outlined in § 199-6 of this chapter.
MANDATORY OR REQUIRED RIGHT-OF-WAY DEDICATIONS AND/OR
ROADWAY IMPROVEMENTS — Such noncompensated dedications and/or
roadway improvements required by the Town during subdivision or site plan
review.
ROADS — Includes arterial streets and transportation facilities associated
with the arterial and state-aid highway network within the Topsham Fair
Mall area of the Town and under the jurisdiction of the Town or the State of
Maine.
Includes transportation planning, preliminary engineering, engineering
design studies, land surveys, right-of-way acquisition, engineering,
permitting and construction of all the necessary features for any public
infrastructure, including but not limited to:
(1) Construction of new through lanes;
(2) Construction of new turn lanes;
(3) Construction of new bridges;
Construction of new drainage facilities in conjunction with new
roadway construction;
(4)
Purchase and installation of traffic signalization (including new and
upgraded signalization);
(5)
(6) Construction of curbs, medians, and shoulders;
(7) Relocating utilities to accommodate new roadway construction;
(8) Construction public utilities to accommodate new development.
A.
Capital improvements do not include site-related improvements defined
herein.
B.
§ 199-4 TOPSHAM CODE § 199-4
199:246
SITE-RELATED IMPROVEMENTS — Capital improvements and right-ofway
dedications for direct access improvements to and/or within the
development in question. Direct access improvements include but are not
limited to the following:
TOPSHAM FAIR MALL AREA — The area of Topsham, including Topsham
Fair Mall Road and State Route 196, as follows:
§ 199-5. Imposition of road impact fee.
A. Access roads leading to the development;
B. Driveways and roads within the development;
Acceleration and deceleration lanes, and right and left turn lanes
leading to those roads and driveways; and
C.
D. Traffic control measurers for those roads and driveways.
A. All land serviced by Topsham Fair Mall Road in its entirety;
All land serviced by State Route 196, from its intersection with State
Route 201 to its intersection with Interstate 295; and
B.
All land serviced by Monument Place, from its proposed intersection
with Topsham Fair Mall Road to its intersection with State Route 201.
C.
A. Any developer who, after the effective date of this ordinance, seeks to
develop land by applying for subdivision or site plan approval, or for an
extension of subdivision or site plan approval issued prior to the
effective date hereof, to make an improvement to land or to change the
use of any land or building in the Topsham Fair Mall area is hereby
required to pay a road impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in
this ordinance. Preliminary determinations regarding whether a
proposed development will generate traffic in the Topsham Fair Mall
area shall be made by the Town Planner and the Town's consulting
traffic engineer, if any. Actual impacts shall be determined by a traffic
study prepared by a traffic engineer at the developer's expense and
approved by the Town's consulting engineer, unless the developer
agrees with the Town's determination.
B. No new building permit for any activity requiring payment of an impact
fee pursuant to this Ordinance shall be issued or renewed unless and
until the road impact fee hereby required has been paid.
C. No extension of a building permit issued prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, for any activity requiring payment of an impact fee
pursuant to this Ordinance, shall be granted unless and until the road
impact fee hereby required has been paid.
§ 199-4 TRAFFIC IMPACT FEE § 199-6
199:247
§ 199-6. Computation of road impact fee.
The amount of the traffic impact fee shall be determined by a fee schedule
established by the Board of Selectmen. The provisions of this paragraph
shall govern the setting of the impact fee schedule by the Board of
Selectmen and the computation of impact fees by the Town.
§ 199-7. Payment of fee.
§ 199-8. Traffic Impact Fee Trust Fund established.
§ 199-9. Use of funds.
A. The amount of the impact fee to be paid shall be determined in
accordance with the schedule of fees approved by order of the Board of
Selectmen, based on the number of vehicle trips generated by the
proposed use.
B. Where a development involves a mixed use, the fees shall be
determined in accordance with the applicable schedule by apportioning
traffic generation to the specific uses.
C. Where an extension is sought for a building permit, the amount of the
fee shall be the difference between the fee applicable at the time of the
extension and any amount previously paid pursuant to this ordinance.
D. Impact fees for change of use, redevelopment, or expansion or
modification of an existing use which has previously paid an impact fee
or which did not require payment of an impact fee when originally
approved and which requires the issuance of a building permit shall be
based upon the net positive increase in the impact fee for the new use
as compared to the previous use.
A. The developer shall pay the traffic impact fee required by this
ordinance to the Building Inspector or his designee prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
B. All funds collected shall be properly identified as traffic impact fees and
promptly transferred for deposit in the Traffic Impact Fee Trust Fund to
be used solely for the purposes specified in this Ordinance.
A. There is hereby established a Traffic Impact Fee Trust Fund, to be used
to accomplish the goals of this chapter, in accordance with § 199-9 of
this chapter.
A. Funds collected from traffic impact fees shall be used for the purpose of
capital improvements to and expansion of transportation facilities
associated with the Topsham Fair Mall area.
B. No funds shall be used for periodic or routine maintenance.
C. Funds shall be used exclusively for capital improvements or expansion
within the traffic impact fee area, as identified in the report entitled
§ 199-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 199-9
199:248
§ 199-10. Refund of fees.
§ 199-11. Exemptions.
§ 199-12. Credits.
"Computation Procedure." Funds shall be expended in the order in
which they are collected.
D. In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for
advanced provision of capital facilities for which traffic impact fees may
be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such
bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities
provided are of the type described in Subsection A of this section.
E. Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in § 199-10.
A. If a building permit is surrendered or expires without commencement
of construction, the developer shall be entitled to a refund, without
interest, of the impact fee paid as a condition for its issuance, except
that the Town shall retain three (3) percent of the impact fee paid to
offset a portion of the costs of collection. The developer must submit an
application for such a refund to the Code Enforcement Officer not later
than fifteen (15) days after the expiration of the permit.
B. Any funds not expended or obligated by contract by the end of the
calendar quarter immediately following ten (10) years from the date the
fee was paid shall, upon application of the developer, be returned to the
developer, provided that the developer submits an application for a
refund to the Code Enforcement Officer within 180 days of the ten (10)
year period.
A. Alterations or expansions of an existing building which do not result in
the generation of additional vehicle trips shall be exempt from payment
of the traffic impact fee.
B. Construction of accessory buildings or structures which do not
generate additional vehicle trips shall be exempt from the payment of
traffic impact fees.
C. The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or
structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use shall
be exempt from the payment of the impact fee.
D. Any claim of exemption shall be made prior to the time for payment of
the impact fee. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived.
A. Credit for the dedication of land for rights-of-way shall be valued at the
most recent assessed value by the Town Assessor or by fair market
value established by private appraisers acceptable to the Town. Credit
for the dedication of land shall be provided when property has been
§ 199-9 TRAFFIC IMPACT FEE § 199-12
199:249
conveyed at no charge to, and accepted by, the Town in a manner
satisfactory to the Board of Selectmen.
B. Credit for construction of capital improvements shall be given only
where:
(1) The Town and developer agree in writing that it would be more
cost-effective or expeditious for the developer to construct
improvements authorized for funding under this Ordinance; or
(2) For the cost of constructing capital improvements as a condition of
Planning Board approval under the Site Plan Review or Subdivision
Ordinances of the Town, provided such capital improvements
would be eligible for designation by the Board of Selectmen for
funding under this Ordinance. In such cases, the developer shall
submit acceptable engineering drawings and specifications and
construction cost estimates to the Town, which shall determine
credit for construction based upon either these cost estimates or
upon alternative engineering criteria and construction cost
estimates, if the Town determines that estimates submitted by the
developer are either unreliable or inaccurate. Upon final
determination of all credits, the Town shall provide the developer
with a letter or certificate setting forth the dollar amount of the
credit, the reason for the credit, and the legal description or other
adequate description of the project or development to which the
credit may be applied. The developer must sign and date a
duplicate copy of such letter or certificate indicating his/her
agreement to the terms of the letter or certificate and return such
signed document to the Town before credit will be given. The
failure of the developer to sign, date and return such document
with the balance of the impact fees and building permit fees within
60 days shall nullify the credit.
C. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection D, credit against impact
fees otherwise due will remain provisional until:
(1) Construction is completed and accepted by the Town or the state,
whichever is applicable; and
(2) A suitable maintenance and warranty bond is received and
approved by the Town, where applicable.
D. Security shall be given for provisional credit in the form of a
performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit or escrow agreement
posted with and approved by the Planning Director or Planning Board
and Town Attorney in an amount determined by the Planning
Department or Planning Board. If the project will not be constructed
within two years of the acceptance of the offer by the Town, the amount
of the security shall be increased by 10% compounded for each year of
life of the security. If the construction project is not to be completed
within five years of the date of the developer's offer, the Board of
Selectmen must approve the construction project and its scheduled
§ 199-12 TOPSHAM CODE § 199-12
199:250
§ 199-13. Amendments.
This Traffic Impact Fee Ordinance may be amended from time to time
to include other defined areas and/or districts if the Town of Topsham
determines, after appropriate study and hearing, that increased traffic from
new developments in those other areas and/or districts affects traffic in
those areas and/or districts in a manner that must be accommodated safely
and without decreasing current levels of service, and that will promote and
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
BE IT ORDERED by the Topsham Board of Selectmen that pursuant to the
Town of Topsham Traffic Impact Fee Ordinance, the fees and charges shall
be as specified in the Schedule of License, Permit and Application Fees
established by the Board of Selectmen for development from the Traffic
Impact Fee Trust Fund.
completion date prior to the acceptance of the offer by the Town. The
security or replacement shall state the date for commencement of the
project and the time period for estimated completion. This date and/
or time period may be extended by the Town for good cause shown,
conditioned upon extension of the security.
E. Credit may also be given for the costs of constructing capital
improvements required as a condition of Planning Board subdivision
approval or a Department of Transportation Traffic Movement Permit if
the development was approved prior to enactment of this ordinance but
building permits are issued after enactment. Credit shall be in an
amount determined by the Planning Board, based upon the scope of the
development approved by the Planning Board and/or MeDOT and the
value of the capital improvements actually constructed. Credit shall be
given only to the extent that the traffic impact of the proposed
development, as determined at the time of construction, does not
exceed the impacts anticipated by the subdivision or site location of
development approval. The developer shall have the burden of
establishing the cost of capital improvements constructed.
F. Any claim for credit must be made prior to the time for payment of
impact fees. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived.
G. Credits shall not be transferred from one project or development to
another without the approval of the Board of Selectmen.
H. Determination pursuant to this section may be appealed to the Town
Manager by filing a written request with the Town Manager within 30
days of the determination order setting impact fees and designating
approved projects.
§ 199-12 TRAFFIC IMPACT FEE § 199-13
199:251
Chapter 202
UNSECURED LOADS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 179.
§ 202-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate certain unsecured loads within
the Town of Topsham.
§ 202-2. Covering required; removal of spills.
§ 202-3. Enforcement.
The Topsham Police Department shall have enforcement authority
pertaining to this chapter.
§ 202-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person or business who operates or causes to be operated a vehicle
without the load covered and either secured or confined to prevent the
spillage of the transported material shall be subject to the following
penalties:
A. No person shall operate or cause to be operated upon any public way
within the town any vehicle with a load of gravel, sand, crushed stone,
ledge, rock or by-products thereof unless the load is covered and either
secured or confined to prevent any portion of the load from falling or
spilling out of the vehicle.
B. A load shall be considered to be covered when a tarpaulin, canvas or
other suitable similar device is employed to prevent the spillage of the
transported material.
C. Should there be mud, water or other liquid combined with any
transported material, it shall be prevented from leaking, spilling or
otherwise falling from the vehicle transporting the material through
any means necessary, such as drying or cleaning prior to loading and
transporting.
D. Any material that has fallen or spilled from a vehicle shall be removed
or cleaned up immediately. All costs of removal or cleanup shall be
borne by the individual or business causing the spillage.
A. First offense: a written warning and cleanup of any spilled material.
B. Second offense: a fifty-dollar fine and cleanup of any spilled material.
§ 199-13 TOPSHAM CODE § 202-4
202:252
§ 202-5. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective sixty (60) days after its enactment.
Chapter 210
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
C. Third offense and any continuing offenses: a one-hundred-dollar fine
and cleanup of any spilled material.
§ 202-4 UNSECURED LOADS § 202-5
202:253

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 210-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Vehicles at the Fire and Police
Departments and such ambulances and emergency vehicles as designated
or authorized by the Chief of Police.
BICYCLE — Every device propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is more than 20 inches
in diameter.
BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN LANE COMBINATION — A space adjacent to
a street or highway designated by painted lines or other durable markings
running parallel with the street or highway designated for the use by
bicycles and pedestrians. The municipal officer may designate certain
locations on the street or highway as bicycle and pedestrian lanes with an
official sign reading "bicycle and pedestrian lane" located on the street or
highway so as to be sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinary observant
individual.[Added 7-16-1992 by the Board of Selectmen]
BICYCLE LANE — A space adjacent to a street or highway designated by
painted lines or other durable markings running parallel with the street or
highway designed for use by bicycles. The municipal officers may designate
certain locations on the street or highway as a bicycle lane with an official
sign reading "bicycle lane" located on the street or highway so as to be
sufficiently visible and legible to be seen by an ordinary observant
individual.
COMPACT OR BUILT-UP SECTION — The territory of any municipality
contiguous to any way which is built up with structures which are situated
less than 150 feet apart for a distance of at least 1/4 mile.
CROSSWALKS: —
DRIVER — Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
motor vehicle.
INTERSECTION — The area embraced within the prolongation or
connection of the lateral curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary
lines of the roadways of two streets which join one another.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively on
tracks, including motorcycles, but not including snowmobiles.
That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation
of the lateral curblines.
A.
Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by
lines or other margins on the surface.
B.
§ 210-1 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-1
202:255
PARKED — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading
or unloading.
PARKING SPACE — Any space which is duly designated for the parking of a
single vehicle by painted lines or other durable markings.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person on foot.
POLICE OFFICER — Every officer of the Police Department, or any person
authorized to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
PUBLIC WAY — Any public highway or sidewalk, private way laid out under
authority of statute, way dedicated to public use or way upon which the
public has a right of access.
SIDEWALKS — A space adjacent to a street or highway with a built-up curb
or grass strip that separates the space from the street or highway, designed
exclusively for use by pedestrians.
STANDING — Any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
STOP — Complete cessation when required.
STOP OR STOPPING WHEN PROHIBITED — Any halting, even
momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with another vehicle or in compliance with the directions of
a police officer or traffic control signal.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between boundary lines of every
way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to use for the public
for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purposes of
travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES — All signs, signals, markings and other
devices, whether immovable or whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, placed or erected by authority of a public body
having official jurisdiction, by which traffic is ultimately directed to stop and
proceed or for the purposes of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
TRAVELED PORTION OF STREET OR HIGHWAY — The portion of the street
or highway that is ordinarily used by vehicle traffic. For purposes of this
definition, "traveled portion" shall be the distance of 10 feet measured
from the center of the street or highway toward the edge of said street or
highway and 10 feet measured from the center of the street or highway
toward the edge of said street or highway toward the opposite side of the
street or highway.
TRUCK — A motor vehicle that is registered for over 12,000 pounds gross
weight.
VEHICLE — Includes all kinds of conveyances on ways for persons and for
property, including special equipment, except those propelled or drawn by
human power or used exclusively on tracks or snowmobiles.
§ 210-1 TOPSHAM CODE § 210-2
202:256
§ 210-2. Applicability.
§ 210-3. Signs required.
No provision of this chapter for which signs are required may be enforced
against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an
official sign is not in proper position as sufficiently legible to be seen by an
ordinary observant individual. Whenever a particular section does not state
that signs are required, such section shall be effective without signs being
erected to give notice thereof.
§ 210-4. Unauthorized signs.
A. This chapter shall apply to all persons who are engaged in the operation
of any vehicle upon the public ways within the jurisdiction of the Town
of Topsham, including the driver of any vehicle owned or used in service
of the United States government, state, county or any city or town.
B. Except when otherwise directed by a police officer, the driver of any
vehicle and every pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any traffic
control device, signals, sign or marker, installed under this chapter or
state law, and every such person shall obey each and every provision of
this chapter.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to authorized emergency
vehicles, except that the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle,
except when otherwise directed by a police officer, may:
(1) Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
(3) Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as he or she does not
endanger life or property.
(4) Disregard regulations governing the direction of movement or
turning in specified directions so long as he or she does not
endanger life or property.
D. The provisions regarding emergency vehicles shall not protect the
driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his or her reckless
disregard of the safety of others.
E. This chapter shall apply to all persons propelling any pushcart, riding
any animal upon a roadway or driving any animal-drawn vehicle.
A. No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street
any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be
or is an imitation or resembles a traffic control device or railroad sign or
signal or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which
hides from view or interferes with effectiveness of any traffic control
device or any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall maintain any
§ 210-2 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-4
202:257
§ 210-5. Clinging to moving vehicles.
No person riding upon any bicycle, moped, coaster, skateboard, roller
skates, sled, toy vehicle, motorized bicycle or motorized tricycle shall attach
himself or herself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway.
§ 210-6. Bicycles.
No person shall ride a bicycle, moped, coaster, skateboard, roller skates,
sled, motorized bicycle or motorized tricycle on any sidewalk within the
jurisdictional limits of the Town of Topsham.
§ 210-7. True name.
§ 210-8. Skateboards and roller skates.
§ 210-9. Violations and penalties.
The Chief of Police, when satisfied that a juvenile under the age of
seventeen 17 years has ridden a bicycle, moped, coaster, skateboard, roller
skates, sled, toy vehicle, motorized bicycle or motorized tricycle in violation
of any of the provisions of §§ 210-5, 210-6 and 210-8, may impound the
traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This
shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property
adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information and
of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
B. Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared a
public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway
is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed
without notice.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person when given notice by any police
officer to appear to answer for any offense against any provision of this
chapter to give other than his or her true name, date of birth and true
place of residence.
B. Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall, upon
adjudication, be punished by a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars
($25.).
A. Any person riding a skateboard or roller skates on any public way shall
ride the same in a careful and prudent manner, having due regard to the
traffic and of any other conditions existing.
B. Any police officer or other duly authorized law enforcement officer
within the Town of Topsham, when satisfied that a person over the age
of seventeen (17) years has ridden a skateboard or roller skates in
violation of any of the provisions of this section, may enforce this
section in accordance with 17-A M.R.S.A. § 505, Obstructing Public
Ways.
§ 210-4 TOPSHAM CODE § 210-9
202:258
bicycle, moped, coaster, skateboard, roller skates, sled, toy vehicle,
motorized bicycle or motorized tricycle for a period not to exceed five (5)
days for the first offense, for a period not to exceed ten (10) days for the
second offense and for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days for any
subsequent offense.
§ 210-9 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-9
202:259

ARTICLE II
Operation of Vehicles
§ 210-10. Traffic control signal legend.
A. Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting
different colored lights or color lighted arrows successively one at a
time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be
used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and
such lights shall indicate and apply to the drivers of vehicles and
pedestrians as follows:
(1) Green.
(a) The driver of a vehicle facing a circular green signal may
proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at
such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic
coming, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the
right of way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully
within the intersection at the time the signal is exhibited.
(b) The driver of a vehicle facing a green arrow signal, shown
alone or in combination with another indication, may
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement
indicated by such arrow or other such movement as is
permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such
vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to pedestrians
lawfully within the intersection and to other traffic lawfully
using the intersection.
(c) Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
(2) Yellow.
(a) The driver of a vehicle facing a circular yellow signal shall stop
before entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if
such stop cannot be made in safety a vehicle may be driven
cautiously through the intersection.
(b) Pedestrians facing such signals are thereby advised that there
is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian
then starting to cross shall yield the right of way to all vehicles.
(3) Red.
(a) The driver of a vehicle facing a steady red signal shall stop
before entering a crosswalk on the near side of the intersection
or, if none, then before entering the intersection shall remain
standing until an indication to proceed is shown, except as
provided in Subsection A(3)(c) below.
§ 210-10 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-10
202:261
§ 210-11. Flashing signals.
Whenever any illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic
sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
§ 210-12. Location of traffic control signals.
Automatic traffic control signals shall be placed at the intersections listed
in the attached inventory.39
(b) No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway,
unless he can do so safely and without interfering with any
vehicular traffic.
(c) The driver of a vehicle facing a steady circular red signal at an
intersection may cautiously enter the intersection to make a
right turn after stopping as required by Subsection A(3)(a)
above, unless such a turn is prohibited by appropriate signs
such as "No Right Turn on Red." The driver of a vehicle
executing such a turn shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians in the intersection and to all traffic moving on the
lanes having the green signal at the intersection.
(d) The driver of a vehicle facing a steady red arrow indication
may not enter the intersection to make a movement indicated
by such arrow, and unless entering the intersection to make
such other movement as is permitted by other indications
shown at the same time, shall stop before entering the
intersection on the near side of the intersection and shall
remain standing until an indication to make the move and
indicated by such arrow is shown.
B. If a traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than
an intersection, this section shall be applicable except as to those
provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop
required shall be made at a signal or marking on the pavement
indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such
marking or sign, the stop shall be made at the signal.
A. Flashing red. When a red signal is illuminated with rapid intermittent
flashes, the driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the
intersection or at a line marked on the pavement, and the right to
proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
B. Flashing yellow. When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or pass the signal only with caution.
39.Editor's Note: See § 210-56.
§ 210-10 TOPSHAM CODE § 210-13
202:262
§ 210-13. Stop signs.
Stop signs shall be located at the intersections listed in the Stop Sign and
Yield Sign Inventory,40 and shall cause drivers of vehicles approaching to
stop at the entrance of the intersections.
§ 210-14. Yield signs.
Yield signs shall be located at the intersections listed in the Stop Sign and
Yield Sign Inventory,41 and shall cause drivers of vehicles approaching to
slow to a reasonable speed for existing conditions and to yield the right-ofway
to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway
so as to constitute a hazard during the time that the driver is moving across
or within the intersection.
§ 210-15. One-way signs.
Signs indicating the direction of vehicular traffic shall be located upon the
streets and parts of streets described in the attached inventory.42 Drivers of
vehicles shall move only in the direction indicated by the signs.
§ 210-16. No-turning, turning and U-turn signs.
§ 210-17. U-turns.
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction of any street in a business district and shall not upon any
other street so turn a vehicle unless its movement can be made in safety
and without interfering with other traffic.
A. The municipal officers may cause signs to be erected and maintained,
indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles approaching or turning
at those locations. The direction indicated may conform to or be other
than prescribed by law or ordinance. The municipal officers may also
cause directional signs to be painted or marked on the roadway; such
directional signs shall be obeyed in the same manner as other
directional signs.
B. When authorized signs, marks or other indications are placed adjacent
to or within an intersection or other location indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning there, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey
the directions of such indications.
C. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no U-turn is
permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of that
sign.
40.Editor's Note: See § 210-55.
41.Editor's Note: See § 210-55.
42.Editor's Note: See § 210-58.
§ 210-13 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-18
202:263
§ 210-18. Blocking crosswalks and intersections.
The driver of a vehicle shall not enter an intersection or marked crosswalk
unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians through the
intersection, notwithstanding any traffic control indication to proceed.
§ 210-19. Passing stopped or slowed vehicles.
Whenever any vehicle is stopped or slowed at a crosswalk or any unmarked
crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway,
the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake
and pass such stopped or slowed vehicles.
§ 210-20. Dimming headlights.
§ 210-21. Driving out from curb.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive a vehicle from any curb or on any
street without first looking to see that he or she shall not pull directly into
the path of an approaching vehicle, nor without giving flashing directional
signal or hand signals indicating that he or she is about to drive out from
the curb.
§ 210-22. Emerging from driveways.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private driveway, automobile
service station or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to
driving onto the road and upon entering the roadway shall yield the rightof-
way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
§ 210-23. Speed limits.
A person operating a vehicle on any street, highway or public way within the
jurisdiction of the Town shall operate that vehicle at a careful and prudent
speed not greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions
existing at the time and in no case in excess of any posted limit, and having
due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the road, and to the actual
and potential hazards in any condition then existing, except that:
A. Whenever the driver of a vehicle equipped with multiple-beam road
lighting equipment, during the times when headlights are required,
approaches oncoming vehicles within five hundred (500) feet, such
driver shall dim the headlights to a low beam so that the glaring rays
are not projected into the eyes of the driver of the oncoming vehicle.
B. No driver of a motor vehicle shall operate his headlights continuously
on the upper high beam when following a motor vehicle closer than one
hundred (100) feet.
§ 210-18 TOPSHAM CODE § 210-23
202:264
§ 210-24. School crossings.
Whenever traffic is controlled by a school crossing sign exhibiting the word
"Stop," the driver of the vehicle facing the sign shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk or at such other point as may be indicated by a clearly
visible line, and shall then proceed with due caution, having regard for the
safety of the pedestrians crossing at that point.
§ 210-25. Bicycle and pedestrian lanes. [Added 7-16-1992 by the
Board of Selectmen]
No person shall stop or operate any vehicle within a bicycle lane or a bicycle
and pedestrian lane which is listed in the attached inventory.43
§ 210-26. Unsecured loads.
A. No person shall operate any vehicle on any street, highway, public way
or throughway in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour in a school zone.
B. No person shall operate a vehicle on any street, highway, public way or
throughway in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour in any compact
or built-up section of the town.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate certain unsecured
loads with in the Town of Topsham.
B. General provisions.
(1) No person, business or entity shall operate or cause to be operated
upon any public way within the Town any vehicle with a load of
gravel, sand, crushed stone, ledge, rock or by-products thereof
unless the load is covered and either secured or confined to prevent
any portion of the load from falling or spilling out of the vehicle.
(2) A load shall be considered to be covered when a tarpaulin, canvas
or other suitable similar device is employed to prevent the spillage
of the transported material.
(3) Should there be mud, water or other liquid combined with any
transported material, it shall be prevented from leaking, spilling or
otherwise falling from the vehicle transporting the material
through any means necessary, such as drying or cleaning prior to
loading and transporting.
(4) Any material that has fallen or spilled from a vehicle shall be
removed or cleaned up immediately. All costs of removal or cleanup
shall be borne by the individual, business or entity causing the
spillage.
43.Editor's Note: See § 210-59.
§ 210-23 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-26
202:265
§ 210-27. Inventory list. [Amended 7-16-1992 by the Board of
Selectmen]
There shall be an inventory list of stop signs, yield signs, one-way signs,
crosswalks, traffic control signals, bicycle lanes and pedestrian bicycle
lanes. Authorization for additional locations requiring the above-listed signs
and entry in the appropriate inventory list attached to this chapter is vested
with the Board of Selectmen.44
§ 210-28. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of Article II of this chapter,
with the exception of § 210-26, shall, upon adjudication, be punished by a
fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.) and not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.).
C. Exceptions. This section does not apply to any vehicles engaged in
snowplowing, snow removal and/or sanding operations during winter
months.
D. Enforcement. The Topsham Police Department shall have enforcement
authority pertaining to this section.
E. Penalties. Any person, business or entity who operates or causes to be
operated a vehicle without the load covered and either secured or
confined to prevent the spillage of the transported material shall be
subject to the following penalties:
(1) First offense: a written warning and cleanup of any spilled material.
(2) Second offense: a fine of fifty dollars ($50.) and cleanup of any
spilled material.
(3) Third offense and any continuing offenses: a fine of one hundred
dollars ($100.) and cleanup of any spilled material.
F. Effective date. This section shall become effective immediately.
44.Editor's Note: See Art. VII, Inventory Lists.
§ 210-26 TOPSHAM CODE § 210-28
202:266
ARTICLE III
Pedestrians
§ 210-29. Traffic control signals.
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals at intersections as
provided in this chapter, but at all other places pedestrians shall be
accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions as stated in
this Article.
§ 210-30. Right-of-way at crosswalks.
§ 210-31. Restrictions.
§ 210-32. Crosswalks.
Crosswalks shall exist, whether marked or unmarked, at all intersections.
At areas other than intersections, crosswalks shall be designated by the
Selectmen, with a list of such areas to be placed on record with the Town
Clerk's office, with those areas to be appropriately marked.45
A. Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver
of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if
need be so as to yield, to a pedestrian crossing at the roadway within
any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection, except as provided in this Article.
B. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at any intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross
the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear
shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
A. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
B. Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except at marked
crosswalks.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, every driver of a vehicle
shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any
roadway, and shall give warning by sounding a horn when necessary,
and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any
confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
D. Pedestrians shall walk or jog on the extreme left side of the roadway
facing oncoming traffic when no sidewalks are available.
45.Editor's Note: See § 210-57, Crosswalk Inventory.
§ 210-29 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-33
202:267
§ 210-33. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of Article III of this chapter shall,
upon adjudication, be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.)
but not more than one hundred dollars ($100.).
§ 210-33 TOPSHAM CODE § 210-33
202:268
ARTICLE IV
Stopping, Standing and Parking
§ 210-34. Restricted areas.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or a traffic control device, in any of the following places:
§ 210-35. Passenger and freight loading zones.
The municipal officers may establish passenger zones and freight loading
zones and place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and
stating the hours during which the provisions of this chapter are applicable.
§ 210-36. No-parking zones.
The municipal officers may establish and then erect and maintain signs
indicating that no parking is permitted on the side of said street.
A. On a sidewalk, bridge or crosswalk, bicycle lane or bicycle and
pedestrian lane.
B. In front of any public or private driveway; nor within ten (10) feet on
either side of any driveway.
C. Within an intersection.
D. Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant.
E. Within twenty (20) feet of the near corner of the curbs at an
intersection, unless otherwise designated.
F. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance of any fire station and
on the side of the street opposite the entrance of any fire station within
seventy-five (75) feet of that entrance.
G. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
H. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of the street or "double parked," so-called.
I. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
J. Within ten (10) feet of a railroad track.
K. On any street or highway that is the traveled portion of said street or
highway.
L. On any street or highway where parking is allowed, with the vehicle
heading in the opposite direction.
§ 210-34 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-37
202:269
§ 210-37. Declaration of emergency parking ban. [Amended
1-17-2008]
§ 210-38. Snow removal. [Amended 1-17-2008]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time on any public way so as to
interfere with plowing or the removal of snow from it by the Town. The Chief
of Police, or his or her designee, may remove any such vehicle and place it
in a suitable parking space, at the expense of the owner. For the purpose of
facilitating snow removal, the Public Works Director may place temporary
signs along any public way from which the snow is about to be removed,
indicating that parking a vehicle is prohibited. A person shall not park a
vehicle within the area indicated by the signs.
§ 210-39. Parking restrictions.
A. The Town Manager, or his or her designee, may declare an emergency
parking ban. The declaration of an emergency parking ban may be
made applicable to all Town streets and municipal parking lots or only
to certain lots, or streets or streets within a defined perimeter. Such a
declaration of emergency shall be for the purpose of plowing or
removing snow or ice which has accumulated, or for other good cause
stated in the declaration of the parking ban. The declaration shall be
made at least six hours prior to the starting time of the ban. Such
declaration shall be communicated to such representatives of the
communications media as the Town Manager may direct.
B. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be or remain parked on any street
during the effective time of such declared emergency. Any vehicle in
violation will also be subject to removal as outlined under § 210-38.
A. Elm Street. There shall be no parking of vehicles on Elm Street in any of
the following locations.
(1) On either side from the intersection of Main Street and Elm Street
to the intersection of Pleasant Street and Elm Street. Vehicles
parked alongside Elm Street in this one (1) area and not within the
traveled portion on Sunday for church services are exempt.
(2) On the north side:
(a) From the intersection of Pleasant Street and Elm Street to the
intersection of the main entrance to the Topsham Fairgrounds
and Elm Street.
(b) From the intersection at Fair Circle to the intersection of
Foreside Road and Elm Street.
(3) On the south side of 63 Elm Street (Fields Spar Mill) to the railroad
overhead bridge.
§ 210-37 TOPSHAM CODE § 210-39
202:270
B. Main Street. There shall be no parking of vehicles on either side of Main
Street from the intersection of Elm Street and Main Streets to the
intersection of Route 196 and Main Street (to the post office on the east
side of Main Street).
(1) There shall be no parking of vehicles on the west side of Main
Street from the intersection of Main Street and Summer Streets to
the intersection of Main and Elm Street.
(2) Parking will be allowed on the east side of Main Street between the
Frank Woods Bridge and the intersection of Green Street in the
marked spaces for a maximum of two consecutive hours.
[Amended 2-5-2004 by the Board of Selectmen[
(3) There shall be no parking of vehicles on the east or west side of
Main Street from the intersection of Elm and Main Street in a
northerly direction for a distance of 600 feet.
(4) Parking will be allowed in the identified spaces on Ron's Way at the
intersection of Main Street and Green Street for a maximum of two
consecutive hours. [Added 2-5-2004 by the Board of
Selectmen]
C. Perkins Street. There shall be no parking of vehicles on either side of
the short portion of Perkins Street from the intersection of Pleasant and
Perkins Street to the portion of Perkins Street that runs north and
south.
D. Winter Street.
(1) There shall be no parking of vehicles along either side of Winter
Street from Garden Drive to the Central Maine Power Company
pole No. 1.
(2) There shall be no parking of vehicles on the south side of Winter
Street for a distance of 75 feet from the intersection of Main and
Winter Street.
E. There shall be no parking from the west line of Main Street to a point
fifty (50) feet west of the intersection, except that a loading zone shall
be permitted on the southerly side of Winter Street within twenty (20)
feet of the intersection.
F. There shall be no parking permitted on the northeast side of Route 196
from the intersection of Route 201 to the intersection at Second Street.
G. Second Street.
(1) There shall be no parking permitted on the north side of Second
Street.
(2) Parking shall be permitted an the south side of Second Street for
one (1) hour from a point of approximately fifty (50) feet from the
§ 210-39 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-39
202:271
§ 210-40. Parking near fire station.
§ 210-41. Handicapped parking.
intersection of Route 196 proceeding easterly for a distance of
approximately one hundred (100) feet.
H. There shall be no parking permitted on School Drive from the
intersection of Perkins Street to the intersection with the Williams
School parking lot.
I. There shall be no parking permitted on the final one hundred (100)
yards of the section of Old Augusta Road that enters Route 201 north of
the interstate. This includes both sides of the road and the turnaround
located near the dead end.
J. No parking shall be permitted in the area marked "Fire Lane" except for
Fire Department apparatus.
K. There shall be no parking on either side of Green Street.
L. There shall be no parking of vehicles on either side of Pleasant Street.
Parking is allowed in the three designated parking spaces on the west
side in front of the library.
M. There shall be no parking of vehicles on either side of Wilson Street.
N. There shall be no parking of vehicles on the north side of Melcher Place.
O. There shall be no parking of vehicles on Frost Street.
P. There shall be no parking of vehicles on Mallet Drive.
Q. There shall be no parking on either side on Foreside Road adjacent to
the Topsham Recreation Field.
A. Authority of the Chief. The Chief of Police or the Fire Chief or both are
hereby authorized to set out, make and maintain parking signs, lines
and barriers on the triangular lot owned by the Town of Topsham at the
front of Green Street near the fire station in accordance with the
parking plan on file at the Town office and the other provisions of this
section.
B. Fire personnel. Parking for fire personnel only shall be permitted in the
eighteen (18) stalls located directly in front of the fire station and
marked on the parking plan as "Fire Personnel."
C. The Fire Chief is authorized to regulate parking by means of signs
within one hundred (100) feet of any fire station.
D. The ten (10) parking spaces identified as public parking in front of the
Fire Station will be designated as "All Day Parking." "All day parking" is
defined as 6:00 a.m. to 3:00 a.m. [Added 2-5-2004 by the Board of
Selectmen]
§ 210-39 TOPSHAM CODE § 210-41
202:272
§ 210-42. Double parking.
Double parking shall not be permitted on any street or way within the Town
of Topsham.
§ 210-43. Time limit parking signs.
Whenever any time limit parking is imposed, except when specifically
exempted, the municipal officers shall erect appropriate signs giving notice
thereof.
§ 210-44. Emergency parking.
When, in the best judgment of the municipal officers or the Chief of Police
an emergency exists or is about to exist, because of snow, ice, hurricane
or other weather hazard or because of a large gathering such as a fair or
concert, the municipal officers or the Chief of Police may, notwithstanding
any other provision of this chapter, determine and designate, by proper
emergency signs, streets or portions of streets on which no stopping or
parking of vehicles may be permitted and also to determine and designate,
by proper emergency signs, streets or portions of streets on which no
vehicular traffic may be permitted or on which vehicular traffic may move
only in one (1) direction.
§ 210-45. Violations and penalties.
A. No person shall park or cause to be parked any motor vehicle or
motorcycle in a parking space clearly marked as a handicapped parking
space, unless that vehicle or motorcycle displays a special registration
license plate issued under 29 M.R.S.A. § 252, 252-A or 252-C,46 or a
similar license plate or placard issued by another state. Clearly marked
signs include signs painted on the pavement and vertical standing
signs.
B. Where the owner of the private off-street parking area has entered into
an agreement with the Topsham Police Department for the enforcement
of this chapter, as authorized under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3009, Subsection
1D(2), this chapter may be enforced, in the private off-street area, by
the Topsham Police Department.
A. Any person who violates a provision of this Article shall be subject to
the following penalties:
Violation Fine
Overtime parking $10.00
Vehicle in crosswalk or in
sidewalk
$10.00
46.Editor's Note: 29 M.R.S.A. §§ 252, 252-A and 252-C were repealed by Chapter 683 of the
Laws of 1993. See now 29-A M.R.S.A. § 521 et seq.
§ 210-41 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-45
202:273
Violation Fine
Obstructing traffic $10.00
Obstructing driveway $10.00
Parking in restricted area $10.00
Double parking $10.00
Parking overnight $10.00
Other $10.00
Handicapped parking violation
[Amended 8-21-1997 by the
Board of Selectmen]
$100.00
B. Any person who parks a motor vehicle in violation of the parking Code
will be subject to a penalty fine of: [Amended 2-5-2004 by the Board
of Selectmen]
(1) Ten dollars ($10.00) for the first violation within a seven (7)
consecutive day period.
(2) Fifteen dollars ($15.00) for the second violation within a seven (7)
consecutive day period.
(3) Twenty dollars ($20.00) for the third violation within a seven (7)
consecutive day period.
(4) Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) each for the fourth or more violations
within a seven (7) consecutive day period.
(5) Handicapped parking violations will remain $100.00 for each
offense.
If the penalty is not paid within 30 days after notice of the
violation, a civil summons may be issued charging that person
with the specific violation under Article IV. Upon adjudication, that
person shall be punished by a fine according to Subsection A. The
District Court, in addition to the penalty, may assess a fee not to
exceed $100.00 to cover the cost to the Town for the District Court
process.
C. Penalties are to be collected by the Police Department dispatch office
and handled according to the Town cash control policy. A duplicate copy
of the account will be forwarded to the Selectmen's office.
D. Towing. [Added 2-5-2004 by Board of Selectmen]
(1) Purpose. The purpose of these sections is to improve the
enforcement of the Topsham parking ordinances and to discourage
habitual violators.
§ 210-45 TOPSHAM CODE § 210-45
202:274
(2) Definitions. The following words and terms as used in these
sections shall have the meanings ascribed thereto, unless the
context otherwise indicates:
OUTSTANDING PARKING TICKET — Any notice of violation of any
parking ordinance of the Town of Topsham where:
TOWING LIST — A list maintained by the Police Department
containing the names of those wreckers approved by the Town to
respond to requests for the towing of vehicles made by the Police
Department.
WAIVER CHARGES or CHARGES — The fees a violator may pay to
waive court action plus all expenses the Town of Topsham incurs,
specifically enumerated in this chapter or state law, to collect fees
or fines, including but not limited to certified mail fees.
WRECKER — A person engaged in the business of, or offering the
services of, a vehicle wrecker or towing service whereby motor
vehicles are or may be towed or otherwise moved from one place
to another by the use of a motor vehicle adapted to and designated
for that purpose.
The owner of the offending vehicle has been finally determined
to be in violation by reason of default or otherwise; and
(a)
The resultant fine or waiver charge established pursuant to
30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 and § 3009 has not been paid.
(b)
(3) Towing. The Topsham Police Department is authorized, subject to
the requirements of these sections, to remove by use of a wrecker
and impound any vehicle found on any public or private way or
public property which has accumulated four (4) or more
outstanding parking tickets or accumulated fines totalling fifty
dollars ($50.00) or more and is authorized to take whatever action
is reasonably necessary to carry out the provisions of these
sections.
(4) Notice to owner before towing. After a vehicle has received four (4)
or more outstanding tickets or accumulated fines totalling fifty
dollars ($50.00) or more, a letter will. be sent to the vehicle's owner
or operator. This letter alerts the owner of the outstanding parking
tickets or accumulated fines totalling fifty dollars ($50.00) or more
and allows thirty (30) days for payment of accumulated fines or
waiver charges. After this time period has transpired with no
arrangement having been made to pay the fines or waiver charges,
a certified letter, return receipt requested, will be sent to the owner
or operator allowing seven (7) calendar days for payment of the
fines or waiver charges, or the vehicle will be subject to tow.
(5) Procedure for towing and impoundment. Any police officer
ordering towing and impoundment of a vehicle under these
sections shall, at the time of such towing and impounding or within
§ 210-45 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-45
202:275
a reasonable time thereafter, notify the dispatcher of the storage
location of the vehicle. Such information shall be recorded by the
dispatcher for use by the Chief of Police, or his/her authorized
representative. The Chief of Police, or his/her authorized
representative shall notify the owner or operator by certified mail,
return receipt requested, of the towing and impoundment of the
vehicle within five (5) business days of the towing and
impoundment thereof; the storage location of such vehicle; and
the requirements of release as set forth in Subsection D(6). This
section shall not apply where an impounded vehicle has been
released within the five-day period.
(6) Release of vehicles. The vehicle shall not be released until:
(a) The individual requesting the release presents satisfactory
evidence of his/her right to possession and signs a receipt
therefor, and the Chief of Police, or his/her authorized
representative, certifies that all fines or waiver fees described
in this chapter, including the fees for towing and
impoundment, have been paid; or
(b) Upon the certification by the Chief of Police, or his/her
authorized representative, that the owner or operator is unable
to pay accumulated fines or waiver charges by reason of
poverty, having provided satisfactory proof of such status, and
that such owner or operator has accepted a summons initiating
a court proceeding to determine his/her liability for the alleged
violations.
(7) Towing conditions. Once a police officer has ordered towing, one
(1) of three (3) following possibilities exist:
(a) If the towing truck is enroute to the scene but has not yet
arrived, and the owner or operator has arrived, or if they arrive
at approximately the same time, then the owner or operator
must pay the wrecker, on arrival, in the amount of one-half (1/
2) of the towing charge and must pay to the Chief of Police, or
his/her authorized representative, all fines or waiver charges
to effect the on-the-scene release of the vehicle.
(b) If the wrecker has secured the vehicle before the owner or
operator arrives, the owner or operator must pay the wrecker,
on arrival, all the towing charges and must pay the Chief of
Police, or his/her authorized representative, all fines or waiver
charges to effect the on-the-scene release of the vehicle.
(c) If the vehicle is actually towed away for impoundment, the
vehicle owner or operator must pay the wrecker all towing and
storage charges and must pay the Chief of Police, or his/her
authorized representative, all fines and waiver charges in
order to gain release of the vehicle.
§ 210-45 TOPSHAM CODE § 210-45
202:276
(8) Interference with enforcement. It shall be a violation of these
sections for any person to obstruct or attempt to prevent the
removal of a vehicle as provided in these sections. The penalty for
such violation shall not be less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(9) Hearings. The owner or operator of a towed and impounded vehicle
may request a hearing on the applicability of these sections to the
towing and impoundment. Such hearing shall be scheduled at the
earliest possible date and be conducted by the Lieutenant of the
Police Department. Decisions of the Lieutenant shall be appealable
to the Chief of Police.
§ 210-45 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-45
202:277

ARTICLE V
Traffic
§ 210-46. Specific restrictions.
§ 210-47. Town dump access roads.
Except for official use of vehicles by the Town or its agents, the road
access from Foreside Road to the Town dump and the various roads
interconnecting with several portions of the Town dump are solely for the
use of vehicles passing to and from the dump transporting solid waste
matter from the homes of Topsham's residents or from businesses located
in the Town of Topsham. Any other use of these access roads is prohibited.
A. Winter Street. Eastbound traffic on Winter Street shall enter Main
Street to proceed in a southbound direction only (no left turn).
B. Through truck traffic on Mallet Drive shall be restricted to local
deliveries only. Through truck traffic is prohibited. For purposes of this
subsection, the restrictions and prohibition on through truck traffic
shall not apply to buses. [Amended 10-3-1994 STM, Art. 7]
C. Main Street. At the intersection of Main and Green Street, it will be
unlawful for any vehicular traffic to make any turn or movement except
for a right-hand turn onto Main Street (northerly) from 6:30 a.m. to
7:30 a.m. with the exception of emergency vehicles, authorized snow
removal vehicles, including municipal equipment, state highway
equipment and municipally contracted equipment.
D. Brookside Drive. All vehicular traffic entering and using the circle at
the end of Brookside Drive shall keep to the right and always proceed
counterclockwise around the circle.
E. Summer Street. At the northerly intersection of Main Street and
Summer Street, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to exit
Summer Street onto Main Street by turning left or traveling straight
ahead. The driver shall make a right turn only in a southerly direction
or onto Main Street. [Added 3-17-1994 by the Board of Selectmen]
F. Main Street and Winter Street. At the northerly intersection of Main
Street and Winter Street, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any
vehicle to make a left turn onto Winter Street when proceeding
northerly on Main Street.
G. Winter Street. At the northerly intersection of Main Street and Winter
Street it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to exit Winter
Street onto Main Street. One-way direction of travel for vehicles is
designated from the curbline on Main Street, at the northern
intersection of Main Street and Winter Street, running westerly for
approximately 50 feet.
§ 210-46 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-48
202:279
§ 210-48. Obstructions within public right-of-way. [Amended
5-15-2002 STM, Art. 20]
See § 184-1L of the Topsham Code.
§ 210-49. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of Article V of this chapter
shall, upon adjudication, be punished by a fine of not more than $100.
§ 210-48 TOPSHAM CODE § 210-49
202:280
ARTICLE VI
Impounding Vehicles
§ 210-50. Authority to impound.
Members of the Police Department are authorized to cause to be removed
any vehicle from a street or highway or any public way to the nearest garage
or other place of safety, or to an area designated or maintained by the town,
in the following instances:
§ 210-51. Towing records.
Where a vehicle is caused to be removed by a police officer, the Police
Department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed, listing
its owner as reflected by the registration records, the owner's address, the
make and year of manufacture, the color of the vehicle, the registration
number, the state of registration, the date and hour of the tow, the location
towed from, the location towed to, the reason for the towing and the name
of the officer authorizing the tow. A copy of this notice shall be given to the
operator of the vehicle conducting the towing and impounding activities and
to the operator of the facility where the vehicle is to be impounded.
A. When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge or causeway
where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic.
B. When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle
are incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its
custody or removal.
C. When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street or highway and is
so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard to life or property
or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic.
D. When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street or highway and is
so parked as to interfere with or hinder snow removal operations by the
town.
E. When any vehicle is parked in violation of the provisions of this chapter,
including being parked in excess of the time specified herein.
F. When a vehicle is found on a street, highway or public way within the
jurisdiction of the town, when such vehicle has three or more
outstanding parking violations, whether or not the vehicle is at that
place and time in violation of any provision of this chapter.
G. When a vehicle is left unattended upon or adjacent to a street or
highway, the owner or person in charge of said vehicle shall remove or
cause to be removed the vehicle within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not
removed as designated, the Police Department may have the vehicle
towed at the owner's expense.
§ 210-50 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-52
202:281
§ 210-52. Cost.
The owner of any vehicle removed from the street or highway or public way
pursuant to this order shall be responsible for all towing costs.
§ 210-53. Reclaiming vehicles.
The owner of any vehicle removed from the street or highway under this
Article may reclaim the vehicle by:
§ 210-54. Effective date.
The effective date of this chapter is February 20, 1992.
A. Furnishing satisfactory evidence of his identity and of his or her
ownership of the vehicle to the officer in charge at the Police
Department;
B. Paying the reasonable charges for the towing and storage of the
vehicle;
C. Paying all outstanding fines, fees and assessments for parking
violations outstanding against the vehicle at that time; and
D. Signing a receipt for the return of the vehicle.
§ 210-52 TOPSHAM CODE § 210-54
202:282
ARTICLE VII
Inventory Lists
§ 210-55. Stop Sign and Yield Sign Inventory.
Stop Sign and Yield Sign Inventory, according to §§ 210-13 and 210-14:
Name Number Location
A Street 2 At the intersection of Front Street, Front
Street being the thruway. At the
intersection of Union Street, Union
Street being the thruway.
Abenaki Drive 1 At the intersection of Winter Street,
Winter Street being the thruway.
Alan Street 1 At the intersection of Arbor Avenue,
Arbor Avenue being the thruway.
Alora Drive 1 At the intersection of Eric Drive, Eric
Drive being the thruway.
Andrea Street 1 At the intersection of Route 196, Route
196 being the thruway.
Arbor Avenue 2 At the intersection of Middlesex Road,
Middlesex Road being the thruway. At
the intersection of Somerset Place,
Somerset Place being the thruway.
Ash Street 1 At the intersection of Bridge Street,
Bridge Street being the thruway.
Atwood Road
(private)
1 At the intersection of Augusta Road
(Route 201), Augusta Road (Route 201)
being the thruway.
Barbara Street 2 At the intersection of Patricia Drive,
Patricia Drive being the thruway. At the
intersection of Barrows Drive, Barrows
Drive being the thruway.
Bay Park Drive 2 At the intersection of Middlesex Road,
Middlesex Road being the thruway. At
the intersection of Lover's Lane, Lover's
Lane being the thruway.
Beechwood Drive 1 At the intersection of Cathance Road,
Cathance Road being the thruway.
Berkeley Lane 1 At the intersection of Ivanhoe Drive,
Ivanhoe Drive being the thruway.
Bickford Drive 2 At the intersection of Winter Street,
Winter Street being the thruway. At the
intersection of Barrows Drive, Barrows
Drive being the thruway.
§ 210-55 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-55
202:283
Name Number Location
Birch Ridge
Avenue
1 At the intersection of Lewiston Road
(Route 196), Lewiston Road (Route 196)
being the thruway.
Blueberry Lane 1 At the intersection of Lewiston Road
(Route 196), Lewiston Road (Route 196)
being the thruway.
Bradley Pond Road 1 At the intersection of Augusta Road
(Route 201), Augusta Road (Route 201)
being the thruway.
Brian Street 1 At the intersection of Lewiston Road
(Route 196), Lewiston Road (Route 196)
being the thruway.
Bridge Street 1 At the intersection of Winter Street,
Winter Street being the thruway.
Brookside Drive 1 At the intersection with Foreside Road,
Foreside Road being the thruway.
Brown Street 1 At the intersection of Barrows Drive,
Barrows Drive being the thruway.
Canam Drive 1 At the intersection of Main Street, Main
Street being the thruway.
Carolyn Street 2 At the intersection of Patricia Drive,
Patricia Drive being the thruway. At the
intersection of Barrows Drive, Barrows
Drive being the thruway.
Cathance Road 1 At the intersection of Middlesex Road,
Middlesex Road being the thruway.
Cleave Street 1 At the intersection of Old Lisbon Road,
Old Lisbon Road being the thruway.
Collins Street 1 At the intersection of Ivanhoe Drive,
Ivanhoe Drive being the thruway.
Community Way Yield Sign At the intersection of Lewiston Road
(Route 196), Lewiston Road (Route 196)
being the thruway.
Coot Lane 1 At the intersection of Bay Park Drive,
Bay Park being the thruway.
Coville Road 2 At the intersection of Ivanhoe Drive,
Ivanhoe Drive being the thruway. At the
intersection of Whitehouse Crossing
Road, Whitehouse Crossing Road being
the thruway.
Danielle Drive 1 At the intersection of Katie Drive, Katie
Drive being the thruway.
§ 210-55 TOPSHAM CODE § 210-55
202:284
Name Number Location
Dominion Avenue 2 At both intersections of Canam Drive,
Canam Drive being the thruway.
Dusty Lane
(private)
1 At the intersection of Tedford Road,
Tedford Road being the thruway.
Eagles Way
(private)
1 At the intersection of Main Street, Main
Street being the thruway.
East Schoolhouse
Crossing
1 At the intersection of Cathance Road,
Cathance Road being the thruway.
Eider Lane 2 At the intersection of Bay Park Drive,
Bay Park Drive being the thruway. At the
intersection of Hunter Lane, Hunter
Lane being the thruway.
Emily Street 1 At the intersection of Riverview Drive,
Riverview Drive being the thruway.
Eric Drive 1 At the intersection of Middlesex Road,
Middlesex Road being the thruway.
Fair Circle 1 At the intersection of Elm Street, Elm
Street being the thruway.
Faye Street 2 At the intersection of River Road, River
Road being the thruway. At the
intersection of Raymond Road, Raymond
Road being the thruway.
Fifth Street 1 At the intersection of Main Street (Route
201), Main Street being the thruway.
First Street 1 At the intersection of Monument Place,
Monument Place being the thruway.
Foreside Road 2 At both intersections of Middlesex Road,
Middlesex Road being the thruway.
Forest Drive 4 At both intersections of Main Street
(Route 201), Main Street (Route 201)
being the thruway. The southerly
intersection with Wood Avenue is a
three-way stop.
Forest Glen Lane 1 At the intersection of Mallett Drive,
Mallett Drive being the thruway.
Fourth Street 1 At the intersection of Main Street (Route
201), Main Street (Route 201) being the
thruway.
Front Street 2 At the intersection of Bridge Street,
Bridge Street being the thruway. At the
intersection of North Street.
§ 210-55 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-55
202:285
Name Number Location
Frost Street Yield Sign At the intersection of Elm Street, Elm
Street being the thruway.
Garden Drive 2 At the intersection of Winter Street,
Winter Street being the thruway. At the
intersection of Mill Road, Mill Road
being the thruway.
Garden Lane 1 At the intersection of Garden Drive,
Garden Drive being the thruway.
Gilmore Drive
(private)
1 At the intersection of Lewiston Road
(Route 196), Lewiston Road (Route 196)
being the thruway.
Goldeneye Drive 2 At the intersection Bay Park Drive, Bay
Park Drive being the thruway. At the
intersection of Hunter Lane, Hunter
Lane being the thruway.
Gray Street
(private)
1 At the intersection of Main Street, Main
Street being the thruway.
Green Street 2 At the intersection of Main Street, Main
Street being the thruway. At the
intersection of Elm Street, Elm Street
being the thruway.
Highland Street 1 At the intersection of Wilson Street,
Wilson Street being the thruway.
Hillcrest Lane 1 At the intersection of Foreside Road,
Foreside Road being the thruway.
Home Place Yield Sign At the intersection with Brookside Drive,
Brookside Drive being the thruway.
Ivanhoe Drive 4 At the intersection of Lewiston Road
(Route 196), Lewiston Road (Route 196)
being the thruway. On the north side of
Jersey Circle intersection and the west
side of Jersey Circle intersection being a
three-way stop. At the intersection of
Coville Road, Colville Road being the
thruway.
Jeanne Street 1 At the intersection of Loop Road, Loop
Road being the thruway.
Jersey Circle 1 At the intersection of Ivanhoe Drive,
intersection being a three-way stop.
Jesse Road 1 At the intersection of Meadow Road,
Meadow Road being the thruway.
Katie Lane 1 At the intersection of Cathance Road,
Cathance Road being the thruway.
§ 210-55 TOPSHAM CODE § 210-55
202:286
Name Number Location
Leanne Street
(private)
1 At the intersection of Meadow Road,
Meadow Road being the thruway.
Link Lane 2 At the intersection of Old Tavern Road,
Old Tavern Road being the thruway. At
the intersection of Jeanne Drive, Jeanne
Drive being the thruway.
Lola Street 1 At the intersection of Barrows Drive,
Barrows Drive being the thruway.
Loon Drive 2 At the intersection of Coot Drive, Coot
Drive being the thruway. At the
intersection at Hunter Lane, Hunter
Lane being the thruway.
Loop Road 2 At both intersections of Middlesex Road,
Middlesex Road being the thruway.
Lover's Lane 1 At the intersection of Middlesex Road,
Middlesex Road being the thruway.
Madelyn Avenue 1 At the intersection of Jeanne Drive,
Jeanne Drive being the thruway.
Mae Lane 1 At the intersection of Old Lisbon Road,
Old Lisbon Road being the thruway.
Mallet Drive 2 At the intersection of Winter Street,
Winter Street being the thruway.
Maple Street 1 At the intersection of Bridge Street,
Bridge Street being the thruway.
Maple Street
Extension
1 At the intersection of Bridge Street,
Bridge Street being the thruway.
Marc Avenue
(private)
1 At the intersection of Andrea Drive,
Andrea Drive being the thruway.
Mayflower Lane 2 At the intersection of Blueberry Lane,
Blueberry Lane being the thruway. At the
intersection of Rocky Avenue, Rocky
Avenue being the thruway.
Maynard Drive 1 At the intersection of Andrea Drive,
Andrea Drive being the thruway.
Meadow Cross
Road
2 At the intersection of Meadow Road,
Meadow Road being the thruway. At the
intersection of Route 196, Route 196
being the thruway.
Meadow Road 1 At the intersection of Augusta Road
(Route 201), Augusta Road (Route 201)
being the thruway.
§ 210-55 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-55
202:287
Name Number Location
Meadow Road
Extension
1 At the intersection of Augusta Road
(Route 201), Augusta Road (Route 201)
being the thruway.
Merganser Lane 2 At the intersection at Bay Park Drive,
Bay Park Drive being the thruway. At the
intersection of Hunter Lane, Hunter
Lane being the thruway.
Merrymeeting
Drive
1 At the intersection of Somerset Place,
Somerset Place being the thruway.
Middle Street 4 At the intersection of A Street, A Street
being the thruway. At the intersection of
North Street, North Street being the
thruway. At the intersection of High
Street on the east side and High Street
on the west side.
Mill Road 2 At the intersection of Summer Street,
Summer Street being the thruway. At the
intersection of Winter Street, Winter
Street being the thruway.
Moe Lane 1 At the intersection of Old Lisbon Road,
Old Lisbon Road being the thruway.
Monument Place 3 At the intersection of Lewiston Road
(Route 196), Lewiston Road (Route 196)
being the thruway. At the intersection of
Main Street, Main Street being the
thruway. At the intersection of Second
Street being a three-way stop.
Munroe Lane
(private)
1 At the intersection of Main Street (Route
201), Main Street (Route 201) being the
thruway.
North Street 4 Four-way stop at the intersection of
Middle Street.
Oak Street 1 At the intersection of Bridge Street,
Bridge Street being the thruway.
Old Augusta Road 1 At the intersection with Main Street,
Main Street being the thruway.
Old Augusta Road Yield Sign Where Old Augusta Road intersects
itself.
Old Farm Road 1 At the intersection of the Foreside Road,
Foreside Road being the thruway.
Old Lisbon Road 2 At both intersections of Lewiston Road
(Route 196), Lewiston Road (Route 196)
being the thruway.
§ 210-55 TOPSHAM CODE § 210-55
202:288
Name Number Location
Old Lisbon Road
(north)
2 At both intersections of Lewiston Road
(Route 196), Lewiston Road (Route 196)
being the thruway.
Old Middlesex
Road
2 At both intersections with Middlesex
Road, Middlesex Road being the
thruway.
Old Tavern Road 1 At the intersection of Middlesex Road,
Middlesex Road being the thruway.
Park Drive 1 At the intersection of Topsham Fair Mall
Road, Topsham Fair Mall Road being the
thruway.
Patricia Drive 1 At the intersection of Barrows Drive,
Barrows Drive being the thruway.
Pejepscot Road 1 At the intersection of River Road, River
Road being the thruway.
Pellitier Lane
(private)
1 At the intersection of Lover's Lane,
Lover's Lane being the thruway.
Perkins Street 1 At the intersection of Elm Street, Elm
Street being the thruway.
Perkins Street
Extension
2 At the intersection of Perkins Street,
Perkins Street being the thruway. At the
intersection of Pleasant Street, Pleasant
Street being the thruway.
Pinewood Drive 2 At the intersection of Foreside Road,
Foreside Road being the thruway. Where
Pinewood Drive intersects itself.
Pitch Pine Drive 1 At the intersection of Middlesex Road,
Middlesex Road being the thruway.
Pleasant Point
Road
1 At the intersection of Foreside Road,
Foreside Road being the thruway.
Pleasant Street 2 At the intersection of Main Street, Main
Street being the thruway. At the
intersection of Elm Street, Elm Street
being the thruway.
Prospect Street 1 At the intersection of Bridge Street,
Bridge Street being the thruway.
Quarry Road
(private)
1 At the intersection of River Road, River
Road being the thruway.
Raymond Road 1 At the intersection of River Road, River
Road being the thruway.
Republic Avenue 1 At the intersection of Canam Drive,
Canam Drive being the thruway.
§ 210-55 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-55
202:289
Name Number Location
Rhoades Lane 1 At the intersection with Old Augusta
Road, Old Augusta Road being the
thruway.
River Road 1 At the intersection of Lewiston Road
(Route 196), Lewiston Road (Route 196)
being the thruway.
Riverview Drive 1 At the intersection of River Road, River
Road being the thruway.
Romans Road
(private)
1 At the intersection of Foreside Road,
Foreside Road being the thruway.
Royal Oak Circle 1 At the intersection of Old Tavern Road,
Old Tavern Road being the thruway.
Salem Street 2 At the intersection of Arbor Avenue,
Arbor Avenue being the thruway. At the
intersection of Thomas Avenue, Thomas
Avenue being the thruway.
Second Street 2 At the intersection of Main Street, Main
Street being the thruway. At the
intersection of Monument Place a threeway
stop.
Sky-Hy Drive
(private)
1 At the intersection of Meadow Road,
Meadow Road being the thruway.
Sokokis Circle 2 At the intersection of Winter Street,
Winter Street being the thruway. At the
intersection of Abenaki Drive, Abenaki
Drive being the thruway.
Somerset Place 1 At the intersection of Arbor Avenue,
Arbor Avenue being the thruway.
Spruce Lane 2 At both intersections with Pinewood
Drive, Pinewood Drive being the
thruway.
Summer Street 2 At both intersections with Main Street,
Main Street being the thruway.
Summer Street Yield Sign At the intersection of Summer Street
(southerly extension), Summer Street
(southerly extension) being the thruway.
Sunward Lane 1 At the intersection of Ward Road, Ward
Road being the thruway.
Tamarack Circle 1 At the intersection of Madelyn Avenue,
Madelyn Avenue being the thruway.
Taylor Farm Road 1 At the intersection of River Road, River
Road being the thruway.
§ 210-55 TOPSHAM CODE § 210-55
202:290
Name Number Location
Teal Road 6 At the intersection of Eider Lane, Eider
Lane being the thruway. At the
intersection of Loon Drive, Loon Drive
being the thruway. At the intersection of
Merganser Lane on the east side,
Merganser Lane at the west side. At the
intersection of Goldeneye Drive an the
east side, at the intersection of
Goldeneye Drive on the west side.
Tedford Road 1 At the intersection of Middlesex Road,
Middlesex Road being the thruway.
Thomas Avenue 2 At the intersection with Alan Street, Alan
Street being the thruway. At the
intersection of Merrymeeting Drive,
Merrymeeting Drive being the thruway.
Town Landing
Road (private)
Yield Sign At the intersection of Green Street,
Green Street being the thruway.
Townsend Way
(private)
1 At the intersection of Foreside Road,
Foreside Road being the thruway.
Twin Pond Road 1 At the intersection of Foreside Road,
Foreside Road being the thruway.
Union Park Drive
(private)
1 At the intersection of Lewiston Road
(Route 196), Lewiston Road (Route 196)
being the thruway.
Union Street 4 At the intersection of Bridge Street,
Bridge Street being the thruway. At the
intersection of High Street, High Street
being the thruway. At the intersection of
Prospect Street on the east side and
Prospect Street on the west side.
Val Halla Drive
(private)
1 At the intersection of Augusta Road
(Route 201), Augusta Road (Route 201)
being the thruway.
Walnut Street 2 At the intersection of Bridge Street,
Bridge Street being the thruway. At the
intersection of Mill Road, Mill Road
being the thruway.
Ward Road 1 At the of Meadow Road, Meadow Road
being the thruway.
West Bay Bridge
Road
1 At the intersection of Foreside Road,
Foreside Road being the thruway.
Western Avenue 2 At both intersections with Wilson Street,
Wilson Street being the thruway.
§ 210-55 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-55
202:291
Name Number Location
West Merrill Road 1 At the intersection of Lewiston Road
(Route 196), Lewiston Road (Route 196)
being the thruway.
West Schoolhouse
Crossing
1 At the intersection of Augusta Road
(Route 201), Augusta Road (Route 201)
being the thruway.
Westwind Drive 1 At the intersection of Meadow Road,
Meadow Road being the thruway.
Whitehouse
Crossing Road
2 At the intersection of Route 196, Route
196 being the thruway. At the
intersection of River Road, River Road
being the thruway.
White Street 2 At the intersection of Foreside Road,
Foreside Road being the thruway. At the
intersection of Old Farm Road, Old Farm
Road being the thruway.
Williams Drive 1 At the intersection of Wilson Street,
Wilson Street being the thruway.
Wilson Street 2 At the intersection of Main Street, Main
Street being the thruway. At the
intersection of Barrows Drive, Barrows
Drive being the thruway.
Winners Circle
(private)
1 At the intersection of Topsham Fair Mall
Road, Topsham Fair Mall Road being the
thruway.
§ 210-56. Automatic Traffic Control Signals Inventory.
Automatic Traffic Control Signals Inventory, according to § 210-12. Location
of traffic control signals:
Traffic Signal Intersection of
Lewiston Road (Route 196) Hamilton Court
Lewiston Road (Route 196) Main Street (Route 201)
Lewiston Road (Route 196) Mallet Drive
Lewiston Road (Route 196) Route 24 Connector
(Middlesex Road)
Lewiston Road (Route 196) Topsham Fair Mall Road
Main Street (Route 201) Elm Street/Winter Street Extension
§ 210-57. Crosswalk Inventory.
Crosswalk Inventory, according to § 210-32:
§ 210-55 TOPSHAM CODE § 210-57
202:292
Name Number Location
Barrows Drive 1 Bickford Drive
Barrows Drive 1 Brown Street (exit)
Bridge Street 1 Near Winter Street
Bridge Street 1 Union Street/Swinging Bridge
Brown Street 2 Barrows Drive
Canam Drive 1 Republic Avenue
Elm Street 1 Fair Circle
Elm Street 1 Governor's Way
Elm Street 1 Main Street
Elm Street 1 Perkins Street
Elm Street 1 Pleasant Street/Green Street
Foreside Road 1 Elm Street/Middlesex Road
Foreside Road 3 Recreational area/parking areas
Green Street 1 Elm Street
Green Street 1 Fire Station
Hamilton Court 1 Lewiston Road (Route 196)
Ivanhoe Drive 2 Jersey Circle
Lewiston Road (Route
196)
1 Main Street (Route 201)
Main Street (Route
201)
1 Eagles Way
Main Street (Route
201)
1 Forest Drive
Main Street (Route
201)
1 Lewiston Road (Route 196)
Main Street (Route
201)
1 Summer Street
Main Street (Route
201)
1 Summer Street/Green Street
Main Street (Route
201)
1 Wilson Street
Main Street (Route
201)
1 Winter Street
Main Street (Route
201)
1 Winter Street Extension
Mallett Drive 1 Lewiston Road (Route 196)
Melcher Place 1 Main Street
Melcher Place 1 Pleasant Street
§ 210-57 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-57
202:293
Name Number Location
Pleasant Street 1 Main Street
Wilson Street 1 Barrows Drive
Winter Street 1 Bridge Street/Bickford Drive
§ 210-58. One-Way Signs Inventory.
One-Way Signs Inventory, according to § 210-15:
§ 210-59. Bicycle/Pedestrian Lane Inventory. [Added 7-16-1992 by
the Board of Selectmen]
Bicycle/Pedestrian Lane Inventory, according to §§ 210-25 and 210-27:
A. Summer Street. The following sign shall be erected on Summer Street:
[Amended 3-17-1994 by the Board of Selectmen]
(1) Right turn only: at the northerly intersection of Summer Street and
Main Street on the southern side of Summer Street facing west in
the approximate location of the current stop sign.
B. Winter Street (northerly extension). The following sign shall be erected
on Winter Street (northerly extension) leading to Main Street and
Walkers Corner traffic signals:
(1) One way do not enter: approximately 50 feet from the northern
intersection of Winter Street and Main Street, two signs will be
erected facing west, one on the northern side of Winter Street
(northerly extension) and one on the southern side of Winter Street
(northerly extension).
C. Brookside Drive cul-de-sac. The following signs shall be erected on
Brookside Drive:
(1) One sign "Keep Right" facing eastbound traffic.
(2) One sign "Keep Right" facing westbound traffic.
A. Foreside Road. The following signs shall be erected on Foreside Road:
(1) Bicycle and pedestrian lane: at the intersection of Foreside Road
and Middlesex Road, south side of Foreside Road.
(2) Bicycle and pedestrian lane: at the American Legion Post 202 and
Town of Topsham recreation property line on the south side of
Foreside Road.
B. Ivanhoe Drive. The following sigs shall be erected on Ivanhoe Drive:
(1) Bicycle and pedestrian lane: at the intersection of Ivanhoe Drive
and Route 196, south side of Ivanhoe Drive.
§ 210-57 TOPSHAM CODE § 210-59
202:294
§ 210-59.1. No Left Turn Signs Inventory. [Added 8-3-2000 by the
Board of Selectmen]
No Left Turn Signs Inventory:
§ 210-59.2. No Parking Signs Inventory. [Added 11-16-2000 by the
Board of Selectmen]
No Parking Signs Inventory:
(2) Bicycle and pedestrian lane: at the intersection of Ivanhoe Drive
and Jersey Circle, south side of Ivanhoe Drive.
(3) Bicycle and pedestrian lane: at the intersection of Ivanhoe Drive
and Coville Road, south side of Ivanhoe Drive.
(4) Bicycle and pedestrian lane: at the intersection of Ivanhoe Drive
and Berkeley Lane, south side of Ivanhoe Drive.
C. Coville Road. The following sign shall be erected on Coville Road:
(1) Bicycle and pedestrian lane: at the intersection of Coville Road and
the Whitehouse Crossing Road, west side of Coville Road.
A. A sign for no left turns from Community Way onto the Coastal
Connector.
A. A sign designating the lower end of Atwood Road as a no parking area.
§ 210-59 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-59.2
202:295

ARTICLE VIII
Traffic Control in Construction Zones
[Added 5-3-2001 by the Board of Selectmen]
§ 210-60. Method of traffic control.
§ 210-61. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of § 210-60, shall be required to
cease construction until adequate traffic control is provided, and may be
punished by a fine of up to $100.
A. All traffic control within construction zones shall consist of one of the
following or a combination of all three listed at the discretion of the
Topsham Public Works Director and/or the Topsham Chief of Police.
(1) Uniformed Topsham police officer.
(2) Civilian, state certified traffic control person.
B. All costs of traffic control shall be borne by the contractor doing the
construction.
§ 210-60 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-61
202:297

ARTICLE IX
Weight Restrictions
[Added 1-19-2006]
§ 210-62. Closing roads to travel of certain trucks; exemptions;
permits.
A. No vehicles registered for a gross weight in excess of 23,000 pounds,
except exempt vehicles as provided for below, shall be operated on the
roads and streets of the Town after a road or street has been closed to
heavy vehicles during any period of time from November 15 to June 1.
The Road Commissioner will submit to the Board of Selectmen a list of
roads recommended for closing to heavy weights. The list will be posted
for public notice at least seven days in advance of a public meeting
where the Selectmen will act to accept, amend or reject the list
submitted by the Road Commissioner. The Selectmen may also
authorize roads to be closed by the Road Commissioner on an
emergency basis. Such emergency closing will be limited to no more
than the minimum time needed for the next soonest regular
Selectmen's meeting. The Selectmen may identify roads that will not be
subject to closing to heavy weights unless subsequently approved by
the Board for such closing. Any change in placing a road to be closed for
heavy weights will be noticed in the same manner as the original
meeting.
B. Notice of closing of a road or street to heavy vehicles shall be given by
erecting at each end of the closed road or street a poster indicating the
following:
(1) The date of the posting;
(2) A description of the street or road closed;
(3) The name, business address and telephone number of the Road
Commissioner for the Town.
C. The following vehicles are exempt from this section:
(1) Any vehicle or combination of vehicles registered for a gross
weight of 23,000 pounds or less.
(2) Any vehicle or combination of vehicles registered for a gross
weight in excess of 23,000 pounds and traveling without a load
other than tools or equipment necessary for the proper operation of
the vehicle. It shall be a defense to alleged violation of this
subsection if the combined actual weights of any vehicle or
combination of vehicles are registered for a gross weight in excess
of 23,000 pounds and its load is in fact less than 23,000 pounds.
(3) Any vehicle of the Topsham Water District or Brunswick Sewer
District while engaged in emergency maintenance.
§ 210-62 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-62
202:299
(4) Town of Topsham vehicles.
(5) When operating a vehicle under an exemption certificate carrying a
partial load with a weight equal to or less than indicated on the
exemption certificate, the vehicle operator shall have in the vehicle
delivery slips or bills of lading documenting the entire amount or
weight of the commodities being transported. The vehicle operator
shall present the delivery slips, bills of lading and exemption
certificate to any law enforcement officer upon any vehicle
delivering home heating fuel and operating in accordance with a
permit issued by the Department of Transportation pursuant to this
section may travel over any county or Town way without a specific
municipal or county permit request.
(6) Any vehicle delivering any home heating fuel milk, feed, groceries
and trash and operating in accordance with a permit issued by the
Department of Transportation pursuant to this section may travel
over any county or Town way without a specific municipal or county
permit.
D. Any vehicle operating without a Town permit shall proceed to the
nearest operating public scale when directed by a law enforcement
officer for weighing. Failure to proceed as directed shall be a violation
of 29 M.R.S.A. § 1805 and this section. Any and all costs associated with
this subsection will be the responsibility of the owner/operator of the
vehicle being weighed.
E. The Board of Selectmen may develop a permit system for which permits
will be issued for travel on posted roads when deemed suited for travel
for vehicles over 23,000 pounds. This system shall be established and
described at the time of the meeting to identify those roads to be posted
as described in Subsection A above.
F. The Board of Selectmen may authorize the Road Commissioner to
revoke the exemption certificate of any vehicle found to be operating
with axle or gross weights in excess of those shown on the permit.
G. Upon approval by the Board of Selectmen, submission of a bond for
damages may be accepted to allow for vehicles owned by or operated
on behalf of the bond holder to travel over roads posted for weight
restrictions.
§ 210-62 TOPSHAM CODE § 210-62
202:300
Chapter 225
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Comprehensive Plan — See Ch. 105.
Site plan review — See Ch. 175.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 191.
§ 210-62 UNSECURED LOADS § 210-62
202:301

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 225-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title
30-A of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated, as amended.
§ 225-2. Short title.
This chapter and the accompanying Official Zoning Map47 shall be known as
and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance, Town of Topsham, Maine."
§ 225-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the residents of the town; to encourage the most appropriate use
of land throughout the municipality; to preserve the character of the town;
to promote traffic safety; to provide safety from fire and other elements; to
provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of real estate; to
promote a wholesome home environment; to prevent housing development
in unsuitable areas; to provide an allotment of land area in new
developments sufficient for all the requirements of community life; to
conserve natural resources; and to provide for adequate public services as
an integral part of a comprehensive plan for municipal development.
§ 225-4. Jurisdiction.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern all land and all structures within
the boundaries of the Town of Topsham.
47.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Town Clerk's office.
§ 225-1 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-4
202:303

ARTICLE II
Word Usage and Definitions
§ 225-5. Word usage.
§ 225-6. Definitions. [Amended 5-20-1992 ATM, Arts. 14, 18, 24;
6-1-1993 STM, Arts. 22, 24; 5-18-1994 STM, Art. 19; 5-21-1997
STM, Art. 30; 11-18-1997 STM, Art. 8A; 5-20-1998 STM, Art. 33;
5-19-1999 STM, Art. 13]
In this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure which is
customarily both incidental and subordinate to the principal use or
structure. The term "incidental" in reference to the principal use or
structure shall mean subordinate and minor in significance to the principal
use or structure. Accessory uses, when aggregated, shall not subordinate
the principal use of the lot.
ADDICTION TREATMENT FACILITY — A facility for outpatient
detoxification and treatment of narcotic dependent persons which
administers or dispenses drugs used to alleviate adverse physiological or
psychological effects incident to withdrawal from continuous or sustained
use of a narcotic drug, including but not limited to clinics that dispense
methadone in such a treatment regimen.[Added 2-16-2011 STM, Art. 5]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT — Those businesses in any
use category, a substantial or significant portion of which consists of selling,
A. In the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, all words other
than those specifically defined in the chapter shall have the meaning
implied by their context in the chapter or their ordinarily accepted
meaning. In the case of any difference of meaning or implication
between the text of this chapter and any map, illustration or table, the
text shall control.
B. The word "person" includes firm, association, organization,
partnership, company or corporation, as well as an individual or any
other legal entity.
C. The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number
includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.
D. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, the word "may" is
permissive.
E. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel."
F. The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall
be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to
be used or occupied."
G. The word "town" or "municipality" means the Town of Topsham, Maine.
§ 225-5 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-6
202:305
renting, leasing, exhibiting, displaying or otherwise dealing in materials or
devices of any kind which appeal to prurient interest and which depict or
describe specified sexual activities. "Specified sexual activities" include: the
exposure of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts
of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; fondling or other
erotic touching of human genitals, vaginal area, pubic region, buttocks or
female breasts; live nude exhibition.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Any housing unit/lot which is designed with
the express intent of providing decent, safe, and sanitary living
accommodations that are affordable to lower income households and
moderate income households, in accordance with the following
definitions:[Added 5-24-2006 STM, Art. 16]
Very low income household is a household with a gross income less than or
equal to 50% of the applicable Sagadahoc County median income.
Low income household is a household with a gross income over 50%, but
less than or equal to 80%, of the applicable Sagadahoc County median
income.
Moderate income household is a household with a gross income more than
80%, but less than or equal to 100%, of the applicable Sagadahoc County
median income.
Sagadahoc County median income is the median family income most
recently published by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development for Sagadahoc County. Where appropriate to use this
definition, median family income may be adjusted for family size.
Gross income includes the income of all household members from all
sources.
Equity recapture. In order to maintain affordability of "affordable housing,"
developers/applicants are required to put in place some kind of equity
recapture mechanism to discourage speculation, and encourage
reasonable long term equity gains to the buyers.
AGGRIEVED PARTY — An owner of land whose property is directly or
indirectly affected by the granting or denial of a permit or variance under:
Chapter 225, Zoning; Chapter 85, Blasting; Chapter 175, Site Plan Review;
Chapter 191, Subdivision Review; a person whose land abuts land for which
a permit or variance has been granted; or any other person or group of
persons who have suffered particularized injury as a result of the granting
or denial of such permit or variance.[Added 5-14-2014 STM, Art. 12]
AGRICULTURE — The production, keeping or maintenance for sale or lease
of plants and/or animals, including, but not limited to, forages and sod
crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry
and poultry products; livestock; fruits and vegetables; and ornamental and
greenhouse products. Agriculture does not include forest management and
timber harvesting activities.[Amended 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
§ 225-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-6
202:306
ALTERATION — Any change, addition or modification in construction, other
than cosmetic or decorative, or any change in the structural members of
buildings, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
AMUSEMENT FACILITY — Any private, commercial premises which are
maintained or operated primarily for the amusement, patronage or
recreation of the public, containing four or more table sports, pinball
machines, video games or similar mechanical or electronic games, whether
activated by coins, tokens or discs, or whether activated through remote
control by the management.
AMUSEMENT PARK — An outdoor commercial facility, which may include
structures and buildings, where there are various devices for
entertainment, including rides, booths for conduct of games or sale of items
and buildings for shows and entertainment.[Added 5-20-2009 STM, Art.
15]
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY — The keeping of any domesticated animals other
than customary household pets.
APPROPRIATE — Shall refer to those changes in historic properties or
landmarks or buildings, structures or sites within an historic overlay zone
which are not incongruous with what is historically and architecturally
significant as determined by the Commission.
APPROVED STAGE II VAPOR RECOVERY SYSTEM — A vapor recovery
system that has demonstrated 95% by weight or greater Volatile Organic
Compound (VOC) control efficiency by a) being a California Air Resources
Board (CARB) certified system; b) being tested and approved using CARB's
recognized testing method; c) meeting the requirements of equivalent
testing procedures and methods approved by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection and the United States Environmental Protection
Agency.
AQUACULTURE — The growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater,
estuarine or marine plant or animal species.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain having a
one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, as specifically
identified in the flood insurance studies cited in § 225-25 of this chapter.
AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD — A yard, field or other area used as a place
of storage, other than temporary storage by an establishment or place of
business which is engaged primarily in doing auto body repair work for the
purpose of making repairs to render a motor vehicle serviceable, for three
or more unserviceable, discarded, worn out or junked motor vehicles.
AUTO SALES — The use of any building, land area or other premise for the
display or sale of new or used automobiles, including but not limited to light
trucks or vans, trailers or recreation vehicles, and boats.[Added 5-17-2000
STM, Art. 15; amended 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15]
BACK LOT — A lot with no frontage on a public or private road, or a lot with
twenty-five (25) feet of frontage on a public or private road, developed in
accordance with § 225-17G.48[Added 5-20-2004 STM, Art. 15]
§ 225-6 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-6
202:307
BASAL AREA — The area of cross section of a tree stem at 4 1/2 feet above
ground level and inclusive of bark.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, alternately referred to as the one-hundred-year
flood.
BASEMENT — The enclosed area underneath a structure, typically having
a concrete floor, and the walls of which are usually part of the structure's
foundation. The clear height up to the joists supporting the floor directly
above is three feet or greater.
BATCH PLANT — A business engaged in the on-site preparation of readymix
concrete and bituminous concrete conveyed for use off-site.[Added
5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A single-family dwelling, built prior to 1940, in
which lodging or lodging and breakfast are offered to the general public for
compensation, offering no more than three bedrooms for lodging purposes.
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any residential structure where lodging and/or meals
are provided for compensation for a period of at least one week, and where
a family residing in the building acts as proprietor or owner. There shall be
no provisions for cooking in any individual guest room.
BOARD OF APPEALS — The Appeals Board established pursuant to
§ 225-68 of this Code.[Added 5-14-2014 STM, Art. 12]
BOATHOUSE — A nonresidential structure designed for the purpose of
protecting or storing boats for noncommercial purposes.
BOAT LAUNCHING FACILITY — A facility designed primarily for the
launching and landing of watercraft and which may include an access ramp,
docking area and parking spaces for vehicles and trailers.
BOTTLE CLUB — An establishment where no alcoholic beverages are sold,
but where members, guests or customers provide their own alcoholic
beverages, paying a fee or other consideration for admission or membership
to the bottle club and/or for setups. Bottle clubs are amusement facilities.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for
the housing or enclosure of persons, animals or personal property.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured between the average
finished grade of the ground at the front of the building to the highest point
of a flat roof, to the deck of a mansard roof or to the mean height between
eaves and ridges of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, not to include chimneys,
spires, towers or similar accessory roof structures.[Amended 5-21-2003
STM, Art. 12; 5-17-2017 STM, Art. 11]
BUREAU — State of Maine Department of Conservation's Bureau of
Forestry.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
48.Editor's Note: The former definition of "banner," which immediately followed this
definition, was superseded 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10. See now the definition of "sign,
banner" in this section.
§ 225-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-6
202:308
CAMPGROUND — Any premises established for overnight use for the
purpose of temporary camping and for which a fee is charged.
CANOPY — The more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a
wooded area.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the
dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums,
crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction
with and within the boundaries of such cemetery.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with definite beds and
banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water.
"Channel flow" is water flowing within the limits of the defined channel.
CHURCH STRUCTURE — A structure used to conduct religious services of
a legally established and recognized church and where persons regularly
assemble for religious worship.
CLUB — Any voluntary association of persons organized for social, religious,
benevolent, recreational, literary, scientific or political purposes, whose
facilities, especially a clubhouse, are open to members and not the general
public; and not generally engaged in activities customarily carried on by
a business or for pecuniary gain. Such term shall include fraternities,
sororities and social clubs generally.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A development by a single developer for
residential, commercial, industrial (or any combination of the above)
purposes, which is undertaken in a manner that treats the developed area
as an entity to promote use of land, including the creation of common open
space, a reduction in the size of road and utility systems and the retention
of the natural characteristics of the land. Cluster development may not be
used, however, to increase the overall density of development permitted in
any zoning district. Cluster development shall include the term "planned
unit development" and shall be laid out in accordance with the relevant
provisions of this chapter and Chapter 191, Subdivision of Land.
COASTAL WETLANDS — All tidal and subtidal lands; all lands with
vegetation present that is tolerant of salt water and occurs primarily in a
salt water or estuarine habitat; and any swamp, marsh, bog, beach, flat or
other contiguous low land that is subject to tidal action during the highest
tide level for the year in which an activity is proposed as identified in
tide tables published by the National Ocean Service. Coastal wetlands may
include portions of coastal sand dunes.[Amended 11-13-2008 STM, Art.
7]
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A person appointed by the municipal
officers to administer and enforce this chapter. Reference to the Code
Enforcement Officer may be construed to include Building Inspector,
Plumbing Inspector, Electrical Inspector and the like, where applicable.
CO-GENERATION OF POWER AS ACCESSORY USE — A facility that has
the capacity to generate more than one megawatt of electricity as part of or
in conjunction with another principal use either for use on the premises or
§ 225-6 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-6
202:309
for sale. Facilities with a capacity of less than a megawatt are considered an
accessory use to the principal use not the co-generation of power.[Added
5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15]
COMMERCIAL RECREATION — Any commercial enterprise, which receives
a fee in return for the provision of some recreational activity, including
but not limited to racquet clubs and health facilities, but not including
amusement facilities and amusement parks, as defined herein.[Added
5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
COMMERCIAL USE — The use of lands, buildings or structures, other than
a home occupation, defined below, the intent and result of which activity
is the production of income from the buying and selling of goods and/or
services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings and/or dwelling units.
CONCRETE PRODUCT MANUFACTURING — A business engaged in the
manufacturing of concrete products. Concrete preparation is an accessory
use to the on-site primary use of concrete product manufacturing.[Added
5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
CONGREGATE CARE — A type of living accommodation, including multiple
individual rooms or dwelling units, to be occupied by elderly persons as
a residential living environment. Such a facility may include individual
dwelling units and/or individual rooms combined with shared community
space, dining facilities, housekeeping services, personal care and
assistance, transportation and specialized services, such as medical support
services and physical therapy.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted only after review and approval
by the Board of Appeals or Planning Board. A conditional use is a use
that would not be appropriate without restriction, but which is permitted,
provided that all performance standards and other requirements of this
chapter are met.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT — A permit authorized by the Board of
Appeals or Planning Board for a conditional use. A conditional use permit
may be issued only after the applicant has followed the procedures of this
chapter.
CONSTRUCTED — Includes built, erected, altered, reconstructed, moved
upon or any physical operations on the premises which are required for
construction. Excavation, fill, paving, drainage and the like shall be
considered a part of construction.
CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY (HISTORIC) — A building or structure that
contributes to the historic and/or architectural character of a designated
Historic Overlay District or an area being considered for inclusion in an
Historic Overlay District that was identified in the Topsham 2010 Historic
Resource Survey as a contributing property or that is identified as a
contributing property in a subsequent historic resource survey conducted
by or on behalf of the Town of Topsham or Maine State Historic Preservation
Commission.[Added 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 9]
§ 225-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-6
202:310
CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA — The cross-sectional area of a stream or
tributary stream channel is determined by multiplying the stream or
tributary stream channel width by the average stream or tributary stream
channel depth. The stream or tributary stream channel width is the straight
line distance from the normal high-water line on one side of the channel to
the normal high-water line on the opposite side of the channel. The average
stream or tributary stream channel depth is the average of the vertical
distances from a straight line between the normal high-water lines of the
stream or tributary stream channel to the bottom of the channel.[Added
11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
DAY CARE — A house or other place in which a person, or combinations
of persons, maintains or otherwise carries out a regular program, for
consideration, for any part of a day providing care and protection for three
or more children under the age of 16.
DBH — The diameter of a standing tree measured 4.5 feet from ground
level.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
DECORATIVE CHANGES — Repainting; removing or replacing trim,
railings or other nonstructural architectural details; or the addition,
removal or change of location of windows and doors.
DESIGNATED THIRD-PARTY CONSERVATION ORGANIZATION — A
conservation organization which has a formal agreement with the Town
of Topsham to carry out vernal pool conservation in accordance with the
provisions of the Vernal Pool Overlay District and the Town of Topsham
Vernal Pools Special Area Management Plan (SAMP) and the conservation
priorities of the SAMP.[Added 5-18-2016 STM, Art. 14]
DEVELOPMENT — A change in land use involving alteration of the land,
water or vegetation, or the addition or alteration of structures or other
construction not naturally occurring.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS — Numerical standards relating to
spatial relationships, including but not limited to setback, lot area, shore
frontage and height.
DISABILITY — Any disability, infirmity, malformation, disfigurement,
congenital defect or mental condition caused by bodily injury, accident,
disease, birth defect, environmental conditions or illness; and also includes
the physical or mental condition of a person which constitutes a substantial
handicap as determined by a physician, or in the case of mental handicap,
by a psychiatrist or psychologist, as well as any other health or sensory
impairment which requires special education, vocational rehabilitation or
related services.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
DISRUPTION OF SHORELINE INTEGRITY — The alteration of the physical
shape, properties, or condition of a shoreline at any location by timber
harvesting and related activities. A shoreline where shoreline integrity has
been disrupted is recognized by compacted, scarified and/or rutted soil, an
abnormal channel or shoreline cross section and, in the case of flowing
waters, a profile and character altered from natural conditions.[Added
11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
§ 225-6 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-6
202:311
DISTRICT — A specified portion of the municipality, delineated on the
Official Zoning Map, within which certain regulations and requirements or
various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter.
DISTURBED AREA — All land areas that are stripped, graded, grubbed,
filled, or excavated at any time during the site preparation or removing
vegetation for, or construction of, a project.
"Disturbed area" does not include routine maintenance, but does include
redevelopment and new impervious areas. "Routine maintenance" is
maintenance performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity, and original purpose of the facility. Paving impervious gravel
surfaces while maintaining the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity
and original purpose of the facility is considered routine maintenance.
Cutting of trees, without grubbing, stump removal, disturbance or exposure
of soil is not considered "disturbed area."
A disturbed area continues to be considered as disturbed area if it meets
the definition of "developed area" or "impervious area" following final
stabilization.[Added 5-17-2017 STM, Art. 13]
DRIVEWAY — A vehicular accessway less than five hundred (500) feet in
length serving two single-family dwellings or one two-family dwelling, or
less.[Amended 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
DWELLING — Any building or structure or portion thereof designed or used
for residential purposes.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or suite of rooms designed and equipped
exclusively for use by one family as a habitation and which contains
independent living, cooking, sleeping, bathing and sanitary facilities. The
term includes manufactured housing but not recreational vehicles.
ELDERLY HOUSING — Housing intended for, and restricted to, individuals
55 years of age or older, or couples where at least one member is 55 years
of age or older.[Added 5-24-2006 STM, Art. 14]
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS — Operations conducted for the public health,
safety or general welfare, such as protection of resources from immediate
destruction or loss, law enforcement and operations to rescue human
beings, property and livestock from the threat of destruction or injury.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing only one dwelling
unit for occupation by not more than one family. [Amended 5-18-2016
STM, Art. 10]
A.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing only two dwelling
units for occupation by not more than two families.
B.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building containing three or more
dwelling units, such building being designed exclusively for residential
use and occupancy by three or more families living independently of
one another, with the number of families not exceeding the number of
dwelling units.
C.
§ 225-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-6
202:312
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The construction, alteration or maintenance of
gas, electrical or communication facilities; steam, fuel, electric power or
water transmission or distribution lines, towers and related equipment;
telephone cables or lines, poles and related equipment; gas, oil, water,
slurry or other similar pipelines; municipal sewage lines, collection or
supply systems; and associated storage tanks. Such systems may include
towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarms
and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories, but
shall not include service drops or buildings which are necessary for the
furnishing of such services.
EXISTING AGRICULTURAL BUILDING — A nonresidential building that
was used for an agricultural use or for animal husbandry or in conjunction
with an agricultural activity prior to April 1, 2007.[Added 1-23-2008 STM,
Art. 3]
EXPANSION OF A STRUCTURE — An increase in the floor area or volume
of a structure, including all extensions such as, but not limited to: attached
decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art.
749]
EXPANSION OF USE — The addition of one or more months to a use's
operating season; or the use of more floor area or ground area devoted to a
particular use.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
EXTERIOR — As pertains to historic properties or landmarks or to property
located within an historic overlay zone, means any portion of the outside of
such properties which can be seen from a public way.
EXTERIOR FEATURES — The architectural style, general design and
general arrangement of the exterior of a building or structure, including
the kind and texture of the building material and the type and style of all
windows, doors and light fixtures. In the case of outdoor signs, "exterior
features" shall be construed to mean the style, material, size, location and
number of all such signs.
EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY — Any operation engaged in the removal of more
than 50 cubic yards, in a twelve-month period, of topsoil, sand, gravel,
clay, rock, peat or other like material from its natural location and for
transportation off a lot within any twelve-month period, except as may
be exempted within the extractive industry performance standards in this
chapter.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single
housekeeping unit.
FILLING — Depositing or dumping any matter on or into the ground or
water.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP — The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the Town of Topsham.
49.Editor's Note: This article also repealed the former definition of "expansion."
§ 225-6 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-6
202:313
FLOODPLAIN — The lands adjacent to a body of water which have been or
may be covered by the regional floods.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure
enclosed by exterior walls, plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed
portions of a structure such as porches and decks.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The maximum amount of total floor area within a
building in proportion to the amount of lot area. A floor area ratio of 1.0
allows for one square foot of floor area for each square foot of lot area.
FOOD PROCESSING — An establishment in which food is processed or
otherwise prepared for eventual consumption, but not intended to be
consumed on the premises, other than on an incidental basis.[Added
5-15-2013 STM, Art. 14]
FORESTED WETLAND — A freshwater wetland dominated by woody
vegetation that is six (6) meters tall [approximately twenty (20) feet] or
taller.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
FOREST MANAGEMENT — Timber cruising and other forest resources
evaluation activities, management planning activities, insect and disease
control, timber stand improvement, pruning, timber harvesting and other
forest harvesting, regeneration of forest stands and other similar associated
activities, but not the construction or creation of roads other than necessary
for forest management purposes and does not include the clearing of land
for development.
FOREST STAND — A contiguous group of trees sufficiently uniform in
age, class distribution, composition, and structure and growing on a site
of sufficiently uniform quality to be a distinguishable unit.[Added
11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
FOUNDATION — The supporting substructure of a building or other
structure, excluding wooden sills and post supports, but including
basements, slabs, frostwalls, or other base consisting of concrete, block,
brick or similar material.[Amended 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
FRESHWATER WETLANDS —
Freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, excluding
forested wetlands, which are: [Amended 5-17-2000 STM, Art. 15]
Of 10 or more contiguous acres; or of less than 10 contiguous acres
and adjacent to a surface water body, excluding any river, stream
or brook such that in a natural state, the combined surface area is
in excess of 10 acres; and
(1)
Inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a
frequency and for a duration sufficient to support, and which under
(2)
A.
§ 225-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-6
202:314
FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance, measured in a straight line, between
the intersections of the side lot lines with the road right-of-way. Corner lots
may include continuous frontage along adjoining streets. When located on
a cul-de-sac, the frontage shall be the distance from sideline to sideline,
measured at the front setback line.[Added 5-20-2004 STM, Art. 18]
FRONTAGE, SHORE — The horizontal distance, measured in a straight line,
between the intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline at normal highwater
elevation.
FUNCTIONALLY WATER-DEPENDENT USES — Those uses that require,
for their primary purpose, location on submerged lands or that require
direct access to, or location in, coastal and inland waters and which cannot
be located away from these waters. The uses include, but are not limited
to, commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities, finfish and
shellfish processing, fish storage and retail and wholesale fish marketing
facilities, waterfront dock and port facilities, shipyards and boat building
facilities, marinas, navigation aides, basins and channels, industrial uses
dependent upon waterborne transportation or requiring large volumes of
cooling or processing water and which cannot reasonably be located or
operated at an inland site and uses which primarily provide general public
access to marine or tidal waters.
GASOLINE-DISPENSING FACILITY — Any site where gasoline is
transferred from a stationary storage tank to a motor vehicle fuel tank used
to provide fuel to the engine of that motor vehicle.[Added 5-20-2004 STM,
Art. 17]
GASOLINE SALES — Any business establishment engaged in the retail sale
of gasoline.
GOLF COURSE — A regulation or executive (par 3) size facility for the
playing of golf, including accessory facilities, such as, but not limited to,
maintenance and operational buildings, structures and facilities. A golf
course may include a clubhouse, which shall be compatible with the rural
character of the district and use, designed and intended for golfers.
GREAT POND — Any inland body of water which in a natural state has a
surface area in excess of 10 acres, and any inland body of water artificially
formed or increased which has a surface area in excess of 30 acres, except,
for the purposes of this chapter, where the artificially formed or increased
inland body of water is completely surrounded by land held by a single
owner.
GREAT POND CLASSIFIED GPA — Any great pond classified GPA, pursuant
to 38 M.R.S.A. § 465-A. This classification includes some, but not all,
impoundments of rivers that are defined as great ponds.
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils.
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions
of land that do not conform to the criteria of this definition.
B.
§ 225-6 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-6
202:315
GROUND COVER — Small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the
partially decayed organic matter of the forest floor.[Added 11-13-2008
STM, Art. 7]
HARVEST AREA — The area where timber harvesting and related activities,
including the cutting of trees, skidding, yarding, and associated road
construction take place. The area affected by a harvest encompasses the
area within the outer boundaries of these activities, excepting unharvested
areas greater than 10 acres within the area affected by a harvest.[Added
11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
HEAVY COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A truck or truck tractor-semi trailer
combination with three or more axles.[Added 1-23-2008 STM, Art. 3]
HISTORIC EASEMENT — Any easement, restriction, covenant or condition
which is designed to preserve, maintain or enhance all or part of the
existing state of places of historical, architectural, archaeological or
cultural significance.
HISTORIC OR HISTORICAL LANDMARK — Any site (including significant
landscape features), building or structure of particular historic or aesthetic
significance to the town, state or nation. Landmarks may include sites,
buildings, structures or objects where cultural, political, spiritual,
economic, social or artistic history of the town, state or nation is reflected or
exemplified; or which are identified or associated with the lives of persons
significant in our past; or important events in local, state or national history;
or which embody the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural
specimen inherently valuable for representation, or a notable work of
construction or a notable work of a master designer or architect; or have
yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or
history.
HISTORIC OR HISTORICAL PROPERTY — Any building, structure, area or
site that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of
the town, state or nation.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation or profession which is carried on
in a dwelling unit or structure accessory to a dwelling unit and which is
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential
purposes and which does not change the character thereof. The term "home
occupation" shall include both professional and personal services.
HOSPITAL — An institution providing, but not limited to, overnight health
services, primarily for inpatients, and medical or surgical care for the sick
or injured, including as an integral part of the institution such related
facilities as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central
service facilities and staff offices.
HOTEL/MOTEL — A building in which lodging or meals and lodging are
offered to the general public for compensation and in which ingress and
egress to and from the rooms are made primarily through an inside lobby
or office or an interior courtyard. The hotel may contain such accessory
services and facilities for the benefit of its guests, and only incidentally
§ 225-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-6
202:316
for the general public, as newsstands, personal grooming facilities and
restaurants.[Amended 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA — The total area of a parcel that consists of
buildings and associated constructed facilities or areas that will be covered
with a low-permeability material, such as asphalt or concrete, and areas
such as gravel roads and unpaved parking areas that will be compacted
through design or use to reduce their permeability. Common impervious
areas include, but are not limited to, rooftops, walkways, patios, driveways,
parking lots or storage areas, concrete or asphalt paving, gravel roads,
packed earthen materials, and macadam or other surfaces which similarly
impede the natural infiltration of stormwater. A natural or man-made water
body is not considered an impervious area, but is treated as an immediate
runoff surface in curve number calculations.[Added 5-17-2017 STM, Art.
13]
INCREASE IN NONCONFORMITY OF A STRUCTURE — Any change in a
structure or property which causes further deviation from the dimensional
standard(s) creating the nonconformity, such as, but not limited to,
reduction in water body, tributary stream or wetland setback distance,
increase in lot coverage, or increase in height of a structure. Property
changes or structure expansions which either meet the dimensional
standard or which cause no further increase in the linear extent of
nonconformance of the existing structure shall not be considered to
increase nonconformity. For example, there is no increase in nonconformity
with the setback requirement for water bodies, wetlands, or tributary
streams if the expansion extends no further into the required setback area
than does any portion of the existing nonconforming structure. Hence, a
structure may be expanded laterally, provided that the expansion extends
no closer to the water body, tributary stream, or wetland than the closest
portion of the existing structure from that water body, tributary stream, or
wetland. Included in this allowance are expansions which in-fill irregularly
shaped structures.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
INDIVIDUAL PRIVATE CAMPSITE — An area of land which is not associated
with a campground, but which is developed for repeated camping by only
one group not to exceed 10 individuals and which involves site
improvements which may include but not be limited to gravel pads, parking
areas, fireplaces or tent platforms.
INDUSTRIAL — The assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing,
packaging or processing of goods or the extraction of minerals.
INN — A building, which contains a dwelling unit occupied by an owner or
resident manager, in which lodging or lodging and meals are offered to the
general public for compensation, offering no more than 10 bedrooms for
lodging purposes, in which the entrances and exits to or from these rooms
are made through a lobby or other common room.
INSTITUTIONAL — A nonprofit or quasi-public use or institution, such as
a church, library, public or private school, hospital, or municipally owned
or operated building, structure or land used for public purposes.[Added
11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
§ 225-6 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-6
202:317
JUNKYARD —
KENNEL — Any place, building, tract of land, abode, enclosure or vehicle
where three or more dogs or three or more cats, owned singly or jointly,
are kept for commercial purposes, including but not limited to breeding,
hunting, show, field trials or exhibition, or where one or more dogs or other
pets are kept for their owners in return for a fee. This definition shall not
apply to dogs or cats under the age of four months.
LAB RESEARCH FACILITY — A building or buildings and/or structure or
structures and any accessory equipment or use in directing scientific or
other forms of human inquiry into phenomena, including but not limited to
nature, human nature, the physical environment, ecosystems, other systems
and products and devices.
LAND MANAGEMENT ROAD — A route or track consisting of a bed of
exposed mineral soil, gravel, or other surfacing materials constructed for, or
created by, the passage of motorized vehicles and used primarily for timber
harvesting and related activities, including associated log yards, but not
including skid trails or skid roads.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
LANDSCAPE/OPEN SPACE RATIO — See "floor area ratio," but this applies
as a minimum requirement.
LICENSED FORESTER — A forester licensed under 32 M.R.S.A. Chapter
76.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
LOT — A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one or
more buildings and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental
to them, including such open spaces as are required by this chapter, and
having frontage upon a public street, right-of-way or private way and
otherwise meets all dimensional requirements of this chapter.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area within the lot lines.
LOT, CORNER — A lot with at least two contiguous sides abutting upon a
street or right-of-way.
LOT, COVERAGE — The percentage of the lot covered by all buildings.
LOT, INTERIOR — Any lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES — The lines bounding a lot as defined below:
A yard, field or other area used as place of storage for:
Discarded, worn-out or junked plumbing, heating supplies,
household appliances and furniture.
(1)
(2) Discarded scrap and junked lumber.
Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash,
rubber or plastic debris, waste and all scrap iron, steel and other
scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.
(3)
(4) Garbage dumps, waste dumps and sanitary fills.
A.
§ 225-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-6
202:318
LOT OF RECORD — A parcel of land, a legal description of which or the
dimensions of which are recorded on a document or map on file in the
Sagadahoc County Registry of Deeds.
LOT, THROUGH — Any interior lot having frontages on two more or less
parallel streets or rights-of-way or between a street and a body of water,
or a right-of-way and a body of water, or between two bodies of water, as
distinguished from a corner lot. All sides of through lots adjacent to streets,
rights-of-way and bodies of water shall be considered frontage, and front
yards shall be provided as required.
LOT WIDTH — The closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot. When
only two lot lines extend into the Shoreland Zone, both lot lines shall be
considered to be side lot lines.[Amended 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — A set of site development strategies
that are designed to mimic natural hydrologic function by reducing
stormwater runoff and increasing groundwater recharge and pollutant
treatment. The strategies may include those set forth in the DEP
Stormwater Manual, Volume III-BMPs Technical Design Manual, and/or
any other LID strategies adopted by the Topsham Planning Board.[Added
5-17-2017 STM, Art. 13]
MANUFACTURED HOUSING — A structural unit or units designed for
residential occupancy and constructed in a manufacturing facility and
transported, by the use of its own chassis or an independent chassis, to
a building site. This term includes both newer mobile homes and modular
homes.[Added 5-19-2010 STM, Art. 12]
MANUFACTURED HOUSING UNIT — A newer mobile home or a modular
home that when installed on a lot or mobile home park site contains one (1)
dwelling unit.[Amended 5-19-2010 STM, Art. 12]
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY — A use engaged in the basic processing and
manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted or
FRONT LOT LINE:
On an interior lot, the line separating the lot from the street rightof-
way.
(1)
On a corner or through lot, the line separating the lot from either
street or right-of-way.
(2)
A.
REAR LOT LINE — The lot line opposite the front lot line.
On a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary
line between the side lot lines parallel to the front lot line, not less
than 10 feet long, lying farthest from the front lot line.
(1)
On a corner lot, the rear lot line shall be opposite the front lot line
of least dimension.
(2)
B.
SIDE LOT LINES — Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot
line.
C.
§ 225-6 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-6
202:319
raw materials, or a use engaged in storage of or large-scale manufacturing
processes using flammable or explosive materials, or storage or
manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous conditions. The
following uses are not permitted: chemical manufacturing, commercial
tannery, explosive manufacturing, military installation rendering, petroleum
refinery, slaughterhouse, storage of hazardous and biomedical waste and
nuclear power.[Amended 5-17-2000 STM, Art. 15]
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT — A use engaged in the production of products
or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging,
incidental storage, sales and distribution of products, including, but not
limited to, biotechnology, medical technology, composite materials,
precision manufacturing, and other similar businesses, which must operate
within the minimum performance standards of this chapter and is
compatible in scale to other uses in the zone.[Amended 9-25-2013 STM,
Art. 5]
MARIJUANA BUSINESS — A marijuana cultivation facility, a marijuana
products manufacturing facility, a marijuana testing facility, or a registered
caregiver retail store.[Added 5-15-2019 STM, Art. 22]
MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY — A facility licensed to cultivate,
prepare and package adult use and/or medical marijuana and to sell adult
use and medical marijuana to marijuana manufacturing facilities, marijuana
stores, and other cultivation facilities. A marijuana cultivation facility is
not authorized as an accessory use, and only where expressly allowed as a
permitted use.[Added 5-15-2019 STM, Art. 22]
MARIJUANA PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING FACILITY — A facility licensed
to purchase adult use and/or medical marijuana from a marijuana
cultivation facility or another marijuana products manufacturing facility;
to manufacture, label and package adult use and/or medical marijuana
products; and to sell adult use and/ or medical marijuana products to other
marijuana products manufacturing facilities and to marijuana stores. A
marijuana products manufacturing facility is not authorized as an accessory
use, and only where expressly allowed as a permitted use.[Added
5-15-2019 STM, Art. 22]
MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY — A medical marijuana testing facility or
adult use marijuana testing facility, as described within this definition. A
marijuana testing facility is not authorized as an accessory use, and only
where expressly allowed as a permitted use:[Added 5-15-2019 STM, Art.
22]
ADULT USE MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY — A facility licensed
under Chapter 150 of the Topsham Code to develop, research and test
adult use marijuana, marijuana products and other substances.
A.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY — A public or private
laboratory that:
B.
§ 225-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-6
202:320
MARINA — A shorefront commercial facility with provisions for one or more
of the following: boat storage, boat launching or the sale of supplies and
services for watercraft and their equipment and accessories.
MARKET VALUE — The estimated price a property will bring in the open
market and under prevailing market conditions in a sale between a willing
seller and a willing buyer, both conversant with the property and with
prevailing general price levels.
MEDICAL CLINIC — A building designed and/or used for the diagnosis
and treatment of human patients that does not include overnight care
facilities.50
MINERAL EXPLORATION — Hand sampling, test boring, or other methods
of determining the nature or extent of mineral resources which create
minimal disturbance to the land and which include reasonable measures to
restore the land to its original condition.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
MINIMUM LOT AREA — The lot area, less the area of any land which is part
of a right-of-way for a thoroughfare or easement, such as, but not limited
to, surface drainage easements or traveled rights-of-way (but not including
utility easement servicing that lot), which is subject to tidal action or which
is covered with water for at least three months per year.
MIXED USE BUILDING — A single structure with residential and
professional/commercial uses.[Added 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
MOBILE FOOD SERVICE — Food service establishments in mobile units,
either towed or self-propelled registered vehicles, preparing and serving
food products on a particular site, open to the general public.[Added
5-14-2014 STM, Art. 10]
MOBILE HOME — A manufactured housing unit constructed prior to June
15, 1976.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A plot of land under unified ownership approved
by the Town for the placement of three or more manufactured housing
units.[Amended 5-19-2010 STM, Art. 12]
MOBILE HOME PARK LOT — An area of land on which an individual home
is situated within a mobile home park and which is reserved for use by the
occupants of that home and which is designated on a mobile home park plan
approved by the town.
Is authorized in accordance with 22 M.R.S.A. § 2423-A, Subsection
10, to analyze contaminants in and the potency and cannabinoid
profile of samples; and
(1)
Is accredited pursuant to standard ISO/IEC 17025 of the
International Organization for Standardization by a 3rd-party
accrediting body or is certified, registered or accredited by an
organization approved by the State of Maine.
(2)
50.Editor's Note: The former definition of "medical marijuana dispensary," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 5-15-2019 STM, Arts. 21 and 22.
§ 225-6 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-6
202:321
MODULAR HOME — Manufactured housing that the manufacturer certifies
is constructed in compliance with Title 10 M.R.S.A. Chapter 951, and rules
adopted under that chapter, meaning a structure, transportable in one
or more sections, that is not constructed on a permanent chassis and
is designed to be used as a dwelling on a permanent foundation when
connected to required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, airconditioning
or electrical systems contained in the unit.[Added 5-19-2010
STM, Art. 12]
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE/REPAIR — Any business establishment
engaged in general repair, engine rebuilding or parts replacement. This use
does not include the sales of gasoline.
MUNICIPAL — Any authority, agency or unit of local government or school
district.[Added 5-15-2019 STM, Art. 9]
NATIVE TREES — Indigenous to the local forests.[Added 11-13-2008
STM, Art. 7]
NATURAL RESOURCE RELATED BUSINESS — A retail, service, or
wholesale business that provides goods or services that are primarily used
by agricultural, animal husbandry, forestry, or other natural resource
activities but not including extractive industries.[Added 1-23-2008 STM,
Art. 3]
NEAR-FIELD BUILDING — A building placed in front of a larger building or
land use to screen the larger building and land use and create a pedestrianscaled
street environment.[Added 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
NEIGHBORHOOD GROCERY STORE — A store with less than 3,000 square
feet of retail floor space, not including storage, food preparation, or service
areas, and not exceeding 4,000 square feet of total floor space, that is
primarily intended to serve the convenience of a residential neighborhood
or area of the community with such items as, but not limited to, basic
foods, prepared foods, newspapers, fuel for motor vehicles, emergency
home repair articles and other household items. A neighborhood grocery
store does not include State Agency liquor sales. The sale of motor fuels
accessory to a neighborhood grocery store does not constitute gasoline
sales as a use, provided that the performance standards of § 225-60.16 are
met.[Amended 5-19-2010 STM, Art. 15]
NET RESIDENTIAL ACREAGE — The gross acreage available for
development, excluding the areas which are unsuitable for development
including:[Amended 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 11]
The area within mapped floodways as identified on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM).
A.
The area within a coastal wetland or freshwater wetland as defined
in 38 MRSA § 480-B and significant vernal pools subject to the state
Natural Resources Protection Act.
B.
Contiguous areas of two acres or more with continuous slopes in excess
of thirty-five percent (35%).
C.
§ 225-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-6
202:322
NET RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The maximum number of dwelling units
that can be developed on a lot or parcel of land as determined by dividing
the net residential acreage of the lot or parcel by the minimum lot size
requirement for the district in which it is located.[Amended 5-16-2012
STM, Art. 11]
NEWER MOBILE HOME — Manufactured housing constructed after July
15, 1976, that the manufacturer certifies is constructed in compliance
with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
Standards, meaning a structure transportable in one or more sections,
that in traveling mode is fourteen (14) body feet or more in width and
has seven hundred fifty (750) or more square feet of floor area, and that
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without being placed on a permanent foundation when connected
to required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning or
electrical systems contained in the unit. The term "newer mobile home"
includes manufactured housing that meets these requirements except for
the size requirements for which the manufacturer has voluntarily filed a
certification with the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development and that complies with the standards established
under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974, United States Code, Title 42, Section 401, et
seq.[Added 5-19-2010 STM, Art. 12]
NONCONFORMING CONDITION — Nonconforming lot, structure or use
which is allowed solely because it was in lawful existence at the time
this ordinance or subsequent amendment took effect.[Added 11-13-2008
STM, Art. 7]
NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD — A lot shown on a recorded plan or
deed which does not meet the area, frontage, width or depth requirements
of the zone in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure that does not meet any one
or more of the following dimensional requirements: setbacks, height and lot
coverage. It is allowed solely because it was in lawful existence at the time
this chapter or subsequent amendments took effect.[Amended 5-18-2016
STM, Art. 10]
NONCONFORMING USE — Use of land or structures that is not otherwise
permitted, but which is allowed to remain solely because it was in lawful
existence at the time this chapter or subsequent amendments took effect.
NONCONTRIBUTING PROPERTY (HISTORIC) — A building or structure
that is located in a designated Historic Overlay District or an area being
Areas that are zoned "resource protection."
In determining the net residential acreage of a parcel, each physical
area of the site shall be deducted only once even if it is more than
one type of area (i.e., an area that is a freshwater wetland, is within
a floodway, and is zoned "resource protection" is deducted from the
gross area only one time).
D.
§ 225-6 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-6
202:323
considered for inclusion in an Historic Overlay District that is not identified
as a contributing property. (See definition of "contributing
property.")[Added 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 9]
NORMAL HIGH-WATER LINE (NONTIDAL WATERS) — That line which
is apparent from visible markings, changes in the character of soils due
to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation, and which
distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial
land. Areas contiguous with rivers and great ponds that support
nonforested wetland vegetation and hydric soils and that are at the same
or lower elevation as the water level of the river or great pond during
the period of normal high-water are considered part of the river or great
pond.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
NORMAL HIGH-WATER MARK OF COASTAL WATERS — Along coastal
or tidal waters, the elevations at which vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. By way of illustration,
coastal or tidal vegetation includes, but is not limited to, salt marsh grass,
salt meadow hay, black arrowgrass, seaside lavender, silverweed, salt marsh
bulbrush, seaside plantain, orach, salt marsh sedge, salt marsh aster. In
places where vegetation is not present, the high-water mark shall be the
identifiable debris or water line left by nonstorm tidal action.
NORMAL HIGH-WATER MARK OF INLAND WATERS — That line on the
shores and banks of nontidal waters which is apparent because of the
contiguous different character of the soil of the vegetation due to the
prolonged action of the water. Relative to vegetation, it is that line where
the vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly
terrestrial (by way of illustration, aquatic vegetation includes, but is not
limited to, the following plants and plant groups: water lily, pond grasses;
and terrestrial vegetation includes, but is not limited to, the following plants
and plant groups: upland grasses, aster, lady slipper, wintergreen, partridge
berry, sarsaparilla, pines, cedars, oaks, ashes, alders, elms and maples).
In places where the shore or bank is of such character that the highwater
mark cannot be easily determined (rockslides, ledges, rapidly eroding
or slumping banks), the normal high-water mark shall be estimated from
places where it can be determined by the above method.
NURSING HOME — An institution that provides nursing or convalescent
care to chronic or convalescent patients, but does not provide hospital
services such as an operating room or X-ray facility unless incidental to the
delivery of nursing or convalescent care.51
ON-STREET PARKING — Parking for vehicles within public rights-of-way
where allowed in accordance with § 210-34 and § 210-39 or as
amended.[Added 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
PARKING SPACE — An area, exclusive of drives or aisles, for the parking of
vehicles.
51.Editor's Note: The former definition of "official business directional sign," which
immediately followed this definition, was superseded 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10. See now the
definition of "sign, official business directional" in this section.
§ 225-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-6
202:324
PARKS AND RECREATION — Noncommercially operated recreation
facilities open to the general public, including, but not limited to,
playgrounds, parks, monuments, green strips, open space, mini-parks,
athletic fields, boat launching ramps, piers and docks, picnic grounds,
swimming pools and wildlife and nature preserves, along with any
necessary accessory facilities, rest rooms and bathhouses, and the
maintenance of such land and facilities, but not including campgrounds,
commercial recreation and amusement centers as defined elsewhere in this
chapter.
PERMITTEE-RESPONSIBLE MITIGATION ACTIVITIES — Vernal pool
conservation carried out by an applicant for a development approval or
permit in accordance with the provisions of the Vernal Pools Overlay District
as an alternative to paying a vernal pool mitigation fee.[Added 5-18-2016
STM, Art. 14; amended 5-17-2017 STM, Art. 14]
PERSON — An individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality,
trust, estate, partnership, association, two or more individuals having a joint
or common interest or other legal entity.
PIERS, DOCKS, WHARVES AND USES PROJECTING INTO WATER BODIES
—
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — Land under unified control
to be planned and developed as a whole in a single development operation
or a definitely programmed series of development operations or phases,
including shopping centers, industrial parks and office/business parks. A
planned development includes principal and accessory structures and uses
substantially related to the character and purposes of the planned
development. A planned development is built according to general and
detailed plans that include not only streets, utilities, lots and building
location and the like, but also site plans for all buildings as are intended to
be located, constructed, used and related to each other and plans for other
uses and improvements on the land as related to the buildings.[Added
5-17-2000 STM, Art. 15]
PLANNED MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — Land under unified control to
be planned and developed as a coordinated, integrated mixed-use project in
accordance with § 225-60.7.[Amended 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15]
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Land under unified control to
be planned and developed as a whole in a single development operation
or a definitely programmed series of development operations or phases
for housing developments, including retirement communities, with all uses
integrated and related to each other. The nonrelated housing uses shall
be related to the proposed planned residential development. The planned
residential development must consist of at least 50 units of housing and at
least 25 acres of land that is operated as a single community. A planned
TEMPORARY — Structures which remain in the water for less than
seven months in any period of 12 consecutive months.
A.
PERMANENT — Structures which remain in the water for seven
months or more in any period of 12 months.
B.
§ 225-6 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-6
202:325
residential development includes principal and accessory structures and
uses substantially related to the character and purposes of the planned
residential development. A planned residential development is built
according to general and detailed plans that include not only streets,
utilities, lots and building location and the like, but also site plans for
all buildings as are intended to be located, constructed, used and related
to each other and plans for other uses and improvements on the land as
related to the buildings.[Amended 5-17-2000 STM, Art. 15]
POND — See "body of water."
PRESCHOOL — A school for children up to the age of six years.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — The structure in which the principal use is
conducted.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary use to which the structure is devoted and
the main purpose for which the structure exists. Such structure may contain
more than one use, only one of which shall be the principal use.
PRIVATE ROAD (PRIVATE WAY) — A private way meeting the Town's road
construction standards for preparation, subbase and base (as specified in
Chapter 191, Subdivision of Land). In order to be considered a road, for
purposes of this chapter, the traveled surface need not be paved. To be
considered a private road or way, it must serve two or more hopes or
lots, and be located within a right of way 50' in width throughout its
length.[Added 5-20-2004 STM, Art. 18]
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The place of business for doctors, lawyers,
accountants, architects, surveyors, real estate or insurance agents,
psychiatrists, psychologists, counselors and the like, but not including
financial institutions or personal services (such as hair dressers,
beauticians, masseuses, etc.).
PUBLIC DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign which indicates direction to
locations of hospitals or similar emergency facilities.
PUBLIC FACILITY — Any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings,
property, recreation areas and roads, which are owned, leased or otherwise
operated or funded by a governmental body or public entity.
PUBLIC WATER UTILITY FACILITY — Any buildings, property, roads,
driveway, parking, and the like which are owned, leased or otherwise
operated or funded by the Brunswick Topsham Water District.[Added
5-15-2019 STM, Art. 10]
PUBLIC WAY (HISTORIC) — A way in which the public has a right of access
and includes public streets and sidewalks.[Added 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 9]
RECENT FLOODPLAIN SOILS — The following soil series as described and
identified by the National Cooperative Soil Survey:
Alluvial Cornish Charles
Fryeburg Hadley Limerick
Lovewell Medomak Ondawa
§ 225-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-6
202:326
Podunk Rumney Saco
Suncook Sunday Winooski
RECREATIONAL FACILITY — A place designed and equipped for the
conduct of sports, leisure time activities and other customary and usual
recreational activities, excluding boat launching facilities.
RECREATION VEHICLE — A vehicle or vehicular attachment to a vehicle
designed to be towed, and designed for temporary sleeping or living
quarters for one or more persons, which is not a dwelling and which may
include a pickup camper, travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer and motor
home. In order to be considered as a vehicle and not as a structure, the unit
must remain with its tires on the ground and must be registered with the
State Division of Motor Vehicles.
REGISTERED CAREGIVER RETAIL STORE — A facility operated by a single
medical marijuana registered caregiver and licensed to sell harvested
marijuana to qualifying patients for the patients' medical use and may
include an area for consultation with patients. A registered caregiver retail
store is not authorized as an accessory use, and only where expressly
allowed as a permitted use.[Added 5-15-2019 STM by Art. 21]
RENDERING — An operation that processes animal parts and/or byproducts
to create an end product.
REPLACEMENT SYSTEM — A system intended to replace:
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms designed and
equipped exclusively for use as permanent, seasonal, or temporary living
quarters for only one family at a time, and containing cooking, sleeping and
toilet facilities. The term shall include mobile homes and rental units that
contain cooking, sleeping, and toilet facilities regardless of the time period
rented. Recreational vehicles are not residential dwelling units.[Added
11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
RESIDUAL BASAL AREA — The average of the basal area of trees remaining
on a harvested site.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
RESIDUAL STAND — A stand of trees remaining in the forest following
timber harvesting and related activities.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
RESTAURANT — An establishment where meals are prepared and served
to the public for consumption on the premises entirely within a completely
enclosed building; and where no food or beverages are served directly to
occupants of motor vehicles or directly to pedestrian traffic from an exterior
service opening or counter, or any combination of the foregoing; and where
customers are not permitted or encouraged by the design of the physical
facilities, by advertising or by the servicing or packaging procedures to take
out food or beverage for consumption outside the enclosed building.
An existing system which is either malfunctioning or being upgraded
with no significant change of design flow or use of the structure; or
A.
B. Any existing overboard wastewater discharge.
§ 225-6 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-6
202:327
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — An establishment that offers quick food
service, which is accomplished through a limited menu of items already
prepared and held for service or prepared, fried or griddled quickly or
heated in a device such as a microwave. Orders are not generally taken at
the customer's table, and food is generally served in disposable wrapping or
containers.
RETAIL BUSINESS — Any business engaged in sales and related services
to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption and/or use, and not for
resale. For purposes of this chapter, eating and drinking places, auto sales,
motor vehicle service/repair and gasoline sales are not considered as a
retail business and are defined separately.[Amended 5-17-2000 STM,
Art. 15]
RIPRAP — Rocks, irregularly shaped and at least six inches in diameter,
used for erosion control and soil stabilization, typically used on ground
slopes of two units horizontal to one unit vertical or less.
RIVER — A free-flowing body of water, including its associated floodplain
wetlands from that point at which it provides drainage for a watershed of
25 square miles to its mouth.
RURAL AREAS — The portion of the Town designated as “Rural” in the
adopted Comprehensive Plan.[Added 5-18-2016 STM, Art. 14]
RURAL ENTREPRENEURIAL ACTIVITY — A low-impact nonresidential
activity such as, but not limited to, lab/research facilities, light
manufacturing, professional offices, service businesses, wholesale
businesses, and warehousing, storage, and distribution that conforms to the
performance standards of § 225-60.11.[Added 1-23-2008 STM, Art. 3]
SAWMILL — An operation that includes, but is not limited to, a mill or
machine for sawing or resawing logs or lumber with or without a storage
area or building for the raw materials, final product and any by-product
from the milling process.
SCHOOLS —
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SCHOOLS (including parochial schools) —
Institutions where education or instruction of any branch or branches
of knowledge is imparted and which satisfies either of the following
requirements:
(1) The school is not operated for a profit or a gainful business; or
The school teaches courses of study which are sufficient to qualify
attendance there as compliance with state compulsory education
requirements.
(2)
A.
COMMERCIAL SCHOOLS — Schools or institutions which are
commercial or profit-oriented. Examples thereof are dancing, music,
riding, correspondence, aquatic schools, driving or business.
B.
§ 225-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-6
202:328
SEASONAL RETAIL SALES — The sale of agricultural and horticultural
products, excluding animals, manure, equipment, bulk products and
chemicals.[Added 5-24-2006 STM, Art. 11]
SERVICE BUSINESS — A business that provides services to the public
for compensation, either on or off the premises. Uses include, but are
not limited to, beauty salons, building, electrical, plumbing and landscape
contracting, business and educational services, financial services, catering,
cleaning services, locksmith, photocopying, repair and restoration services,
bicycle repair shop, tailoring, typing and word processing. Motor vehicle
service and repair is not included and is defined separately.[Amended
5-17-2000 STM, Art. 15]
SERVICE DROP — Any utility line extension which does not cross or run
beneath any portion of a water body, provided that:
SETBACK — That portion of a lot which runs parallel to the lot boundaries,
the width of which is established by this chapter, and in which no regulated
improvements, including, but not limited to, building, structures and
parking shall be placed unless otherwise permitted by this chapter. To
determine if the improvements are in compliance with the above, the
distance at which any improvement is located from a property line shall be
measured as a horizontal distance from the property line to the nearest part
of the improvement.
SETBACK FROM WATER — The nearest horizontal distance from the
normal high-water line of a water body or tributary stream, or upland edge
of a wetland, to the nearest part of a structure, road, parking space or other
regulated object or area.[Amended 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
SHOPPING CENTER — Any concentration of two or more retail stores or
service establishments under one ownership or management containing
10,000 square feet or more of gross floor space.
SHORE FRONTAGE — The length of a lot bordering on a water body or
wetland measured in a straight line between the intersections of the lot
lines with the shoreline.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
In the case of electric service:
The placement of wires and/or the installation of utility poles is
located entirely upon the premises of the customer requesting
service or upon a roadway right-of-way; and
(1)
(2) The total length of the extension is less than 1,000 feet.
A.
In the case of telephone service:
The extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation
of telephone wires to existing utility poles; or
(1)
The extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or
placement underground is less than 1,000 feet in length.
(2)
B.
§ 225-6 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-6
202:329
SHORELAND ZONE — The land area located within two hundred and fifty
(250) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of any great
pond or river; within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a
coastal wetland, including all areas affected by tidal action; within 250 feet
of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland; or within seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream.[Amended
11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
SHORELINE — The normal high-water line, or upland edge of a freshwater
or coastal wetland.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
SIGN — An object, device or structure, visible from a public way, or
functionally visible from a neighboring property (visible and legible from
the property line at any point up to 6 feet above finished grade), with a
name, identification, description, display, notification or illustration which
is affixed to, painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building,
structure, parcel or lot and which relates to a commercial use located on
the premises.[Amended 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10; 5-17-2017 STM, Art.
12]
SIGNABLE AREA — The wall area exclusive of openings and architectural
details.[Added 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIGN, ARCADE — An on-premises sign attached to the underside of the
soffit or ceiling of an arcade or covered walkway.[Added 5-16-2012 STM,
Art. 10]
SIGN AREA — The space within a continuous perimeter of a geometric
configuration, which encloses the limits of the advertising message,
illustration, insignia, surface or a space of a similar nature, together with
any frame, color or other material which is an integral component of the
display and is used to differentiate such sign from a wall or other
background, and including supporting posts or brackets, unless the
supporting posts or brackets are less than 8 inches in width, or are less than
20% of the area of the sign. Any area greater than 20% of the sign area will
be counted as sign area. The total area of a canopy sign shall be the sum
of the areas of the geometric configuration surrounding the sign wording or
message.[Amended 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIGN, BANNER — Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material having
no permanent frame and which is mounted to a pole, building or other
object.[Amended 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIGN, BUILDING DIRECTORY — A wall sign indicating the tenants in a
building.[Added 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIGN, CANOPY — Any sign that is part of, or attached to, an awning, canopy
or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, window,
entrance or outdoor service area.[Amended 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIGN, DEVELOPMENT — An on-premises permanent sign which identifies
an office complex, industrial park, retail mall, multifamily dwelling or
subdivision development.[Amended 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
§ 225-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-6
202:330
SIGN, DIRECTORY — A sign at the major entrance to a commercial,
business, retail, multi-tenant or industrial park that identifies the occupants
of the park.[Added 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER — An on-premises sign created,
designed, manufactured or modified in such a way that its message may be
electronically, digitally, or mechanically altered by the complete substitution
or replacement of one display by another on each side, as further defined
and regulated under 23 M.R.S.A. § 1914 (11-A).[Added 5-16-2012 STM,
Art. 10]
SIGN, FLAG — Any fabric or flexible material attached or designed to be
flown from a flagpole or similar structure.[Added 5-16-2012 STM, Art.
10]
SIGN, GAS STATION PRICING — A sign used to display the per-gallon price
of gasoline.[Added 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIGN, HOME OCCUPATION — A sign containing only the name and
occupation of a permitted home occupation.[Added 5-16-2012 STM, Art.
10]
SIGNIFICANT RIVER SEGMENTS — See 38 M.R.S.A. § 437.
SIGNIFICANT SITE FEATURE (HISTORIC) — Any landscape structure that
is substantially above grade, to include but not be limited to walls 3 feet
or higher, retaining walls, fences, and light poles.[Added 5-16-2012 STM,
Art. 9]
SIGN, INFORMATION — An on-premises sign commonly associated with,
and not limited to, information and directions necessary or convenient
for visitors coming on the property, including pedestrians and vehicles,
marking entrances and exits, parking areas, circulation direction,
restrooms, entrances, exits, pickup and delivery areas, or other similar site
feature.[Added 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIGN, INTERIOR — Any sign placed within a building, but not including
window signs as defined herein.[Added 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIGN, INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED — A sign that is illuminated from a light
source that is within the sign.[Added 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIGN, MARQUEE — A permanent roof-like structure designed and
constructed to serve as a sign, utilizing manually changeable copy for
the purpose of advertising at a movie or other type of theater.[Amended
5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIGN MATERIAL — Permanent signs shall be constructed of durable
material of one-half-inch minimum thickness that will not deform (warp,
bend, etc.) under normal weather conditions. Materials under 1/2 inch
in thickness may be approved when supported by a fixed ridged frame
designed to prevent deformation of the sign panel.52[Added 5-16-2012
STM, Art. 10]
52.Editor's Note: The definition of "sign, memorial tablet," added 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10,
which immediately followed, was repealed 5-17-2017 STM, Art. 12.
§ 225-6 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-6
202:331
SIGN, MONUMENT — A sign permanently affixed to the ground at its base,
supported entirely by a base structure, and not mounted on a pole.[Added
5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIGN, MOVABLE — Any sign, or part of a sign, that changes physical
position or light intensity by any movement or rotation or that gives the
visual impression of such movement or rotation, including any sign mounted
on a vehicle the sole purpose of which is to advertise a product or business,
or any sign held, worn or used by an individual which is designed to attract
the attention of the public to a particular place of business or a specific
product.[Added 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIGN, OFFICIAL BUSINESS DIRECTIONAL — A sign erected in accordance
with Title 23, M.R.S.A. Chapter 21, Maine Traveler Information
Services.[Amended 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIGN, PERMANENT — All stationary signs or advertising devices with a
fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed
location on the ground, identifying goods or services offered on the lot
where the sign is located.53[Added 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIGN, PORTABLE — A sign that is not permanent, affixed to a building,
structure or the ground.[Amended 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15; 5-16-2012
STM, Art. 10]
SIGN, POST — A freestanding sign supported by one or more upright poles,
columns or braces permanently affixed in or on the ground and not attached
to any building or structure.[Amended 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIGN, PROJECT/CONTRACTOR — A temporary sign located on a project
site which advertises the project name, owner or contractor, such as
architect, engineer, builder, plumber, electrician, building material supplier,
etc., associated with the building project or development.[Added
5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIGN, PROJECTING — A permanent sign mounted on a building projecting
perpendicular to the face of the building.[Added 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15;
5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIGN, PUBLIC NOTICE — A sign located on municipal property or located
at a municipal facility to display notices or information to the public.[Added
5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10; amended 5-15-2019 STM, Art. 9]
SIGN, PUBLIC SAFETY — A sign for the control of traffic and other
regulatory purposes, street signs, warning signs and signs of public service
companies indicating danger or warnings.[Added 5-16-2012 STM, Art.
10]
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the
premises, or a portion of the premises, on which the sign is located.[Added
5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
53.Editor's Note: The definition of "sign, political/political campaign," amended 5-16-2012
STM, Art. 10, which immediately followed, was repealed 5-17-2017 STM, Art. 12.
§ 225-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-6
202:332
SIGN, ROOF — A sign that is displayed above the eaves and under the peak
of a building.[Added 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD — A two-sided sign, typically shaped like an "A"
and hinged at the top, that is made of wood or materials that appear to be
wood and is not attached to the ground.[Amended 5-16-2012 STM, Art.
10]
SIGN, SEASONAL OCCUPATION — A temporary sign advertising the
business conducted on the premises which is dependent on seasonal
services or products, and is displayed during specified periods as
determined by the applicant and as permitted by a seasonal retail
license.54[Amended 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign intended to display commercial messages of
a transitory nature. Portable signs or any sign not permanently embedded
in the ground, or not permanently affixed to a building or sign structure
that is permanently embedded in the ground, are considered temporary
signs.[Amended 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10; 5-17-2017 STM, Art. 12]
SIGN, WALL — A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or
structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure
for, or forms the background surface of, the sign and does not project more
than twelve (12) inches from such building or structure. No wall sign may
cover any window, door or architectural detail.[Added 5-16-2012 STM,
Art. 10]
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign affixed to the surface of a window with its
message intended to be visible to the exterior environment.[Added
5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10]
SIMILAR VISUAL APPEARANCE (HISTORIC) — Where alteration occurs to
a building or structure within the Historic District, the change of material
or any architectural detail cannot be clearly deduced from the public
way.[Added 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 9]
SKID ROAD or SKID TRAIL — A route repeatedly used by forwarding
machinery or animal to haul or drag forest products from the stump to
the yard or landing, the construction of which requires minimal
excavation.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
SLASH — The residue, e.g., treetops and branches, left on the ground after
a timber harvest.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
STACKED PARKING — Parking arrangements where cars are arranged in a
manner that one or more cars are parked behind each other and not all cars
can directly access a travel lane or driveway.[Added 5-20-2009 STM, Art.
15]
54.Editor's Note: The definitions of "sign, service club," and "sign, symbol or insignia," both
added 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 10, and which immediately followed, were repealed 5-17-2017
STM, Art. 12.
§ 225-6 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-6
202:333
STREAM — A channel between defined banks created by the action of
surface water and that has two (2) or more of the following
characteristics.[Amended 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
STREET — All new and existing streets as defined in Chapter 185,
§ 185-3.[Amended 5-20-2015 STM, Art. 10]
STREETSCAPE — An overall coordinated and designed exterior public
space with zones delineated for pedestrians, landscaping/street trees,
vehicles and bicyclists. In general, streetscapes are located within the
public right-of-way in front of a building, but may be on the adjacent
fronting parcel or within both the public right-of-way and the parcel.[Added
5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
It contains or is known to contain flowing water continuously for a
period of at least 6 months of the year under normal seasonal rainfall
conditions.
A.
The channel bed is primarily composed of mineral material, such as
sand, scoured silt, gravel, clay, or other parent material that has been
deposited or scoured by water.
B.
The channel contains aquatic animals, such as fish, aquatic insects or
mollusks in the water or, if no surface water is present, within the
stream bed.
C.
The channel contains aquatic vegetation and is essentially devoid of
upland vegetation.
This definition is based on physical characteristics that in case of
development need to be field verified. The Town has attempted to map
streams throughout the community to serve as an initial guide for
land owners and developers. This information is available in the Town
Planning and Codes Enforcement Offices, but should not be considered
a substitute for field verification.
Bordering freshwater wetlands that are not separated from the stream
channel by a distinct change in elevation (such as hillside groundwater
seeps) or barrier, and wetlands that are subject to periodic flooding or
soil saturation as a result of high stream flows are considered part of
the stream. Where these wetlands are present, the normal high water
line of the stream is measured from the upland/wetland transition
of bordering wetlands subject to periodic stream water flooding or
saturation, or where changes in wetland vegetation, soil
characteristics, or topography clearly demonstrate wetland hydrology
not associated with associated with periodic flood flows.
Natural and artificial impoundments at the source and along the
course of the stream are considered to be part of the stream.
Stream does not mean a ditch or other drainageway constructed,
or constructed and maintained, solely for the purpose of draining
stormwater or a grassy swale.
D.
§ 225-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-6
202:334
Streetscape elements include but are not limited to street trees, benches,
bollards, public trash receptacles, movable tables and chairs, light posts,
planters, bicycle racks and on-street parking. These components are
intended to create a pedestrian-friendly zone parallel to the street. The
width of the streetscape zone varies depending on the nature of the
development and available space between the building and the edge of the
travel way.
Streetscapes should reinforce an integrated plan including architecture,
signage, on-street parking and traffic-calming measures such as curb bump
outs and raised or reflective sidewalks. In all cases, a minimum six footwide
pedestrianway shall be maintained clear of obstacles.
STRUCTURE — Anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, goods or property of any kind, together with anything
constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, exclusive
of fences, and poles, wiring and other aerial equipment normally associated
with service drops as well as guying and guy anchors. The term includes
structures temporarily or permanently located, such as decks, patios, and
satellite dishes.[Amended 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
STRUCTURE HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured between the
average finished grade of the ground at the base of a structure to the high
point of a structure.
SUBDIVISION — See Chapter 191, Subdivision of Land.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair
is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored,
before the damage occurred. For purposes of this definition, substantial
improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include
any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state
or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions or for any alteration of a structure
listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of
Historical Places.
SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system designed to
dispose of waste or wastewater on or beneath the surface of the earth;
includes, but is not limited to, septic tanks; disposal fields; grandfathered
cesspools; holding tanks; pretreatment filter, piping, or any other fixture,
mechanism, or apparatus used for those purposes; does not include any
discharge system licensed under 38 M.R.S.A. § 414, any surface wastewater
disposal system, or any municipal or quasi-municipal sewer or waste water
treatment system.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
SUSTAINED SLOPE — A change in elevation where the referenced percent
grade is substantially maintained or exceeded throughout the measured
area.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
§ 225-6 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-6
202:335
TIDAL AREA — Any land or water area upon which tidal action occurs
(Merrymeeting Bay and tributaries).
TIDAL WATERS — All waters affected by tidal action during the maximum
spring tide.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
TIMBER HARVESTING — The cutting and removal of timber for the primary
purpose of selling or processing forest products. The cutting or removal of
trees in the Shoreland Zone on a lot that has less than two (2) acres within
the Shoreland Zone shall not be considered timber harvesting. Such cutting
or removal of trees shall be regulated pursuant to § 225-19, Subsection
15P, “Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber
Harvesting.”[Amended 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
TIMBER HARVESTING AND RELATED ACTIVITIES — Timber harvesting,
the construction and maintenance of roads used primarily for timber
harvesting and other activities conducted to facilitate timber
harvesting.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
TOWN PLANNER — The department head of the Topsham Planning
Department, or his/her designee.[Added 5-14-2014 STM, Art. 12]
TRANSMISSION TOWER — A structure that is intended for transmitting or
receiving television, radio or telephone communications.
TRIBUTARY STREAM — A channel between defined banks created by the
action of surface water, which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial
vegetation or by the presence of a bed, devoid of topsoil, containing
waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material or bedrock; and which
is connected hydrologically with other water bodies. "Tributary stream"
does not include rills or gullies forming because of accelerated erosion in
disturbed soils where the natural vegetation cover has been removed by
human activity. This definition does not include the term "stream" as defined
elsewhere in this chapter, and only applies to that portion of the tributary
stream located within the Shoreland Zone of the receiving water body or
wetland.[Amended 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
UNDUE HARDSHIP: —
UPLAND EDGE OF A WETLAND — The boundary between upland and
wetland. For purposes of a coastal wetland, this boundary is the line formed
by the landward limits of the salt-tolerant vegetation and/or the maximum
spring tide level, including all areas affected by tidal action. For purposes
The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance
is granted;
A.
The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of a
property and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
B.
The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the
locality; and
C.
The hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior
owner.
D.
§ 225-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-6
202:336
of a freshwater wetland, the upland edge is formed where the soils are not
saturated for a duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation; or where
the soils support the growth of wetland vegetation, but such vegetation is
dominated by woody stems that are six (6) meters [approximately twenty
(20) feet] tall or taller.[Amended 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
USED MERCHANDISE SALE — The indoor or outdoor sale of used articles,
conducted for more than five consecutive days or for more than two
weekends during the period May 1 through September 30. This term shall
include extended yard sales, but shall not include flea markets or shops
for secondhand clothing or secondhand books. Used merchandise sales
shall require a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, which shall be
conditional upon the provision of adequate off-street parking.
VARIANCE — A relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such
relaxation will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to
conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of
the applicant, a literal enforcement of the chapter would result in undue
hardship. A financial hardship shall not constitute grounds for granting a
variance. The crucial points of variances are undue hardship and unique
circumstances applying to property.
VEGETATION — All live trees, shrubs, ground cover and other plants,
including, without limitation, trees both over and under four inches in
diameter, measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level.
VERNAL POOL — Depressional wetland basins that typically go dry in most
years and may contain inlets or outlets, typically of intermittent flow. Vernal
pools range in both size and depth depending upon landscape position
and parent material(s). Pools usually support one or more of the following
obligate indicator species: wood frog, spotted salamander, blue-spotted
salamander, marbled salamander, Jefferson’s salamander and fairy shrimp.
However, they should preclude sustainable populations of predatory
fish.[Added 5-17-2017 STM, Art. 14]
VERNAL POOL CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan developed by the Town
that assesses the known vernal pools in the community’s Rural Area and
establishes a list of target conservation pools and conservation actions
in accordance with the Vernal Pool Conservation Criteria in the Town of
Topsham Vernal Pools Special Area Management Plan (SAMP).[Added
5-18-2016 STM, Art. 14]
VERNAL POOL MITIGATION FEE — A fee paid by an applicant for a
development approval or permit in accordance with the provisions of the
Vernal Pools Overlay District.[Added 5-18-2016 STM, Art. 14; amended
5-17-2017 STM, Art. 14]
VOLUME OF A STRUCTURE — The volume of all portions of a structure
enclosed by roof and fixed exterior walls as measured from the exterior
faces of these walls and roof.
WAREHOUSING; STORAGE, DISTRIBUTION — A use engaged in storage,
wholesale and distribution of manufactured products, supplies and
equipment, but excluding bulk fuel storage.
§ 225-6 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-6
202:337
WATER BODY — Any great pond, river or stream.[Amended 11-13-2008
STM, Art. 7]
WATER CROSSING — Any project extending from one bank to the opposite
bank of a river, stream, tributary stream, or wetland whether under,
through, or over the water or wetland. Such projects include but may not
be limited to roads, fords, bridges, culverts, waterlines, sewer lines, and
cables as well as maintenance work on these crossings. This definition
includes crossings for timber harvesting equipment and related
activities.55[Amended 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
WETLAND — A freshwater or coastal wetland.[Added 11-13-2008 STM,
Art. 7]
WHOLESALE BUSINESS — An establishment selling goods intended for
resale.
WINDFIRM — The ability of a forest stand to withstand strong winds and
resist wind throw, wind rocking, and major breakage.[Added 11-13-2008
STM, Art. 7]
WOODY VEGETATION — Live trees or woody, nonherbaceous
shrubs.[Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
YARD SALE — Includes so-called garage sales, porch sales, tag sales and
the like. Unless they occur on more than five consecutive days or for more
than two weekends during the period May 1 through September 30, they
shall not be considered to be used merchandise sales as defined in this
chapter and shall not require a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer.
55.Editor's Note: The definition of "wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers," which
immediately followed, was repealed 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7.
§ 225-6 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-6
202:338
ARTICLE III
Official Zoning Map
§ 225-7. Delineation of zone boundaries.
Zones are located and bounded as shown on the Official Zoning Map which
is a part of this chapter.56 The Shoreland Overlay District boundaries are
determined by the terms of the section creating that zone, and any
delineation of them on the Official Zoning Map shall be for reference only
and shall not supersede or modify such boundaries as created in that
section.
§ 225-8. Certification and filing.
The Official Zoning Map is certified by and attested by the Town Clerk under
the following words: "This is the Official Zoning Map referred to in § 225-8
of Chapter 225, Zoning, of the Code of the Town of Topsham," together with
the date of the adoption of this chapter. The official copy and a duplicate
shall be located in the office of the Town Clerk. An additional copy will be
on file with the Sagadahoc County Registry of Deeds.
§ 225-9. Amendments.
If changes are made in the zone boundaries or other matter portrayed on
the Official Zoning Map such changes shall be made on the Official Zoning
Map within 14 days after the amendment has been adopted together with
an entry on the Official Zoning Map as follows:
"On (insert date) by official action of the town, the following change(s)
was (were) made: (insert brief description of the nature of change)."
Immediately beneath the entry the Town Clerk shall place his/her
signature.
§ 225-10. Replacement.
In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost
or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and
additions, the governing authority may by resolution adopt a new Official
Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other
errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such corrections
shall have the effect of amending the Official Zoning Map.
56.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Town Clerk's office.
§ 225-7 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-10
202:339

ARTICLE IV
Establishment of Zones
§ 225-11. Establishment of zones. [Amended 5-17-2000 STM, Art.
15]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Town is hereby divided into the
following zones:
A. Zones.
(1) Urban Residential Zones, to be known as "R-1 Zones." The
objective for the Urban Residential Zones is to provide for the
maintenance and increased liveability of the existing densely builtup
areas of the Town and for areas where a limited amount of highdensity
housing can be constructed. The Urban Residential Zones
provide areas of compact development that foster cohesive
neighborhoods close to community services.
(2) Suburban Residential Zones, to be known as "R-2 Zones." The
objective for the Suburban Residential Zones is to provide for
medium-density housing on public water and sewer or where public
water and sewer would be provided eventually. This zone is the
transition area between the Urban Residential and the Rural
Residential Zones. Two-family dwelling units are permitted in this
zone with a smaller lot size if served by public water and sewer.
(3) Rural Residential Zones, to be known as "R-3 Zones." The objective
of the Rural Residential Zones is to provide for low-density housing
with the intention of preserving valuable open space, including
agricultural and forest lands, recreation lands and viewsheds.
Public water and sewer will not be expanded into this district in
order to encourage low-density development. This area is
geographically located next to many of the most important natural
resource areas that should be protected by the town.
(4) Commercial Corridor Zones, to be known as "CC Zones." The
objective of the Commercial Corridor Zones is to create a tree-lined
commercial corridor with developments portraying smaller-scale
commercial development than is found in the Mixed-Use
Commercial (MUC) Zone. Architectural and landscape design
guidelines will foster higher-quality development and improve this
public face of Topsham.
(5) Rural Commercial Use Zones, to be known as "RCU Zones." The
objective of the Rural Commercial Use Zones is to protect the rural
character of these areas while allowing a range of development to
create a mixed-use, farmland and forested gateway to Topsham. A
range of professional and commercial uses should be encouraged
in these zones, but the uses should not be dependent on high
§ 225-11 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-11
202:341
visibility or be highly illuminated. Residential development should
be clustered and well screened from roads and view corridors.
(6) Mixed-Use Limited Zones, to be known as "MUL Zones." The
objective of the Mixed-Use Limited Zones is to protect the rural
character of the Coastal Connector corridor while allowing a range
of mixed residential and commercial development to create an
attractive gateway to Topsham.
(7) Mixed-Use Commercial Zones, to be known as "MUC Zones." The
objective of the Mixed-Use Commercial Zones is to provide for a
mixed-use district that can absorb new growth in the town.
Because of the high visibility and accessibility of the area,
commercial franchises, big box retail and office complexes should
be encouraged to locate here. Design guidelines should be
established to guide development and improve the aesthetics of the
zones.
(8) Lower Village Zones, to be known as "LV Zones." The objective of
the Lower Village Zones is to provide for an area that is a dense,
mixed-use pedestrian-scaled historic village. Development should
be a village scale with an historic appearance.
(9) Middle Village Zones, to be known as "MV Zones." The objective of
the Middle Village Zones is to provide for a village/residential
scaled mixed-use area with strict parking and landscaping
standards. The overall goal is to maintain the current character of
this area while closely monitoring renovations and changes in use
to ensure that they fit with this goal.
(10) Main Street Residential, to be known as the "R4 Zone." The
objective of the R4 Zone is to provide an area of higher density
residential development, in close proximity to small-scale mixedused
developments and civic uses, such as schools. The area should
accommodate future growth of residential and accessory type uses
that complement and are compatible with the adjacent business
and civic uses. The R4 Zone is made up of four distinct areas. Two
are intended as residential areas with densities and housing costs
(10% affordable housing is desired outlined in the Topsham Annex
Reuse Plan), the third is intended for recreational uses as depicted
on the approved Topsham Annex Master Reuse Plan and the fourth
area is not included in the Annex Reuse Master Plan and is subject
to the standards in the Table of Dimensional Requirements.
[Amended 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
(11) Industrial Zones, to be known as "I Zones." The objective of the
Industrial Zones is to provide areas for light and heavy
manufacturing.
(12) Mixed-Use Commercial One Zone, to be known as the “MUC-1
Zone." The objective of the Mixed-Use Commercial One Zone is to
§ 225-11 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-11
202:342
provide an area where high quality, mixed-use development can
occur in a manner that is compatible with the existing natural
environment while protecting adjacent residential areas. A wide
range of commercial and nonresidential uses as well as residential
uses should be allowed in this zone. The character of retail uses
in the MUC-1 should be different from development in the MUC
Zone. The size of individual retail uses as well as the overall share
of development that involves retail activity should be limited. Very
large-scale retail uses should not be allowed in this zone and
medium-size retail uses should be allowed only as part of a planned
mixed-use development. [Added 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15]
(13) Business Park Zone, to be known as the "BP Zone." The objective of
the BP Zone is to provide an area for the development of a business
park to accommodate the growth of office, research, service, light
manufacturing, and similar uses in a well-planned environment
with access to public water and sewer service and the arterial road
system. Because of the high visibility of the district, the district
standards should assure that all development is buffered from
I-295 and adjacent residential uses. [Added 5-24-2007 STM, Art.
15]
(14) Commercial Corridor Route 196 Zone, to be known as the "CC 196
Zone." The objective of the CC 196 Zone is to provide an area to
accommodate the growth of office, research, service, light
manufacturing, and similar uses as an extension of the Business
Park Zone while allowing small retail uses and motor vehicle sales
and service in a way that maintains the livability of the area for
existing residential uses. [Added 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15]
(15) The Village Center Zone, to be known as the "VC Zone." The
objective of the Village Center Zone is to provide for civic and
mixed-use development opportunities, while utilizing buildings and
streetscape components to define Main Street and promote a
pedestrian friendly environment. New or renovated buildings shall
be designed in a New England style in keeping with historic
character of the Middle Village and recent developments in the
Lower Village. Shared driveways and parking, limited curb cuts,
new sidewalks and streetscaping, crosswalks, signage and other
amenities will create a safe pedestrian environment. [Added
11-13-2008 STM, Art. 8; amended 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
(16) The Limited Industrial Zone, to be known as the "LI Zone." The
intent of the Limited Industrial District is to create more flexibility
for existing businesses, while minimizing the impact on the
adjacent educational and residential uses with appropriate
performance and dimensional standards. New or renovated
buildings shall be designed with an attractive facade articulated to
break up the scale and massing of the buildings, particularly along
Rt. 201, reinforcing the concept of a Main Street running from the
§ 225-11 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-11
202:343
§ 225-12. Rules governing zone boundaries.
Androscoggin River to the I-295 overpass. [Added 11-13-2008
STM, Art. 8; amended 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
(17) Business Park 2, to be known as "BP2 Zone." The objective of the
BP2 Zone is to allow for a level of business, commercial and office
development that will be compatible with the adjacent higher
density residential zone and the adjacent civic uses. The area is
that portion of the Topsham Annex referred to as the "Military
Triangle" in the Topsham Annex Master Reuse Plan. [Added
5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
(18) Residential 2 — Business Zone, to be known as "R2B Zone." The
objective of this zone is to allow limited commercial opportunities
for the existing uses with frontage on Route 196, which addresses
the commercial marketability of the parcels, and ensures that
residential abutters are protected through appropriate
development standards. [Added 5-20-2015 STM, Art. 12]
B. Overlay districts.
(1) Historical Zone, to be known as "H District."
(2) Shoreland Zone, to be known as "S District."
(3) Aquifer Protection Zone, to be known as "AP District."
(4) Development Transfer Overlay Zone to be known as the "DTO
District." [Added 5-19-2010 STM, Art. 11]
(5) Vernal Pools Overlay District to be known as the “VPO District.”
[Added 5-18-2016 STM, Art. 14]
A. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zones as shown on the
Official Zoning Map the following rules shall apply:
(1) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, alleys, railroad rights-of-way, rivers or streams
shall be construed to follow such center lines.
(2) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines.
(3) Boundaries indicated as approximately following Town limits shall
be construed as following Town limits.
(4) Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to
follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline
shall be construed as moving with the actual shore lines.
B. Sources for the exact delineation of the special flood hazard areas shall
be the Topsham Flood Hazard Boundary Map and the Brunswick Flood
Insurance Study.
§ 225-11 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-12
202:344
C. Sources for the exact delineation of the Aquifer Protection Zone shall be
as follows: [Amended 5-15-2002 STM, Art. 18]
(1) River Road Aquifer Protection Zone: Zones 1 and 2 as delineated in
the February 25, 1994, report entitled "Hydrogeology of the
Jackson, Taylor and Williams Stations Aquifer in Topsham and
Brunswick, Maine" prepared by Caswell, Eichler and Hill, Inc.
(2) Foreside Road Aquifer Protection Zone: Maine Geological Survey
Sand and Gravel Aquifers Maps 10 and 11.
(3) West Topsham Aquifer Protection Zone (in the vicinity of Map R-2
Lots 81, 82, 95 and 100 and Map R-3 Lot 27): Maine Geological
Survey Sand and Gravel Aquifers Maps 10 and 11.
D. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated
in Subsection A(1) through (4) above shall be so construed. Distances
not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be
determined by the scale of the map.
E. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or other
circumstances not covered by Subsections A through D above, the
Board of Appeals shall interpret the zone boundaries.
§ 225-12 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-12
202:345

ARTICLE V
General Regulations
§ 225-13. Applicability.
Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure or land shall
hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof
shall hereafter be erected, constructed, moved or altered unless in
conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the zone in which
it is located.
§ 225-14. Nonconforming uses, structures and lots of record.
A. General.
(1) Continuance, enlargement and reconstruction. Any nonconforming
use or structure may be continued but may not be extended,
reconstructed, enlarged or structurally altered except as specified
by this chapter or as required by federal, state or local codes, rules
or laws. [Amended 5-18-2016 STM, Art. 11]
(2) Transfer of ownership. Nonconforming structures, nonconforming
lots of record and nonconforming uses may be transferred, and the
new owner may continue the nonconforming use or continue to use
the nonconforming structure or lot, subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
(3) Restoration or replacement.
(a) This chapter allows the normal upkeep and maintenance of
nonconforming uses and structures; repairs, renovations or
modernizations which do not involve expansion of the
nonconforming use or structure; and such other changes in a
nonconforming use or structure as federal, state or local
building and safety codes may require.
(b) Any nonconforming use or structure which is hereafter
damaged or destroyed by fire or any cause other than the
willful act of the owner or his agent may be restored or
reconstructed within one year of the date of said damage or
destruction, provided that:
[1] Any nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged except
in conformity with this chapter and the Maine State
Plumbing Code; and
[2] Any nonconforming use shall not be expanded in area.
(c) Nothing in this section shall prevent the demolition of the
remains of any building so damaged or destroyed.
B. Nonconforming use.
§ 225-13 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-14
202:347
(1) Resumption prohibited. A building or structure in which a
nonconforming use is discontinued for a period exceeding two
years, or which is superseded by a conforming use, may not again
be devoted to a nonconforming use, even if the owner has not
intended to abandon the use. In the LV, MV, VC, LI, R4 and BP2
Zones, a building or structure in which a nonconforming use is
discontinued for a period exceeding one year, or which is
superseded by a conforming use, may not again be devoted to a
nonconforming use, even if the owner has not intended to abandon
the use. [Amended 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
(2) A structure nonconforming as to use. Except for single-family
dwellings, a building or structure, nonconforming as to use, shall
not be enlarged unless the nonconforming use is terminated.
Single-family dwellings, which are nonconforming uses, may be
enlarged as long as the dimensional requirements of the district in
which they are located are met. A nonconforming use or part of a
building or structure shall not be extended throughout other parts
of the building or structure unless those parts of the building or
structure were manifestly arranged or designed for such use prior
to the adoption of this chapter or of any amendment making such
use nonconforming.
(3) Change of use. A nonconforming use may be changed to another
nonconforming use only when the Board of Appeals determines,
pursuant to the procedures of Article X of this chapter, that the
impact of the new use on adjacent properties and the Town is less
adverse than the former use and that the existing use was legally
established, was made nonconforming by the adoption or
amendment of Chapter 225 and is not a home occupation. In
making this determination, the Board shall consider traffic, hours
of operation, amount and location of parking, lighting, noise, odors,
vibrations, dust, smoke, air discharges, rate of surface water runoff
and the potential for erosion. Once the Board of Appeals has
changed the use as described above, the former nonconforming use
shall be considered abandoned. In the LV, MV, VC, LI, R4 and BP2
Zones, any change of use shall be to a conditional or permitted use
for that zone. [Amended 5-16-2001 STM, Art. 27; 5-20-2009
STM, Art. 15]
(4) Use of land.
(a) A nonconforming use of land may not be extended into any part
of the remainder of a lot of land. A nonconforming use of land
which is accessory to a nonconforming use of a building shall
be discontinued at the same time the nonconforming use of the
building is discontinued.
(b) In the case of earth removal operations, the removal of earth
may not be extended as a nonconforming use beyond the
required setback lines of the specific parcel upon which such
§ 225-14 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-14
202:348
operations were in progress when such use became
nonconforming. Adjacent parcels in the same or different
ownership shall not be eligible for exemption under the
nonconforming use provisions unless earth removal operations
were in progress on these parcels before these provisions
were enacted. The provision of required off-street parking for
an existing nonconforming use shall not be considered the
expansion of said use.
C. Nonconforming structures. (This subsection pertains to dimensional
requirements. Applications regarding nonconforming use shall be
reviewed under the provisions above.)
(1) Enlargements controlled.
(a) An existing structure that does not meet one or more of the
dimensional requirements of the zone may be expanded
vertically and horizontally as long as the expansion does not
increase the nonconformity of the existing structure or create
a new nonconformity. [Amended 1-23-2008 STM, Art. 2;
5-18-2016 STM, Art. 11]
(b) The addition of an open patio with no structures elevated
above ground level shall not constitute the expansion of a
nonconforming structure, except in the shoreland zone. The
addition of steps or the enclosure of an existing porch shall not
constitute the expansion of a nonconforming structure. But the
addition of a deck shall constitute the expansion of a
nonconforming structure and shall meet all the dimensional
requirements of this chapter. [Amended 6-1-1993 STM, Art.
20]
(c) The placing of a foundation below a lawfully existing
nonconforming structure shall not constitute the expansion of
the structure so long as the first floor space of the structure is
not increased.
(d) Construction or expansion of a foundation under an existing
dwelling which expands habitable space shall be considered an
expansion and shall be subject to the state plumbing laws (30
M.R.S.A. § 3221, Subsection 4)57 requiring new soils
documentation.
(2) Discontinuance. Discontinuance of the use of a legally existing
nonconforming structure shall not constitute abandonment of the
structure. Conforming use of the structure may be commenced at
any time.
57.Editor's Note: 30 M.R.S.A. § 3221 was repealed by Chapter 737 of the Laws of 1987. See
now 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4201.
§ 225-14 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-14
202:349
(3) Lack of required parking or loading space. A building or structure
which is nonconforming as to the requirements for off-street
parking and/or loading space shall not be enlarged, added to or
altered unless off-street parking and/or loading space is provided to
bring parking and/or loading space into conformance with the
requirements of this chapter for both the addition or alteration and
for the original building or structure, or a variance is obtained.
(4) Conditional use. Existing nonconforming structures may receive
conditional use approval in accordance with state law and the
provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding the fact that the existing
structure may not be in conformance in regards to setbacks,
building height and lot coverage.
D. Nonconforming lots of record.
(1) Vacant lots. A vacant nonconforming lot may be built upon,
provided that such lot is in separate ownership and not contiguous
with any other vacant lot in the same ownership, and that all
provisions of this chapter except lot size and frontage can be met.
Variance of setback or other requirements not involving area or
width shall be obtained only by action of the Board of Appeals.
(2) Built lots. A nonconforming lot that was built upon prior to the
enactment or subsequent amendment of this chapter is subject to
the following restrictions. The structure(s) may be repaired,
maintained or improved, and may be enlarged in conformity with
all dimensional requirements of this chapter except lot area, lot
width or lot frontage. If the proposed enlargement of the
structure(s) cannot meet the dimensional requirements of this
chapter a variance shall be obtained from the Board of Appeals.
(3) Contiguous built lots. If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are
in single or joint ownership of record at the time of adoption of this
chapter, if all or part of the lots do not meet the dimensional
requirements of this chapter, and if a principal use exists on each
lot, the nonconforming lots may be conveyed separately or
together, provided that the State Minimum Lot Size Law58 and
Plumbing Code are complied with. If two or more principal uses
existed on a single lot of record on the effective date of this chapter,
each may be sold on a separate lot.
(4) Contiguous lots, vacant or partially built. If two or more contiguous
lots or parcels are in single or joint ownership of record at the time
of or since adoption or amendment of this chapter, if either or both
of these lots do not individually meet the dimensional requirements
of this chapter or subsequent amendments, and if one or more of
the lots are vacant or contain only an accessory structure, the lots
shall be combined to the extent necessary to meet the dimensional
58.Editor's Note: See 12 M.R.S.A. § 4807 et seq.
§ 225-14 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-14
202:350
standards, except where rights have vested, or the lots have
frontage on the parallel streets and state laws are complied with.
E. Vested rights. Nonconforming use rights cannot arise by the mere filing
of a notice of intent to build, an application for building permits or an
application for required state permits and approvals. Such rights arise
when actual construction has begun, or in the case of pending
applications, when the review process on a complete application
commences. Such construction must be legal at the time it is
commenced and the owner must be in possession of and in compliance
with all validly issued permits, both state and local. An application shall
be deemed complete when so designated by a formal vote of the
Planning Board after review by the criteria stated in Article IX and the
performance standards contained in this chapter.
§ 225-14 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-14
202:351

ARTICLE VI
Zone Regulations
§ 225-15. Conformance required; permits and certificates of
occupancy.
Permitted uses and conditional uses in all zones shall conform to all
applicable specifications and requirements. A plumbing permit, building
permit and/or certificate of occupancy shall be required for all buildings,
uses of land and buildings and sanitary facilities, according to the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 225-16. Use regulations. [The Table of Use Regulations is
included at the end of this chapter.]
§ 225-17. Dimensional requirements.59 [Amended 6-1-1993 STM,
Art. 22; 5-15-1996 STM, Art. 31; 5-21-1997 STM, Art. 32;
11-18-1997 STM, Art. 14; 5-19-1999 STM, Art. 13; 5-19-1999 STM,
Art. 14; 5-17-2000 STM, Art. 14; 5-17-2000 STM, Art. 15]
A. Except for lots and buildings located in a planned commercial
development or planned mixed-use development or in a subdivision
developed in accordance with the provisions of Subsection H or
Subsection I, lots and buildings in all zones shall comply with the
following requirements. Additional requirements may be imposed by
other provisions of this chapter. The dimensional requirements for lots
and buildings in a planned commercial development shall comply with
the standards established by § 225-60.4E. The dimensional
requirements for lots and buildings in a planned mixed-use
development shall comply with the standards established by § 225-60.7.
[Amended 7-31-2000 STM, Art. 5; 5-16-2001 STM, Art. 28;
5-20-2004 STM, Art. 18; 9-8-2005 STM, Art. 3; 5-24-2006 STM,
Art. 15; 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15; 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 11]
B. Two-family dwellings.
(1) Two-family dwellings located in the R-1 Urban Residential Zone
which are connected to Town sewer and water may have a
minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet. Two-family dwellings which
are not connected to Town sewer and water must have a minimum
of 20,000 square feet of lot per dwelling unit.
(2) Two-family dwellings located in the R-2 Zone which are connected
to Town sewer and water may have a minimum lot size of 40,000
square feet. Two-family dwellings which are not connected to Town
sewer and water must have a minimum of 30,000 square feet of lot
per dwelling unit.
59.Editor's Note: The Table of Dimensional Requirements is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 225-15 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-17
202:353
(3) Two-family dwellings located in the R-3 Zone must have a minimum
of 1 1/2 acres per dwelling unit.
(4) Two-family dwellings located in the MUL Mixed-Use Limited Zone
which are connected to Town sewer and water may have a
minimum of 20,000 square feet of lot per dwelling unit. Two-family
dwellings which are not connected to Town sewer and water must
have a minimum of 30,000 square feet of lot per dwelling unit.
(5) Two-family dwellings located in CC, RCU, MUC, MUC-1, CC 196,
and MV Zones shall be located on a lot that has an area of at least
1.5 times the minimum lot size. Two-family dwellings in the LV, VC,
LI and R4 Zones may be located on a lot of at least the minimum
size required for that Zone. In the LV, VC and LI Zones, two-family
dwellings in buildings fronting Rt. 201 shall be located on the
second floor. All two-family dwellings in the CC, RCU, MUC,
MUC-1, CC 196, LV, MV, VC, LI, and R4 Zones must be connected to
public sewer and water. [Amended 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15;
11-13-2008 STM, Art. 8; 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
C. Relationship of buildings to lot. Except for lots and buildings located in
a planned commercial development or planned mixed-use development,
no more than one principal structure, excluding accessory structures,
may be constructed or moved onto any one lot of land unless that lot
could be subdivided so that each such principal structure and accessory
structures thereto would be on a subdivided lot which in all respects
would conform to the minimum dimensional requirements for the use in
the particular zone where situated. Buildings and lots in a planned
commercial development shall comply with the requirements of
§ 225-60.4E. Buildings and lots in a planned mixed-use development
shall comply with the approved master plan for the development in
accordance with the requirements of § 225-60.7. [Amended
7-31-2000 STM, Art. 5; 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15]
D. Common plan developments.
(1) A common plan development is any development located within a
commercial zone for which the Planning Board makes a
determination that the following requirements have been satisfied:
(a) The proposed project shall be based upon an adequate
common plan of development; and
(b) The proposed project shall make adequate provision for the
use and maintenance of common or shared space such as, but
not limited to, shared walls, parking, ingress and egress,
signage and other common and shared space.
(2) The Planning Board may approve the division of properties within
commercial zones into individual lots with building setbacks which
are zero or less than those specified in § 225-17A.
§ 225-17 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-17
202:354
(3) The dimensional requirements set forth in Subsection A of § 225-17
shall not apply to any common plan development located in the LV
Zones. Common plan developments in the LV Zones shall instead be
subject to the following dimensional requirements:
Use Requirement
Minimum lot size (square feet) 0
Minimum lot width (square
feet)
0
Minimum front yard setback
(feet)
0
Minimum side yard setback
(feet)
0
Minimum rear yard setback
(feet)
0
Maximum building height (feet) N/A
Maximum structure height
(feet)
N/A
Minimum landscape (open
space ratio)
N/A
Floor area ratio N/A
(4) In addition to the dimensional requirements set forth above,
projects in a common plan development shall comply with all
conditions imposed by the Planning Board that are necessary to
protect health, welfare and safety.
E. Detached storage buildings accessory to residential uses. The minimum
side and rear setback requirement shall be 5 feet and cannot be further
reduced except by variance. The maximum height for such buildings
shall be 12 feet. The maximum floor area for such buildings shall be 150
square feet. [Amended 5-18-2016 STM, Art. 13]
F. (Reserved)60 [Added 5-15-2002 STM, Art. 21]
G. Back lots. One back lot may be created from any lot of record which
conforms to the lot requirements of § 225-17A and B, and which existed
prior to May, 2004, provided that: [Added 5-20-2004 STM, Art. 15]
(1) The back lot and front lot each contain no more than one principal
structure, each structure containing no more than two dwelling
units. Uses are limited to single- and two-family dwellings for both
the front lot and back lot.
60.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, added 5-15-2002 STM, Art. 21, which provided for
hearing and deciding on administrative exceptiuons to the dimensional requirements of
Subsection A, was repealed 1-23-2008 STM, Art. 2.
§ 225-17 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-17
202:355
(2) Both the front lot and back lot conform to the minimum lot area and
minimum lot area per dwelling unit as per § 225-17.
(3) The back lot is at least as wide at the site of the proposed dwelling
as the frontage measurement required in the district.
(4) The back lot has a deeded access to a publicly accepted street or a
private road. This access may be obtained:
(a) By way of a minimum twenty (20) foot wide right-of-way across
the front lot deeded to the owner of the back lot; or
(b) By the extension of the back lot to the public street so that the
back lot has a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet of frontage on
the street.
(5) The creation of the back lot does not make the front lot
nonconforming, or more nonconforming, as to frontage.
(6) The back lot and front lot share the same driveway entrance to the
public street, if the access to the back lot is via a deeded right-ofway.
This requirement may be waived by the Planning Board when
the Board makes findings that a combined driveway is not feasible
due to the location of the home on the front lot, terrain, or natural
resource impact.
(7) A twelve (12) foot wide driveway services a single-family dwelling
(16 feet wide for two-family dwelling), constructed with a minimum
of 12 inches of subbase gravel and a minimum of 3 inch base
gravel.
(8) A turnaround area approved by the Fire Department is provided for
public safety vehicles.
(9) Street numbering, as assigned by the Tax Assessor, is clearly visible
at the public street in accordance with Chapter 185, Article II, of
the Town Code.
(10) Any dwellings on the back lot shall connect to public sewer when a
public sewer line is located in the public street giving access to the
back lot.
H. Large-lot subdivisions. Subdivisions in the R-3 District may be approved
and developed in accordance with the provisions of this section rather
than the dimension requirements set out for the R-3 District in the
Table of Dimensional Standards.61 [Added 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 11]
(1) The minimum lot size for all lots in the large-lot subdivision must be
300,000 square feet.
61.Editor's Note: The Table of Dimensional Requirements is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 225-17 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-17
202:356
(2) Lots in a large-lot subdivision are not required to have any frontage
on a public street or a private road or way except as set forth below.
If a lot will abut a public street and have its primary vehicular
access directly from that street, the lot must have a minimum of
fifty (50) feet of continuous frontage on that street.
(3) If a public lot does not abut a street, it must have its primary
vehicular access from a private road or way meeting the following
standards:
(a) The private road must be located within a recoded easement at
least thirty-three (33) feet in width,
(b) The travelway must be a minimum of twelve feet in width if the
road serves one lot or home or eighteen feet in width if the
road serves two or more lots or homes.
(c) The road shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the provisions of § 191-15 except that the road is not required
to be paved [§ 191-15D(3)] or to have sidewalks [§ 191-15D(4)]
and shall be approved by Town staff prior to any permits being
issued for construction on lots accessed by the private road.
(d) If the lot serves two or more lots or homes, provisions for the
ownership and maintenance of the road must be approved by
the Planning Board as part of the approval of the subdivision.
These provisions must include a stipulation that the road shall
remain private and that the Town will never be asked to accept
the road as a public street unless the road is improved to meet
the Town's standards for a public street. The provisions must
also include a mechanism to assure that funds will be available
for the regular winter maintenance and periodic repair and
maintenance of the road.
(4) If any lots do not abut a public street and have their primary
vehicular access from a private way, the future division of those lots
is prohibited and the subdivision plan must contain a note stating
that future division of such lots is prohibited. This prohibition shall
also be included in the individual property deeds.
(5) The layout of the large lot subdivision shall be designed to reflect
the natural resource and open space values of the site. (See
preapplication site inventory and analysis requirements for major
subdivisions.) The subdivision plan shall designate a building
envelope for each lot that identifies the area on the lot that is
suitable for development and within which the home will be located
and the restrictions that apply to the use of the lot area outside of
the building envelope to maintain the natural values of the site.
Each individual property deed must contain a note that specifies
that the principal building must be located within the building
envelope shown on the approved subdivision plan.
§ 225-17 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-17
202:357
§ 225-18. Historic Overlay District. [Amended 6-1-1993 STM, Art.
19; 6-1-1993 STM, Art. 20; 5-18-1994 STM, Art. 13; 5-17-2000 STM,
Art. 21; 5-16-2012 STM, Art. 9]
(6) Development on the lots in a large-lot subdivision must conform to
the height, open space, and floor area requirements of the R-3
District as set forth in the Table of Dimensional Requirements.
(7) Development on lots that abut a public street must meet the front
setback requirements for the R-3 District. Otherwise, all buildings
and structures must be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from
any property line.
I. Rural open space subdivisions. Subdivisions in the R-3 District may be
approved and developed in accordance with the provisions of this
section and § 225-43 rather than the dimensional requirements set out
for the R-3 District in the Table of Dimensional Standards.62 [Added
5-16-2012 STM, Art. 11]
(1) The maximum net residential density for a rural open space
subdivision shall be determined based on a minimum lot size of
forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet per dwelling unit. The
minimum lot size is reduced to thirty-seven thousand five hundred
(37,500) square feet per dwelling unit for subdivisions that set
aside more than fifty percent (50%) of the net residential acreage of
the parcel as permanent open space rather than the thirty percent
(30%) required under Subsection I(3).
(2) The minimum lot size, frontage, and other dimensional
requirements shall be determined by the Planning Board at the
time of approval of the subdivision in accordance with § 225-43.
(3) An area equal to at least ninety percent (90%) of the area
unsuitable for development deducted from total area in the
calculation of the net residential area plus at least thirty percent
(30%) of the net residential acreage of the parcel shall be set aside
as permanent open space in accordance with § 225-43.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Historic Overlay District is to maintain the
historic, architectural, and overall visual character of those areas of the
Town with a significant number of properties with a collective historical
significance by assuring that the alteration, enlargement, or
replacement of contributing properties or the construction, alteration,
or enlargement of noncontributing properties is carried out in a manner
that is compatible with and maintains the essential character of the
contributing properties and the overall character of the district.
B. Certificate of appropriateness required. The owner of a property in the
Historic Overlay District that proposes to undertake any activity that
62.Editor's Note: The Table of Dimensional Requirements is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 225-17 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-18
202:358
will change the design, material, scale, or location of exterior building
features of a contributing property or a noncontributing property that
is not an exempt activity under Subsection C must obtain a certificate of
appropriateness (CoA) from the Historic Commission prior to receiving
any building, plumbing, electrical, or other permits and approvals
required for the work or, if no permits or other approvals are required,
before commencing the work. This includes:
(1) Contributing properties:
(a) The alteration of a building or structure.
(b) The construction of an addition to a building or structure.
(c) The construction or placement of an accessory building on the
site such as a garage or shed.
(d) The relocation of a building or structure.
(e) The alteration, placement, construction, or removal of
significant site features.
(f) The demolition or removal of a building or structure.
(2) Noncontributing properties:
(a) The construction or placement of a new principal or accessory
building on the site.
(b) Alterations to a building or structure that substantially change
the appearance of more than twenty-five (25) percent of the
wall area of the front façade or change the orientation of the
building to the street.
(c) The construction of an addition to a building or structure.
C. Exempt activities. The following activities are exempt from the
requirement of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the
Historic Commission. A property owner that intends to undertake an
activity that he or she believes is an exempt activity must request a
determination from the Topsham Planning Department prior to
undertaking the activity. The property owner shall provide the Planning
Department with a written description of the proposed activities,
including catalogue cuts or material samples if appropriate. If the
Planning Department determines that the proposed activity constitutes
an exempt activity, the property owner may request that the
Department provide written documentation of that determination,
including that the activity as proposed is exempt from the requirement
to obtain a CoA.
(1) Any activity that is not visible from a public way.
(2) Interior alterations.
§ 225-18 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-18
202:359
(3) Any constructions, demolitions or alterations under orders issued
by a building inspector or similar agent for the purposes of public
safety.
(4) Landscaping with plants, trees or shrubs.
(5) Temporary buildings or temporary structures, subject, however, to
conditions pertaining to the use, location, lighting, removal and
similar matters as the Commission or Planning Office may
reasonably specify. Temporary buildings or structures may not be
placed on a property for more than 45 days in a calendar year.
(6) Residential terraces, walks, driveways, sidewalks and similar
structures, provided that any such structure is substantially at
grade level.
(7) Storm windows, storm doors, screen windows, screen doors, and
window air conditioners.
(8) Flagpoles, sculpture, mailboxes (freestanding or attached), window
boxes, gutters, downspouts and leaders, house numbers, and
garden furniture.
(9) Routine maintenance: normal repair and upkeep of a building or
structure that does not change the design, material, or scale of
exterior building features. The repainting of a building or structure
is considered to be routine maintenance, as is the replacement or
repair of exterior elements with similar materials, such as reroofing
with the same type of shingles, replacement of clapboards with
similar clapboards, or the replacement of doors or windows with
new doors or windows of a similar design and made with similar
materials. Repair or replacement with different materials is not
considered routine maintenance.
D. Process for obtaining a certificate of appropriateness.
(1) Application procedure.
(a) An application for a CoA may be obtained from the Planning
Office. A completed application shall be submitted to the Town
Planner, who shall review the application for completeness. If
the application is complete, he/she shall transmit it to the
Historic Commission for action. If the application is
incomplete, he/she shall notify the applicant and indicate the
additional information that is required.
(b) The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application.
Notice of the public hearing shall be posted and published at
least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Written notice of the
consideration of the application and the public hearing shall be
mailed to all property owners within two hundred (200) feet of
the parcel at least seven (7) days prior to the date of meeting.
§ 225-18 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-18
202:360
(c) The Commission shall act on the application within forty-five
(45) days of the receipt of a completed application. The
Commission shall make written findings of fact detailing the
application's compliance with the standards of approval and
the Secretary of the Interior's standards if applicable. When
the Commission acts on the application, the action and related
findings shall be forwarded to the Code Enforcement Officer,
who shall then issue or deny permits, as appropriate.
(2) Application contents.
(a) The application shall state the location, use, and nature of the
activity for which the CoA is sought.
(b) The application and accompanying submissions shall contain
at least the following information, unless any items are waived
by the Commission:
[1] The applicant's name and address and his legal interest in
the property.
[2] The property owner's name and address, if different from
the applicant's.
[3] The address or location of the property.
[4] The present use of the property.
[5] The status of the property as a contributing or
noncontributing property and its zoning classification.
[6] A description of the proposed construction,
reconstruction, remodeling, alteration, demolition, or
moving requiring the issuance of a CoA.
[7] A drawing or drawings indicating the design, materials,
including texture and color, and location of any proposed
alteration or new construction for which the CoA is
required. As used herein, "drawings" shall mean plans and
exterior elevations drawn to scale, with sufficient detail to
show, as far as they are related to exterior appearances,
the architectural design of the buildings, including
materials and textures, including samples of any brick,
shingles or siding proposed to be used. Drawings shall not
be required to be prepared by a registered architect but
shall be clear, complete and specific.
[8] Photographs of the building and site and of immediately
adjacent buildings as seen from public streets or ways. The
photographs should include all sides of the building that
are visible from public streets as well as detailed photos of
the portion of buildings or structures proposed to be
altered or expanded.
§ 225-18 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-18
202:361
[9] A site plan indicating the location and extent of any
proposed changes involving additions to a building or
structure, placement of buildings or structures on the site,
or the addition, alteration, or removal of site features such
as walls, fences, walks, signs and/or outdoor light fixtures.
The Commission may waive the requirement for a site plan
if the changes proposed do not involve such features.
(3) Appeals. [Amended 5-14-2014 STM, Art. 12]
(a) Appeals of decisions of the Historic District Commission on the
issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness or the
Codes Enforcement Officer, shall be made within 30 days of the
decision being appealed from. All appeals shall be made to the
Board of Appeals under the provisions of Article X of the
Zoning Ordinance.
(b) Decisions of the Town Planner on exempt activities, § 225-18C,
shall be appealed to the Historic District Commission within 30
days of the date of decision.
(c) Appeals may only be made by an aggrieved party as defined in
§ 225-6.
(d) The owner of a property in a Historic Overlay District may
appeal the designation of the property as a contributing or
noncontributing property. Such appeals shall be heard and
decided by the Appeals Board following the procedures for
administrative appeals. To reverse a classification, the Appeals
Board must find that there is clear evidence that the property
is misclassified based on documentation prepared by the Main
Historic Preservation Commission (MHPC) qualified
architectural historians.
E. Approval standards for contributing properties. In reviewing and
approving applications for a CoA involving a contributing property, the
Historic Commission should consider the Secretary of the Interior's
Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties63 as set forth below.
(1) Secretary of the Interior's standards. In reviewing applications for
a CoA for a contributing property, the Commission should consider
the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of
Historic Properties with a focus on the Standards for Rehabilitation
and their application to activities that are visible from public
streets or ways, including the following:
(a) A property will be used as it was historically or be given a new
use that requires minimal changes to its distinctive materials,
features, spaces, and spatial relationships.
63.Editor's Note: See 36 CFR 68.
§ 225-18 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-18
202:362
(b) The historic character of the property will be retained and
preserved. The removal of distinctive materials or alteration of
features, spaces, and spatial relationships that characterize a
property will be avoided.
(c) Each property will be recognized as a physical record of its
time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of
historical development, such as adding conjectural features or
elements from other historic properties, will not be
undertaken.
(d) Changes to a property that have acquired historic significance
in their own right will be retained and preserved.
(e) Distinctive materials, features, finishes, and construction
techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a
property will be preserved.
(f) Deteriorated historic features will be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires the
replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature will
match the old feature in design, color, texture and, wherever
possible, materials. Replacement of missing features will be
substantiated by documentary and physical evidence.
(g) Chemical or physical treatments, if appropriate, will be
undertaken using the gentlest means possible. Treatments that
cause damage to historic materials will not be used.
(h) Archeological resources will be protected and preserved in
place. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation
measures will be undertaken.
(i) New additions, exterior alterations, or related new
construction will not destroy historic materials, features, and
spatial relationships that characterize the property. The new
work will be differentiated from the old and will be compatible
with the historic materials, features, size, scale and proportion,
and massing to protect the integrity of the property and its
environment.
(j) New additions and adjacent or related new construction will be
undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the
essential form and integrity of the historic property would be
unimpaired.
The Town's Design Review Manual for Historic Districts of
Topsham, Maine, provides discussion and examples of how
these standards apply in Topsham.
(2) Additional local standards. The Commission shall find that the
proposed activities meet the following local standards based on the
§ 225-18 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-18
202:363
type of activities proposed. If more than one type of activity is
proposed, the standards for each type of activity must be met for
the application to be approved. The Town's Design Review Manual
for Historic Districts of Topsham, Maine, provides discussion and
examples of how these standards apply in Topsham.
(a) The alteration of a contributing building or structure.
[1] Porches: Existing porches should be maintained and
preserved. Character-defining elements associated with
porches, such as columns, pilasters, decorative brackets,
railings, and balustrades, should not be substantially
altered. It is not appropriate to enclose a porch that is
visible from a public way, but screens may be added if they
are attached in a manner that does not damage the
historic materials and the modification is completely
reversible.
[2] Roof: If the entire roof is being replaced, the material
should be compatible with the visual character of the
building. The replacement material may revert back to a
historically appropriate material if historic documentation
is available.
[3] Appendages: Appendages to the structure, such as solar
collectors, antennas, and satellite dishes, should be
located to minimize the visual impact on the historic
building and should be attached in a manner that does not
damage the historic materials and is completely
reversible. Generally, the location of solar collectors,
antennas, or dishes on the front facade or portion of the
roof facing the street is inappropriate unless there is a
technical reason that mandates that location.
[4] Windows: The creation of new windows or skylights that
result in removal of portions of the historic structure are
inappropriate unless the window or skylight is located in a
portion of the structure that has been previously modified
so that its historic value has been lost. If a new window or
skylight is permitted, the design should be compatible with
the existing building and the location should minimize the
visual impact on the historic building.
[5] Doors: Replacement doors should utilize the existing
opening and should be visually compatible with the
remainder of the property.
[6] Garage doors: Increasing the size of the opening in the
wall to allow the installation of double- or triple-width
garage doors facing the street is not appropriate.
§ 225-18 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-18
202:364
[7] Materials: Wherever practical, existing materials should
be maintained. In the case of the change of material, the
material shall have a similar visual appearance.
(b) The construction of an addition to a contributing building or
structure.
[1] The addition should minimize the impact, both physically
and visually, on the historic property.
[2] The addition should not visually overwhelm or obscure the
historic structure.
[3] The mass, scale, and volume of the addition should be
compatible with the historic building.
[4] Where feasible, the addition should be attached to the
historic property with a connecting link that minimizes the
damage or removal of elements of the historic building.
[5] It is not appropriate to add decks and porches that are
visible from a public way. Sunrooms and similar spaces are
appropriate only if they meet the other standards of this
section.
(c) The construction or placement of an accessory building, such
as a garage or shed, on the site of a contributing building.
[1] The building should be constructed of materials that are
visually compatible with the materials of the historic
building but that are appropriate to the current period.
[2] The design of the building with respect to massing and
scale should be compatible with the massing and scale of
the historic building, including features such as rooflines.
[3] The location of the accessory building should minimize its
visual impact on the historic building and not obscure it
and should be consistent with the placement of similar
accessory buildings on the sites of other comparable
contributing buildings in the district.
(d) The relocation of a contributing building or structure.
[1] The new location of the building or structure should be
consistent with the established pattern of the immediate
neighborhood surrounding the site with respect to its
setback from the street, orientation of the front facade of
the building to the street, and the placement of the
building on the lot with respect to side lot lines and
adjacent properties.
§ 225-18 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-18
202:365
[2] If an accessory building is relocated, the new location
should maintain the spatial relationships on the lot if that
relationship is an essential element of the historic
character of the property.
(e) The alteration, placement, construction, or removal of
significant site features on the site of a contributing building or
structure.
[1] Existing fences or walls should be maintained if feasible.
New or replacement fences or walls should be located to
reflect the established pattern in the neighborhood and on
adjacent lots if a pattern exists. This is particularly
important with respect to the relationship with the street
and sidewalk (if any). Fences should be compatible to
other historic fences in the district with respect to design,
size, and details.
[2] The use of concrete for walls and steps is inappropriate for
new or replacement site features.
[3] New parking areas should be located to the side or rear of
the principal buildings when feasible.
[4] New driveway locations should maintain the established
pattern in the immediate neighborhood of the site. The
area between the front façade of the principal building and
the sidewalk or street should not be used for new or
expanded driveways or parking areas.
(f) The demolition or removal of a contributing building or
structure.
[1] Demolition or removal of a contributing building should
conform to the requirements of Subsection G.
F. Approval standards for noncontributing properties. In reviewing and
approving applications for a CoA involving a noncontributing property,
the Historic Commission shall consider the additional local standards
appropriate to the proposed activity as set forth below and find that the
appropriate standards have been met.
(1) The construction or placement of a new principal building on the
site.
(a) The building should be located on the lot so that the front
setback is consistent with the setback of the principal buildings
on adjacent lots and within the immediate neighborhood.
(b) The general placement of the building on the lot should
maintain the pattern of buildings and voids along the street.
§ 225-18 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-18
202:366
(c) The front entrance of the building should be oriented to the
street.
(d) The height, scale, and massing of the building should be
visually compatible with the principal buildings on adjacent
lots.
(e) The design and location of site elements, including driveways,
sidewalks, fences, and walls, should be visually compatible
with the pattern of the immediate neighborhood especially
with respect to scale and location on the lot.
(2) The construction or placement of a new accessory building on the
site.
(a) The accessory building should be located to the side or rear of
the principal building and be visually compatible with the
principal building and principal buildings on adjacent lots.
(3) Alterations to a building or structure that substantially alter its
front facade or the orientation of the building to the street.
(a) The alterations should be visually compatible with the age and
style of the principal building.
(b) Alterations that attempt to replicate features from an earlier
time period or that make the building look historic are
inappropriate.
(4) The construction of an addition to a building or structure.
(a) Additions should be visually compatible with the age and style
of the principal building.
(b) The placement of the addition in relationship to the principal
building should be visually compatible with the principal
building and principal buildings on adjacent lots.
(c) Additions that attempt to replicate features from an earlier
time period or that make the building look historic are
inappropriate.
G. Approval standards for the demolition or removal of a contributing
property.
(1) The Historic Commission shall approve a CoA for the demolition or
removal of a principal building located in the Historic Overlay
District only if it finds that either of the following conditions exists:
(a) The building has been identified as a noncontributing property;
or
(b) The property owner has demonstrated that cost-effective
repair of the building is not possible as documented by a
§ 225-18 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-18
202:367
structural engineer, builder, or architect with experience in the
renovation of historic properties and that there is no buyer for
the property willing to undertake its repair. If the structural
integrity of the building is in such disrepair as to be hazardous,
the structure may be condemned by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
(2) If the property owner demonstrates to the Commission's
satisfaction that he/she cannot repair the building, the issuance of
the CoA shall be delayed for a period of ninety (90) days during
which period the owner must make a reasonable attempt to sell the
property to someone who will repair the building in accordance
with the following process. The time period shall commence when
the Commission determines that the owner cannot repair the
property and a sale offering statement has been provided to the
Town Planner.
(3) Within five (5) days of the determination by the Commission that
the owner cannot repair the property, the property owner shall post
notices on the premises of the building or structure proposed for
demolition in a location clearly visible from the street. The notices
shall indicate that the property is proposed to be demolished or
moved and that it is available for sale to a buyer who will repair the
property. In addition, the notice shall be published by the owner in
a newspaper of general local circulation at least two times. The first
notice must be published within seven (7) days of the Commission's
finding, and the second notice must be published not less than
forty-five (45) days prior to the end of the ninety (90) day period.
The owner shall provide the Town Planner with evidence that
notices have been posted and published as required.
(4) During the ninety (90) day delay period, the owner shall make a
bona fide offer to sell such building or structure and the land
pertaining thereto, at a price reasonably related to its fair market
value, to any person, firm, corporation, government or agency
thereof or political subdivision or agency thereof which gives
reasonable assurance that it is willing to preserve and restore the
building or structure and the land pertaining thereto. Prior to
making such offer to sell, an owner shall first file a statement with
the Town Planner identifying the property, the offering price and
the date the offer to sell shall begin.
(5) At the end of the ninety (90) day period, the property owner may
request that the Commission release the CoA, allowing the Code
Enforcement Officer to issue a demolition or moving permit. The
Commission shall authorize the release of the CoA only if it finds
that the property owner made a bona fide effort to sell the property
at a reasonable price relative to its fair market value and that there
is no buyer that is willing to repair the property.
§ 225-18 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-18
202:368
H. Establishment or modification of an Historic Overlay District. An
Historic Overlay District may be created or modified through an
amendment to this section by the Town Meeting of the Town of Topsham
in accordance with the following procedures:
(1) An amendment to create or modify an Historic Overlay District may
be proposed by the Board of Selectmen, the Planning Board, the
Historic Commission, one or more property owners within an
existing or proposed overlay district, or by a petition signed by at
least fifty (50) registered voters in the Town.
(2) A request for the creation or modification of an overlay district
must be made in writing to the Historic Commission and must
include the following information:
(a) A map showing the proposed boundaries of the new overlay
district or proposed changes to the boundaries of an existing
district.
(b) A listing of the properties included within the new district or
proposed revision to an existing district showing the Tax Map
and lot number of each parcel and the current owner as
recorded on the Town's assessment records.
(c) An evaluation of each property as a contributing or
noncontributing building or structure using the methodology
used in in the Topsham 2010 Historic Resource Survey or other
methodology approved by the Maine State Historic
Preservation Commission. If the amendment proposes to
remove properties from an existing overlay district, the
classification of those properties in the 2010 survey or
subsequent historical survey must be provided.
(3) Upon receipt of a request for an amendment, the Historic
Commission shall conduct research on the proposal and solicit
comment from the Maine State Historical Preservation Commission
if appropriate.
(4) Within forty-five (45) days of the receipt of a request for an
amendment to an overlay district, the Historic Commission shall
hold a public hearing on the request. The Commission shall provide
public notice of the hearing by publishing the hearing notice in a
newspaper in general circulation within Topsham at least seven (7)
days prior to the hearing. The Commission shall also notify, in
writing, all property areas within the boundary of the proposed
amendment and within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the area at
least seven (7) days prior to the hearing.
(5) Within forty-five (45) days of the public hearing, the Commission
shall make a formal recommendation to the Planning Board and
Board of Selectmen with respect to the request. The Board's
§ 225-18 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-18
202:369
recommendation shall specify the Board's findings and conclusions
with respect to the request.
I. Boundaries of the Historic Overlay Districts. The boundaries of the
Historic Overlay Districts are shown on the Official Zoning Map and are
described as follows:
Topsham Village: The Historic Overlay District includes the entirety of
the following parcels as shown on the April 1, 2011, Town of Topsham
property maps, including any subsequent division or reconfiguration of
these lots that results in a change in the lot number:
Map U02
Lots 3-1, 3-2, 3-3, and 3-4
Lots 12 through 22
Lots 24 through 26
Lots 129 through 132
Lots 134 through 136
Map U03
Lots 1 through 4
Lot 1A
Map U06
Lots 1 and 2
Lots 4 through 11
Lot 11B-0
Lots 12 through 15
Lot 15A
Lots 16 and 17
Lots 19 through 23
Lots 27 through 43
Lots 46 through 49
Lot 49A
Lots 50 through 55
Lot 59
Lots 63 through 67
Lot 67A
Lots 70 through 72
Lots 76 and 77
Lot 77A
Lots 78 and 79
§ 225-18 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-18
202:370
§ 225-19. Shoreland Overlay District. [Amended 5-20-1992 ATM,
Art. 24; 6-1-1993 STM, Art. 20; 5-15-1996 STM, Art. 28; 5-20-2004
STM, Art. 16; 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 7]
Map U07
Lots 3 through 9
Lots 11 through 14
Lot 14C
Lot 15
Lot 17
In addition, the portion of Lot 3 on Map U02 that is known as Great
Mill Island bounded by the Androscoggin River and Granny Hole
Stream is included in the Historic Overlay District.
1. Purposes. The purposes of this ordinance are to further the
maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; to prevent and control
water pollution; to protect fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird and
other wildlife habitat; to protect buildings and lands from flooding and
accelerated erosion; to protect archaeological and historic resources;
to protect commercial fishing and maritime industries; to protect
freshwater and coastal wetlands; to control building sites, placement of
structures and land uses; to conserve shore cover, and visual as well as
actual points of access to inland and coastal waters; to conserve natural
beauty and open space; and to anticipate and respond to the impacts of
development in shoreland areas.
2. Authority. This ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the
provisions of 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 435 through 449.
3. Applicability. This ordinance applies to all land areas within 250 feet,
horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of any great pond or river,
upland edge of a coastal wetland, including all areas affected by tidal
action,
upland edge of a freshwater wetland,
all land areas within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of a stream
And all wetlands associated with the Cathance River and Muddy River.
This ordinance also applies to any structure built on, over or abutting a
dock, wharf or pier, or other structure extending or located below the
normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland. These shall
include, without limitations, the Androscoggin River, Bradley Pond,
Cathance River, Little River, Merrymeeting Bay and Muddy River as
shown on the Official Map.
§ 225-18 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:371
4. Effective date.
A. Effective date of ordinance and ordinance amendments. This
ordinance, which was adopted by the municipal legislative body on
May 21, 2008, shall not be effective unless approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection. A
certified copy of the ordinance, or ordinance amendment, attested
and signed by the Municipal Clerk, shall be forwarded to the
Commissioner for approval. If the Commissioner fails to act on this
ordinance or ordinance amendment, within forty-five (45) days of
his/her receipt of the ordinance, or ordinance amendment, it shall
be automatically approved.
Any application for a permit submitted to the municipality within
the forty-five (45) day period shall be governed by the terms
of this ordinance, or ordinance amendment, if the ordinance, or
ordinance amendment, is approved by the Commissioner.
B. Subsections 15O and 15O-1. Subsection 15O is repealed on the
statutory date established under 38 M.R.S.A. § 438-B(5), at which
time Subsection 15O-1 shall become effective. Until such time as
Subsection 15O is repealed, Subsection 15O-1 is not in effect.
5. Availability. A certified copy of this ordinance shall be filed with the
Municipal Clerk and shall be accessible to any member of the public.
Copies shall be made available to the public at reasonable cost at the
expense of the person making the request. Notice of availability of this
ordinance shall be posted.
6. Severability. Should any section or provision of this ordinance be
declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate
any other section or provision of the ordinance.
7. Conflicts with other ordinances. Whenever a provision of this ordinance
conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision of this ordinance
or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute administered by the
municipality, the more restrictive provision shall control.
8. Amendments. This ordinance may be amended by majority vote of the
legislative body. Copies of amendments, attested and signed by the
Municipal Clerk, shall be submitted to the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection following adoption by the
municipal legislative body and shall not be effective unless approved by
the Commissioner. If the Commissioner fails to act on any amendment
within forty-five (45) days of his/her receipt of the amendment, the
amendment is automatically approved. Any application for a permit
submitted to the municipality within the forty-five (45) day period shall
be governed by the terms of the amendment, if such amendment is
approved by the Commissioner.
9. Districts and Zoning Map.
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:372
A. Official Shoreland Zoning Map. The areas to which this ordinance
is applicable are hereby divided into the following districts as
shown on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map(s) which is (are) made
a part of this ordinance:64
(1) Resource Protection.
(2) Limited Residential.
(3) Limited Commercial.
(4) General Development.
(5) (Reserved)
(6) Stream Protection.
B. Scale of Map. The Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be drawn at
a scale of not less than: 1 inch = 2000 feet. District boundaries
shall be clearly delineated and a legend indicating the symbols for
each district shall be placed on the Map.
C. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map. The Official
Shoreland Zoning Map shall be certified by the attested signature
of the Municipal Clerk and shall be located in the municipal office.
In the event the municipality does not have a municipal office, the
Municipal Clerk shall be the custodian of the Map.
D. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning Map. If amendments, in
accordance with Subsection 8, are made in the district boundaries
or other matter portrayed on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map,
such changes shall be made on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map
within thirty (30) days after the amendment has been approved by
the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection.
10. Interpretation of District Boundaries. Unless otherwise set forth on the
Official Shoreland Zoning Map, district boundary lines are property
lines, the center lines of streets, roads and rights-of-way, and the
boundaries of the shoreland area as defined herein. Where uncertainty
exists as to the exact location of district boundary lines, the Board of
Appeals shall be the final authority as to location.
11. Land use requirements. Except as hereinafter specified, no building,
structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or
structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed,
expanded, moved, or altered and no new lot shall be created except in
conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located, unless a variance is granted.
12. Nonconformance.
64.Editor's Note: The Official Shoreland Zoning Map is on file in the Town offices.
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:373
A. Purpose. It is the intent of this ordinance to promote land use
conformities, except that nonconforming conditions that existed
before the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto
shall be allowed to continue, subject to the requirements set forth
in Subsection 12. Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, a
nonconforming condition shall not be permitted to become more
nonconforming.
B. General.
(1) Transfer of ownership. Nonconforming structures, lots, and
uses may be transferred, and the new owner may continue the
nonconforming use or continue to use the nonconforming
structure or lot, subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
(2) Repair and maintenance. This ordinance allows, without a
permit, the normal upkeep and maintenance of nonconforming
uses and structures including repairs or renovations that do
not involve expansion of the nonconforming use or structure,
and such other changes in a nonconforming use or structure as
federal, state, or local building and safety codes may require.
C. Nonconforming structures.
(1) Expansions. A nonconforming structure may be added to or
expanded after obtaining a permit from the same permitting
authority as that for a new structure, if such addition or
expansion does not increase the nonconformity of the structure
and is in accordance with Subsection 12C(1)(a) and (b) below.
[Alternatively, a municipality may, by local ordinance, regulate
expansions of nonconforming structures in accordance with
Appendix A, Alternative to 30% Expansion Rule Pursuant to
38 M.R.S.A § 439-A. In adopting the alternative provisions
contained in Appendix A, a municipality may choose not to
include the "special expansion allowance" provision contained
in paragraphs (1-A), (1-B), and (1-C) of Appendix A.]
(a) After January 1, 1989, if any portion of a structure is less
than the required setback from the normal high-water line
of a water body or tributary stream or the upland edge of a
wetland, that portion of the structure shall not be
expanded, as measured in floor area or volume, by 30% or
more, during the lifetime of the structure. If a replacement
structure conforms with the requirements of Subsection
12C(3), and is less than the required setback from a water
body, tributary stream or wetland, the replacement
structure may not be expanded if the original structure
existing on January 1, 1989, had been expanded by 30% in
floor area and volume since that date.
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:374
(b) Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is
constructed under a nonconforming structure, the
structure and new foundation must be placed such that the
setback requirement is met to the greatest practical extent
as determined by the Planning Board or its designee,
basing its decision on the criteria specified in Subsection
12C(2), Relocation, below. If the completed foundation
does not extend beyond the exterior dimensions of the
structure, except for expansion in conformity with
Subsection 12C(1)(a) above, and the foundation does not
cause the structure to be elevated by more than three (3)
additional feet, as measured from the uphill side of the
structure (from original ground level to the bottom of the
first floor sill), it shall not be considered to be an expansion
of the structure.
(2) Relocation. A nonconforming structure may be relocated
within the boundaries of the parcel on which the structure is
located, provided that the site of relocation conforms to all
setback requirements to the greatest practical extent as
determined by the Planning Board or its designee, and
provided that the applicant demonstrates that the present
subsurface sewage disposal system meets the requirements of
state law and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules (Rules), or that a new system can be installed in
compliance with the law and said Rules. In no case shall a
structure be relocated in a manner that causes the structure to
be more nonconforming.
In determining whether the building relocation meets the
setback to the greatest practical extent, the Planning Board
or its designee shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of
the land, the potential for soil erosion, the location of other
structures on the property and on adjacent properties, the
location of the septic system and other on-site soils suitable
for septic systems, and the type and amount of vegetation to
be removed to accomplish the relocation. When it is necessary
to remove vegetation within the water or wetland setback
area in order to relocate a structure, the Planning Board
shall require replanting of native vegetation to compensate
for the destroyed vegetation. In addition, the area from which
the relocated structure was removed must be replanted with
vegetation. Replanting shall be required as follows:
(a) Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be
replanted with at least one native tree, three (3) feet in
height, for every tree removed. If more than five trees are
planted, no one species of tree shall make up more than
50% of the number of trees planted. Replaced trees must
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:375
be planted no further from the water or wetland than the
trees that were removed.
Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and ground
cover, that are removed or destroyed in order to relocate
a structure must be re-established. An area at least the
same size as the area where vegetation and/or ground
cover was disturbed, damaged, or removed must be
reestablished within the setback area. The vegetation
and/or ground cover must consist of similar native
vegetation and/or ground cover that was disturbed,
destroyed or removed.
(b) Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel
the original location of the structure shall be replanted
with vegetation which may consist of grasses, shrubs,
trees, or a combination thereof.
(3) Reconstruction or replacement. Any nonconforming structure
which is located less than the required setback from a water
body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed, or
damaged or destroyed, regardless of the cause, by more than
50% of the market value of the structure before such damage,
destruction or removal, may be reconstructed or replaced,
provided that a permit is obtained within eighteen (18) months
of the date of said damage, destruction, or removal, and
provided that such reconstruction or replacement is in
compliance with the water body, tributary stream or wetland
setback requirement to the greatest practical extent as
determined by the Planning Board or its designee in
accordance with the purposes of this ordinance. In no case
shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase
its nonconformity. If the reconstructed or replacement
structure is less than the required setback, it shall not be any
larger than the original structure, except as allowed pursuant
to Subsection 12C(1) above, as determined by the
nonconforming floor area and volume of the reconstructed or
replaced structure at its new location. If the total amount of
floor area and volume of the original structure can be relocated
or reconstructed beyond the required setback area, no portion
of the relocated or reconstructed structure shall be replaced or
constructed at less than the setback requirement for a new
structure. When it is necessary to remove vegetation in order
to replace or reconstruct a structure, vegetation shall be
replanted in accordance with Subsection 12C(2) above.
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:376
Any nonconforming structure which is located less than the
required setback from a water body, tributary stream, or
wetland and which is removed by 50% or less of the market
value, or damaged or destroyed by 50% or less of the market
value of the structure, excluding normal maintenance and
repair, may be reconstructed in place if a permit is obtained
from the Code Enforcement Officer within one year of such
damage, destruction, or removal.
In determining whether the building reconstruction or
replacement meets the setback to the greatest practical
extent the Planning Board or its designee shall consider, in
addition to the criteria in Subsection 12C(2) above, the
physical condition and type of foundation present, if any.
(4) Change of use of a nonconforming structure. The use of a
nonconforming structure may not be changed to another use
unless the Planning Board, after receiving a written
application, determines that the new use will have no greater
adverse impact on the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland, or on the subject or adjacent properties and resources
than the existing use.
In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur,
the Planning Board shall require written documentation from
the applicant, regarding the probable effects on public health
and safety, erosion and sedimentation, water quality, fish and
wildlife habitat, vegetative cover, visual and actual points of
public access to waters, natural beauty, floodplain
management, archaeological and historic resources, and
commercial fishing and maritime activities, and other
functionally water-dependent uses.
D. Nonconforming uses.
(1) Expansions. Expansions of nonconforming uses are prohibited,
except that nonconforming residential uses may, after
obtaining a permit from the Planning Board, be expanded
within existing residential structures or within expansions of
such structures as allowed in Subsection 12C(1)(a) above.
(2) Resumption prohibited. A lot, building or structure in or on
which a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period
exceeding one year, or which is superseded by a conforming
use, may not again be devoted to a nonconforming use except
that the Planning Board may, for good cause shown by the
applicant, grant up to a one year extension to that time period.
This provision shall not apply to the resumption of a use of a
residential structure, provided that the structure has been
used or maintained for residential purposes during the
preceding five (5) year period.
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:377
(3) Change of use. An existing nonconforming use may be changed
to another nonconforming use, provided that the proposed use
has no greater adverse impact on the subject and adjacent
properties and resources, including water-dependent uses in
the CFMA District, than the former use, as determined by the
Planning Board. The determination of no greater adverse
impact shall be made according to criteria listed in Subsection
12C(4) above.
E. Nonconforming lots.
(1) Nonconforming lots: A nonconforming lot of record as of the
effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereto may be
built upon, without the need for a variance, provided that such
lot is in separate ownership and not contiguous with any other
lot in the same ownership, and that all provisions of this
ordinance except lot area, lot width and shore frontage can be
met. Variances relating to setback or other requirements not
involving lot area, lot width or shore frontage shall be obtained
by action of the Board of Appeals.
(2) Contiguous built lots: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels
are in a single or joint ownership of record at the time of
adoption of this ordinance, if all or part of the lots do not meet
the dimensional requirements of this ordinance, and if a
principal use or structure exists on each lot, the
nonconforming lots may be conveyed separately or together,
provided that the State Minimum Lot Size Law (12 M.R.S.A.
§§ 4807-A through 4807-D) and the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules are complied with.
If two or more principal uses or structures existed on a single
lot of record on the effective date of this ordinance, each may
be sold on a separate lot provided that the above referenced
law and rules are complied with. When such lots are divided
each lot thus created must be as conforming as possible to the
dimensional requirements of this ordinance.
(3) Contiguous lots -- vacant or partially built: If two or more
contiguous lots or parcels are in single or joint ownership of
record at the time of or since adoption or amendment of this
ordinance, if any of these lots do not individually meet the
dimensional requirements of this ordinance or subsequent
amendments, and if one or more of the lots are vacant or
contain no principal structure, the lots shall be combined to the
extent necessary to meet the dimensional requirements.
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:378
This provision shall not apply to 2 or more contiguous lots,
at least one of which is nonconforming, owned by the same
person or persons on the effective date of this ordinance
and recorded in the Registry of Deeds if the lot is served
by a public sewer or can accommodate a subsurface sewage
disposal system in conformance with the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules; and
(a) Each lot contains at least 100 feet of shore frontage and at
least 20,000 square feet of lot area; or
(b) Any lots that do not meet the frontage and lot size
requirements of Subsection 12E(3)(a) are reconfigured or
combined so that each new lot contains at least 100 feet of
shore frontage and 20,000 square feet of lot area.
13. Establishment of districts.
A. Resource Protection District. The Resource Protection District
includes areas in which development would adversely affect water
quality, productive habitat, biological ecosystems, or scenic and
natural values. This district shall include the following areas when
they occur within the limits of the Shoreland Zone, exclusive of the
Stream Protection District, except that areas which are currently
developed and areas which meet the criteria for the Limited
Commercial, General Development I, or Commercial Fisheries/
Maritime Activities Districts need not be included within the
Resource Protection District.
(1) Areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge
of freshwater wetlands, salt marshes and salt meadows, and
wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers, which are
rated "moderate" or "high" value waterfowl and wading bird
habitat, including nesting and feeding areas, by the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (MDIF&W) that
are depicted on a Geographic Information System (GIS) data
layer maintained by either MDIF&W or the Department as of
May 1, 2006. For the purposes of this paragraph "wetlands
associated with great ponds and rivers" shall mean areas
characterized by non-forested wetland vegetation and hydric
soils that are contiguous with a great pond or river, and have a
surface elevation at or below the water level of the great pond
or river during the period of normal high water. Wetlands
associated with great ponds or rivers are considered to be part
of that great pond or river.
(2) Floodplains along rivers and floodplains along artificially
formed great ponds along rivers, defined by the 100 year
floodplain as designated on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or
Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in the
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:379
absence of these, by soil types identified as recent floodplain
soils. This district shall also include 100 year floodplains
adjacent to tidal waters as shown on FEMA's Flood Insurance
Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps.
(3) Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of
20% or greater.
(4) Areas of two (2) or more contiguous acres supporting wetland
vegetation and hydric soils, which are not part of a freshwater
or coastal wetland as defined, and which are not surficially
connected to a water body during the period of normal high
water.
(5) Land areas along rivers subject to severe bank erosion,
undercutting, or river bed movement, and lands adjacent to
tidal waters which are subject to severe erosion or mass
movement, such as steep coastal bluffs.
(6) Wetlands associated with the Cathance River and Muddy River
as shown on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map.
B. Limited Residential District. The Limited Residential District
includes those areas suitable for residential and recreational
development. It includes areas other than those in the Resource
Protection District, or Stream Protection District, and areas which
are used less intensively than those in the Limited Commercial
District, the General Development Districts, or the Commercial
Fisheries/Maritime Activities District.
C. Limited Commercial District. The Limited Commercial District
includes areas of mixed, light commercial and residential uses,
exclusive of the Stream Protection District, which should not be
developed as intensively as the General Development Districts.
This district includes areas of two or more contiguous acres in size
devoted to a mix of residential and low-intensity business and
commercial uses. Industrial uses are prohibited.
D. General Development District. The General Development District
includes the following types of existing, intensively developed
areas:
(1) Areas of two or more contiguous acres devoted to commercial,
industrial or intensive recreational activities, or a mix of such
activities, including but not limited to the following:
(a) Areas devoted to manufacturing, fabricating or other
industrial activities;
(b) Areas devoted to wholesaling, warehousing, retail trade
and service activities, or other commercial activities; and
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:380
(c) Areas devoted to intensive recreational development and
activities, such as, but not limited to amusement parks,
race tracks and fairgrounds.
(2) Areas otherwise discernible as having patterns of intensive
commercial, industrial or recreational uses.
E. (Reserved)
F. (Reserved)
G. Stream Protection District. The Stream Protection District includes
all land areas within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of
the normal high-water line of a stream, exclusive of those areas
within two-hundred and fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of a great pond, or river, or within two
hundred and fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge
of a freshwater or coastal wetland. Where a stream and its
associated shoreland area are located within two-hundred and fifty
(250) feet, horizontal distance, of the above water bodies or
wetlands, that land area shall be regulated under the terms of the
shoreland district associated with that water body or wetland.
Waterbodies that are found to meet the stream definition found in
§ 225-6 and do not appear on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map
shall be included in the Stream Protection District.
14. Table of Land Uses. All land use activities, as indicated in Table 1, Land
Uses in the Shoreland Zone, shall conform with all of the applicable
land use standards in Subsection 15. The district designation for a
particular site shall be determined from the Official Shoreland Zoning
Map.
Key to Table 1:
Yes - Allowed (no permit required but the use must comply
with all applicable land use standards)
No - Prohibited
PB - Allowed with permit issued by the Planning Board
CEO - Allowed with permit issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer
LPI - Allowed with permit issued by the Local Plumbing
Inspector
Abbreviations:
RP - Resource Protection
LR - Limited Residential
LC - Limited Commercial
GD - General Development
CFMA - Commercial Fisheries/Maritime Activities
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:381
SP - Stream Protection
The following notes are applicable to the Land Uses Table:
Table 1.
Land Uses in the Shoreland Zone
Land Uses District
SP RP LR LC GD CFMA
1. Nonintensive
recreational uses not
requiring structures
such as hunting,
fishing and hiking
yes yes yes yes yes yes
2. Motorized vehicular
traffic on existing
roads and trails
yes yes yes yes yes yes
3. Forest management
activities except for
timber harvesting and
land management
roads
yes yes yes yes yes yes
4. Timber harvesting yes CEO1 yes yes yes yes
5. Clearing or removal of
vegetation for
activities other than
timber harvesting
CEO CEO1 yes yes yes yes
6. Fire prevention
activities
yes yes yes yes yes yes
7. Wildlife management
practices
yes yes yes yes yes yes
8. Soil and water
conservation practices
yes yes yes yes yes yes
9. Mineral exploration no yes2 yes2 yes2 yes2 yes2
10. Mineral extraction
including sand and
gravel extraction
no no PB PB PB PB
11. Surveying and
resource analysis
yes yes yes yes yes yes
12. Emergency operations yes yes yes yes yes yes
13. Agriculture yes PB yes yes yes yes
14. Aquaculture PB PB PB yes yes yes
15. Principal structures
and uses
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:382
Table 1.
Land Uses in the Shoreland Zone
Land Uses District
SP RP LR LC GD CFMA
A. One and twofamily
residential,
including
driveways
PB4 PB9 CEO CEO CEO no
B. Multi-unit
residential
no no PB PB PB no
C. Commercial no no10 no10 PB PB PB5
D. Industrial no no no no PB PB5
E. Governmental and
institutional
no no PB PB PB PB5
F. Small
nonresidential
facilities for
educational,
scientific, or
nature
interpretation
purposes
PB4 PB CEO CEO CEO PB5
16. Structures accessory
to allowed uses
PB4 PB CEO CEO yes yes
17. Piers, docks, wharfs,
bridges and other
structures and uses
extending over or
below the normal
high-water line or
within a wetland
A. Temporary CEO11 CEO11 CEO11 CEO11 CEO11 CEO11
B. Permanent PB PB PB PB PB PB5
18. Conversions of
seasonal residences to
year-round residences
LPI LPI LPI LPI LPI no
19. Home occupations PB PB PB CEO yes yes
20. Private sewage
disposal systems for
allowed uses
LPI LPI9 LPI LPI LPI LPI
21. Essential services PB6 PB6 PB PB PB PB
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:383
Table 1.
Land Uses in the Shoreland Zone
Land Uses District
SP RP LR LC GD CFMA
A. Roadside
distribution lines
(34.5kV and
lower)
CEO6 CEO6 yes12 yes12 yes12 yes12
B. Non-roadside or
cross-country
distribution lines
involving ten
poles or less in
the Shoreland
Zone
PB6 PB6 CEO CEO CEO CEO
C. Non-roadside or
cross-country
distribution lines
involving eleven
or more poles in
the Shoreland
Zone
PB6 PB6 PB PB PB PB
D. Other essential
services
PB6 PB6 PB PB PB PB
22. Service drops, as
defined, to allowed
uses
yes yes yes yes yes yes
23. Public and private
recreational areas
involving minimal
structural
development
PB PB PB CEO CEO CEO5
24. Individual, private
campsites
CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
25. Campgrounds no no7 PB PB PB no
26. Road construction PB no8 PB PB PB PB5
27. Land management
roads
yes PB yes yes yes yes
28. Parking facilities no no7 PB PB PB PB3
29. Marinas PB no PB PB PB PB
30. Filling and earth
moving of less than 10
cubic yards
CEO CEO yes yes yes yes
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:384
Table 1.
Land Uses in the Shoreland Zone
Land Uses District
SP RP LR LC GD CFMA
31. Filling and earth
moving of more than
10 cubic yards
PB PB CEO CEO CEO CEO
32. Signs yes yes yes yes yes yes
33. Uses similar to
allowed uses
CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
34. Uses similar to uses
requiring a CEO
permit
CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
35. Uses similar to uses
requiring a PB permit
PB PB PB PB PB PB
NOTES:
1In RP not allowed within 75 feet horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of great ponds, and rivers except to remove safety
hazards.
2Requires permit from the Code Enforcement Officer if more than 100
square feet of surface area, in total, is disturbed.
3In RP not allowed in areas so designated because of wildlife value.
4Provided that a variance from the setback requirement is obtained
from the Board of Appeals.
5Functionally water-dependent uses and uses accessory to such waterdependent
uses only (See previous note.)
6See further restrictions in Subsection 15L(2).
7Except when area is zoned for resource protection due to floodplain
criteria in which case a permit is required from the PB.
8Except as provided in Subsection 15H(4).
9Single-family residential structures may be allowed by special
exception only according to the provisions of Subsection 16E, Special
exceptions. Two-family residential structures are prohibited. Private
sewage disposal systems must be associated with allowed uses only
10Except for commercial uses otherwise listed in this table, such as
marinas and campgrounds, that are allowed in the respective district.
11Excluding bridges and other crossings not involving earthwork, in
which case no permit is required.
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:385
12Permit not required but must file a written "notice of intent to
construct" with CEO.
Item 17, in its entirety, should be deleted from Table 1 if a municipality
elects not to regulate "piers, docks, wharfs, bridges and other
structures and uses extending over or below the normal high-water
line or within a wetland".
A person performing any of the following activities shall require a
permit from the Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant to
38 M.R.S.A. § 480-C, if the activity occurs in, on, over or adjacent to
any freshwater or coastal wetland, great pond, river, stream or brook
and operates in such a manner that material or soil may be washed
into them:
A. Dredging, bulldozing, removing or displacing soil, sand,
vegetation or other materials;
B. Draining or otherwise dewatering;
C. Filling, including adding sand or other material to a sand
dune; or
D. Any construction or alteration of any permanent structure.
15. Land use standards. All land use activities within the Shoreland Zone
shall conform with the following provisions, if applicable.
A. Minimum lot standards.
(1) Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Shore
Frontage
(feet)
(a) Residential per dwelling unit
(i) Within the Shoreland
Zone adjacent to tidal
areas
30,000 150
(ii) Within the Shoreland
Zone adjacent to
nontidal areas
40,000 200
(b) Governmental, institutional,
commercial or industrial per
principal structure
(i) Within the Shoreland
Zone adjacent to tidal
areas, exclusive of those
areas zoned for
commercial fisheries and
maritime activities
40,000 200
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:386
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Shore
Frontage
(feet)
(ii) (Reserved)
(iii) Within the Shoreland
Zone adjacent to
nontidal areas
60,000 300
(c) Public and private recreational
facilities
(i) Within the Shoreland
Zone adjacent to tidal
and nontidal areas
40,000 200
(2) Land below the normal high-water line of a water body or
upland edge of a wetland and land beneath roads serving more
than two (2) lots shall not be included toward calculating
minimum lot area.
(3) Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall
be considered each a separate tract or parcel of land unless
such road was established by the owner of land on both sides
thereof after September 22, 1971.
(4) The minimum width of any portion of any lot within one
hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland shall be
equal to or greater than the shore frontage requirement for a
lot with the proposed use.
(5) If more than one residential dwelling unit, principal
governmental, institutional, commercial or industrial structure
or use, or combination thereof, is constructed or established on
a single parcel, all dimensional requirements shall be met for
each additional dwelling unit, principal structure, or use.
B. Principal and accessory structures.
(1) All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back at
least one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, from the
normal high-water line of great ponds and rivers that flow to
great ponds, and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance,
from the normal high-water line of other water bodies,
tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland, except that
in the General Development District the setback from the
normal high-water line shall be at least twenty five (25) feet,
horizontal distance, and in the Commercial Fisheries/Maritime
Activities District there shall be no minimum setback. In the
Resource Protection District the setback requirement shall be
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:387
250 feet, horizontal distance, except for structures, roads,
parking spaces or other regulated objects specifically allowed
in that district in which case the setback requirements
specified above shall apply.
In addition:
(a) The water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback
provision shall neither apply to structures which require
direct access to the water body or wetland as an
operational necessity, such as piers, docks and retaining
walls, nor to other functionally water-dependent uses.
(b) All principal structures along significant river segments as
listed in 38 M.R.S.A. § 437 (see Appendix B), shall be set
back a minimum of one hundred and twenty-five (125) feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line and
shall be screened from the river by existing vegetation.
This provision does not apply to structures related to
hydropower facilities.
(c) For principal structures, water and wetland setback
measurements shall be taken from the top of a coastal
bluff that has been identified on Coastal Bluff Maps as
being "highly unstable" or "unstable" by the Maine
Geological Survey pursuant to its "Classification of Coastal
Bluffs" and published on the most recent Coastal Bluff
Map. If the applicant and the permitting official(s) are in
disagreement as to the specific location of a "highly
unstable" or "unstable" bluff, or where the top of the bluff
is located, the applicant may at his or her expense, employ
a Maine registered professional engineer, a Maine
certified soil scientist, a Maine state geologist, or other
qualified individual to make a determination. If agreement
is still not reached, the applicant may appeal the matter to
the Board of Appeals.
(d) On a nonconforming lot of record on which only a
residential structure exists, and it is not possible to place
an accessory structure meeting the required water body,
tributary stream or wetland setbacks, the Code
Enforcement Officer may issue a permit to place a single
accessory structure, with no utilities, for the storage of
yard tools and similar equipment. Such accessory
structure shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet in area
nor eight feet in height, and shall be located as far from
the shoreline or tributary stream as practical and shall
meet all other applicable standards, including lot coverage
and vegetation clearing limitations. In no case shall the
structure be located closer to the shoreline or tributary
stream than the principal structure.
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:388
(2) Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing
structures which are permitted in the Resource Protection,
Limited Residential, Limited Commercial, and Stream
Protection Districts, shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in
height. This provision shall not apply to structures such as
transmission towers, windmills, antennas, and similar
structures having no floor area.
(3) The lowest floor elevation or openings of all buildings and
structures, including basements, shall be elevated at least one
foot above the elevation of the 100 year flood, the flood of
record, or in the absence of these, the flood as defined by soil
types identified as recent floodplain soils. In those
municipalities that participate in the National Flood Insurance
Program and have adopted the April 2005 version, or later
version, of the Floodplain Management Ordinance, accessory
structures may be placed in accordance with the standards of
that ordinance and need not meet the elevation requirements
of this subsection.
(4) The total footprint area of all structures, parking lots and other
nonvegetated surfaces, within the Shoreland Zone shall not
exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot or a portion thereof,
located within the Shoreland Zone, including land area
previously developed, except in the General Development
District adjacent to tidal waters and rivers that do not flow to
great ponds classified GPA.
(5) Retaining walls that are not necessary for erosion control shall
meet the structure setback requirement, except for low
retaining walls and associated fill, provided all of the following
conditions are met:
(a) The site has been previously altered and an effective
vegetated buffer does not exist;
(b) The wall(s) is(are) at least 25 feet, horizontal distance,
from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary
stream, or upland edge of a wetland;
(c) The site where the retaining wall will be constructed is
legally existing lawn or is a site eroding from lack of
naturally occurring vegetation, and which cannot be
stabilized with vegetative plantings;
(d) The total height of the wall(s), in the aggregate, are no
more than 24 inches;
(e) Retaining walls are located outside of the 100-year
floodplain on rivers, streams, coastal wetlands, and
tributary streams, as designated on the Federal
Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) Flood
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:389
Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or
the flood of record, or in the absence of these, by soil types
identified as recent floodplain soils.
(f) The area behind the wall is revegetated with grass, shrubs,
trees, or a combination thereof, and no further structural
development will occur within the setback area, including
patios and decks; and
(g) A vegetated buffer area is established within 25 feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a
water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland
when a natural buffer area does not exist. The buffer area
must meet the following characteristics:
(i) The buffer must include shrubs and other woody and
herbaceous vegetation. Where natural ground cover is
lacking, the area must be supplemented with leaf or
bark mulch;
(ii) Vegetation plantings must be in quantities sufficient to
retard erosion and provide for effective infiltration of
stormwater runoff;
(iii) Only native species may be used to establish the
buffer area;
(iv) A minimum buffer width of 15 feet, horizontal
distance, is required, measured perpendicularly to the
normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland;
(v) A footpath not to exceed the standards in Subsection
15P(2)(a), may traverse the buffer.
(6) Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or
similar structures may be allowed with a permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer, to provide shoreline access in areas of
steep slopes or unstable soils, provided that the structure is
limited to a maximum of four (4) feet in width; that the
structure does not extend below or over the normal high-water
line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland, (unless
permitted by the Department of Environmental Protection
pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A.
§ 480-C); and that the applicant demonstrates that no
reasonable access alternative exists on the property.
C. Piers, docks, wharves, bridges and other structures and uses
extending over or below the normal high-water line of a water body
or within a wetland.
(1) Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for
such use and constructed so as to control erosion.
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:390
(2) The location shall not interfere with existing developed or
natural beach areas.
(3) The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects
on fisheries.
(4) The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to
carry on the activity and be consistent with the surrounding
character and uses of the area. A temporary pier, dock or wharf
in nontidal waters shall not be wider than six feet for
noncommercial uses.
(5) No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier,
wharf, dock or other structure extending beyond the normal
high-water line of a water body or within a wetland unless the
structure requires direct access to the water body or wetland
as an operational necessity.
(6) New permanent piers and docks on nontidal waters shall not
be permitted unless it is clearly demonstrated to the Planning
Board that a temporary pier or dock is not feasible, and a
permit has been obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection, pursuant to the Natural Resources
Protection Act.
(7) No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock,
wharf or other structure extending beyond the normal highwater
line of a water body or within a wetland shall be
converted to residential dwelling units in any district.
(8) Except in the General Development Districts and Commercial
Fisheries/Maritime Activities District, structures built on, over
or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structure extending
beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a
wetland shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height above the
pier, wharf, dock or other structure.
D. Campgrounds. Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum
requirements imposed under state licensing procedures and the
following:
(1) Campgrounds shall contain a minimum of five thousand (5,000)
square feet of land, not including roads and driveways, for
each site. Land supporting wetland vegetation, and land below
the normal high-water line of a water body shall not be
included in calculating land area per site.
(2) The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle,
tent or shelter, and utility and service buildings shall be set
back a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance,
from the normal high-water line of other water bodies,
tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:391
E. Individual private campsites. Individual private campsites not
associated with campgrounds are allowed, provided the following
conditions are met:
(1) One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this
ordinance, or thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of lot area
within the Shoreland Zone, whichever is less, may be
permitted.
(2) Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for
a recreational vehicle or tent platform, shall be set back
seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal
high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the
upland edge of a wetland.
(3) Only one recreational vehicle shall be allowed on a campsite.
The recreational vehicle shall not be located on any type of
permanent foundation except for a gravel pad, and no
structure except a canopy shall be attached to the recreational
vehicle.
(4) The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational
vehicle, tent or similar shelter in a Resource Protection District
shall be limited to one thousand (1000) square feet.
(5) A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed
method and location of sewage disposal shall be required for
each campsite and shall be approved by the local plumbing
inspector. Where disposal is off-site, written authorization from
the receiving facility or land owner is required.
(6) When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed
on-site for more than one hundred and twenty (120) days per
year, all requirements for residential structures shall be met,
including the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal
system in compliance with the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules unless served by public sewage
facilities.
F. Commercial and industrial uses. The following new commercial and
industrial uses are prohibited within the Shoreland Zone:
(1) Auto washing facilities.
(2) Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations,
including body shops.
(3) Chemical and bacteriological laboratories.
(4) Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or
fertilizers, other than amounts normally associated with
individual households or farms.
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:392
(5) Commercial painting, wood preserving, and furniture
stripping.
(6) Dry cleaning establishments.
(7) Electronic circuit assembly.
(8) Laundromats, unless connected to a sanitary sewer.
(9) Metal plating, finishing, or polishing.
(10) Petroleum or petroleum product storage and/or sale except
storage on same property as use occurs and except for storage
and sales associated with marinas.
(11) Photographic processing.
(12) Printing.
G. Parking areas.
(1) Parking areas shall meet the shoreline and tributary stream
setback requirements for structures for the district in which
such areas are located, except that in the Commercial
Fisheries/Maritime Activities District, parking areas shall be
set back at least twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, from
the shoreline. The setback requirement for parking areas
serving public boat launching facilities in districts other than
the General Development I District and Commercial Fisheries/
Maritime Activities District shall be no less than fifty (50) feet,
horizontal distance, from the shoreline or tributary stream if
the Planning Board finds that no other reasonable alternative
exists further from the shoreline or tributary stream.
(2) Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed use
and shall be designed to prevent stormwater runoff from
flowing directly into a water body, tributary stream or wetland
and where feasible, to retain all runoff on-site.
(3) In determining the appropriate size of proposed parking
facilities, the following shall apply:
(a) Typical parking space: Approximately ten (10) feet wide
and twenty (20) feet long, except that parking spaces for a
vehicle and boat trailer shall be forty (40) feet long.
(b) Internal travel aisles: Approximately twenty (20) feet wide.
H. Roads and driveways. The following standards shall apply to the
construction of roads and/or driveways and drainage systems,
culverts and other related features.
(1) Roads and driveways shall be set back at least seventy-five (75)
feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:393
other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a
wetland unless no reasonable alternative exists as determined
by the Planning Board. If no other reasonable alternative
exists, the road and/or driveway setback requirement shall be
no less than fifty (50) feet, horizontal distance, upon clear
showing by the applicant that appropriate techniques will be
used to prevent sedimentation of the water body, tributary
stream, or wetland. Such techniques may include, but are
not limited to, the installation of settling basins, and/or the
effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts
placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary
stream, or wetland.
On slopes of greater than twenty (20) percent the road and/
or driveway setback shall be increased by ten (10) feet,
horizontal distance, for each five (5) percent increase in slope
above twenty (20) percent.
Subsection 15H(1) does not apply to approaches to water
crossings or to roads or driveways that provide access to
permitted structures and facilities located nearer to the
shoreline or tributary stream due to an operational necessity,
excluding temporary docks for recreational uses. Roads and
driveways providing access to permitted structures within
the setback area shall comply fully with the requirements
of Subsection 15H(1) except for that portion of the road or
driveway necessary for direct access to the structure.
(2) Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road
right-of-way regardless of their setback from a water body,
tributary stream or wetland.
(3) New permanent roads are not allowed within the Shoreland
Zone along significant river segments except:
(a) To provide access to structures or facilities within the
zone; or
(b) When the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable
alternative route exists outside the Shoreland Zone. When
roads must be located within the Shoreland Zone, they
shall be set back as far as practicable from the normal
high-water line and screened from the river by existing
vegetation.
(4) New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource
Protection District except that the Planning Board may grant a
permit to construct a road or driveway to provide access to
permitted uses within the district. A road or driveway may also
be approved by the Planning Board in a Resource Protection
District, upon a finding that no reasonable alternative route or
location is available outside the district. When a road or
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:394
driveway is permitted in a Resource Protection District, the
road and/or driveway shall be set back as far as practicable
from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary
stream, or upland edge of a wetland.
(5) Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of
two (2) horizontal to one (1) vertical, and shall be graded and
stabilized in accordance with the provisions for erosion and
sedimentation control contained in Subsection 15Q.
(6) Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than ten (10)
percent except for segments of less than two hundred (200)
feet.
(7) In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from
directly entering water bodies, tributary streams or wetlands,
roads and driveways shall be designed, constructed, and
maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip at least
(50) feet plus two times the average slope, in width between
the outflow point of the ditch or culvert and the normal highwater
line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of
a wetland. Surface drainage which is directed to an unscarified
buffer strip shall be diffused or spread out to promote
infiltration of the runoff and to minimize channelized flow of
the drainage through the buffer strip.
(8) Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water
turnouts shall be installed in a manner effective in directing
drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before the flow gains
sufficient volume or head to erode the road, driveway, or ditch.
To accomplish this, the following shall apply:
(a) Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water
turnouts shall be spaced along the road, or driveway at
intervals no greater than indicated in the following table:
Grade
(percent)
Spacing
(feet)
0 - 2 250
3 - 5 200 - 135
6 - 10 100 - 80
11 - 15 80 - 60
16 - 20 60 - 45
21 + 40
(b) Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts
only where the grade is ten (10) percent or less.
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:395
(c) On sections having slopes greater than ten (10) percent,
ditch relief culverts shall be placed at approximately a
thirty (30) degree angle downslope from a line
perpendicular to the center line of the road or driveway.
(d) Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly
installed in order to allow for effective functioning, and
their inlet and outlet ends shall be stabilized with
appropriate materials.
(9) Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other
stormwater runoff control installations associated with roads
and driveways shall be maintained on a regular basis to assure
effective functioning.
I. Signs. The following provisions shall govern the use of signs in the
Resource Protection, Stream Protection, Limited Residential and
Limited Commercial Districts:
(1) Signs relating to goods and services sold on the premises shall
be allowed, provided that such signs shall not exceed six (6)
square feet in area and shall not exceed two (2) signs per
premises. In the Limited Commercial District, however, such
signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. Signs
relating to goods or services not sold or rendered on the
premises shall be prohibited.
(2) Name signs are allowed, provided such signs shall not exceed
two (2) signs per premises and shall not exceed twelve (12)
square feet in the aggregate.
(3) Residential users may display a single sign not over three (3)
square feet in area relating to the sale, rental, or lease of the
premises.
(4) Signs relating to trespassing and hunting shall be allowed
without restriction as to number, provided that no such sign
shall exceed two (2) square feet in area.
(5) Signs relating to public safety shall be allowed without
restriction.
(6) No sign shall extend higher than twenty (20) feet above the
ground.
(7) Signs may be illuminated only by shielded, nonflashing lights.
J. Stormwater runoff. [Amended 5-17-2017 STM, Art. 13]
(1) All new construction and development shall be designed in
accordance with the requirements of § 225-34, Stormwater
management, and shall minimize stormwater runoff from the
site in excess of the predevelopment conditions. Where
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:396
possible, existing natural runoff control features, such as
berms, swales, terraces and wooded areas, shall be retained
in order to reduce runoff and encourage infiltration of
stormwaters.
(2) Stormwater runoff control systems shall be maintained in
accordance with the requirements of § 225-34 to ensure proper
functioning.
K. Septic waste disposal.
(1) All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in
conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules, and the following: a) clearing or removal of
woody vegetation necessary to site a new system and any
associated fill extensions shall not extend closer than seventyfive
(75) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water
line of a water body or the upland edge of a wetland and b) a
holding tank is not allowed for a first-time residential use in the
Shoreland Zone.
L. Essential services.
(1) Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be
limited to existing public ways and existing service corridors.
(2) The installation of essential services, other than roadside
distribution lines, is not allowed in a Resource Protection or
Stream Protection District, except to provide services to a
permitted use within said district, or except where the
applicant demonstrates that no reasonable alternative exists.
Where allowed, such structures and facilities shall be located
so as to minimize any adverse impacts on surrounding uses and
resources, including visual impacts.
(3) Damaged or destroyed public utility transmission and
distribution lines, towers and related equipment may be
replaced or reconstructed without a permit.
M. Mineral exploration and extraction. Mineral exploration to
determine the nature or extent of mineral resources shall be
accomplished by hand sampling, test boring, or other methods
which create minimal disturbance of less than one hundred (100)
square feet of ground surface. A permit from the Code Enforcement
Officer shall be required for mineral exploration which exceeds the
above limitation. All excavations, including test pits and holes, shall
be immediately capped, filled or secured by other equally effective
measures to restore disturbed areas and to protect the public
health and safety.
Mineral extraction may be permitted under the following
conditions:
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:397
(1) A reclamation plan shall be filed with, and approved by, the
Planning Board before a permit is granted. Such plan shall
describe in detail procedures to be undertaken to fulfill the
requirements of Subsection 15M(4) below.
(2) No part of any extraction operation, including drainage and
runoff control features, shall be permitted within seventy-five
(75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of
any other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a
wetland. Extraction operations shall not be permitted within
fifty (50) feet, horizontal distance, of any property line without
written permission of the owner of such adjacent property.
(3) Developers of new gravel pits along significant river segments
shall demonstrate that no reasonable mining site outside the
Shoreland Zone exists. When gravel pits must be located
within the zone, they shall be set back as far as practicable
from the normal high-water line and no less than seventy-five
(75) feet and screened from the river by existing vegetation.
(4) Within twelve (12) months following the completion of
extraction operations at any extraction site, which operations
shall be deemed complete when less than one hundred (100)
cubic yards of materials are removed in any consecutive twelve
(12) month period, ground levels and grades shall be
established in accordance with the following:
(a) All debris, stumps, and similar material shall be removed
for disposal in an approved location, or shall be buried onsite.
Only materials generated on-site may be buried or
covered on-site.
(b) The final graded slope shall be two and one-half to one
(2 1/2:1) slope or flatter.
(c) Topsoil or loam shall be retained to cover all disturbed
land areas, which shall be reseeded and stabilized with
vegetation native to the area. Additional topsoil or loam
shall be obtained from off-site sources if necessary to
complete the stabilization project.
(5) In keeping with the purposes of this ordinance, the Planning
Board may impose such conditions as are necessary to
minimize the adverse impacts associated with mineral
extraction operations on surrounding uses and resources.
N. Agriculture.
(1) All spreading of manure shall be accomplished in conformance
with the Manure Utilization Guidelines published by the Maine
Department of Agriculture on November 1, 2001, and the
Nutrient Management Law (7 M.R.S.A. §§ 4201 through 4209).
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:398
(2) Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within seventy-five
(75) feet, horizontal distance, of other water bodies, tributary
streams, or wetlands. All manure storage areas within the
Shoreland Zone must be constructed or modified such that the
facility produces no discharge of effluent or contaminated
stormwater.
(3) Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than forty
thousand (40,000) square feet in surface area, within the
Shoreland Zone shall require a Conservation Plan to be filed
with the Planning Board. Nonconformance with the provisions
of said plan shall be considered to be a violation of this
ordinance.
(4) There shall be no new tilling of soil within seventy-five (75)
feet, horizontal distance, from other water bodies and coastal
wetlands; nor within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance,
of tributary streams and freshwater wetlands. Operations in
existence on the effective date of this ordinance and not in
conformance with this provision may be maintained.
(5) Newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be
permitted within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of
other water bodies and coastal wetlands, nor; within twentyfive
(25) feet, horizontal distance, of tributary streams and
freshwater wetlands. Livestock grazing associated with
ongoing farm activities, and which are not in conformance with
the above setback provisions may continue, provided that such
grazing is conducted in accordance with a Conservation Plan.
O. (Reserved)
O-1. Timber harvesting - statewide standards (effective on effective
date established in Subsection 4B).
(1) Shoreline integrity and sedimentation. Persons conducting
timber harvesting and related activities must take reasonable
measures to avoid the disruption of shoreline integrity, the
occurrence of sedimentation of water, and the disturbance of
water body and tributary stream banks, water body and
tributary stream channels, shorelines, and soil lying within
water bodies, tributary streams and wetlands. If, despite such
precautions, the disruption of shoreline integrity,
sedimentation of water, or the disturbance of water body and
tributary stream banks, water body and tributary stream
channels, shorelines, and soil lying within water bodies,
tributary streams and wetlands occurs, such conditions must
be corrected.
(2) Slash treatment. Timber harvesting and related activities shall
be conducted such that slash or debris is not left below the
normal high-water line of any water body or tributary stream,
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:399
or the upland edge of a wetland. Subsection 15O-1(2) does not
apply to minor, incidental amounts of slash that result from
timber harvesting and related activities otherwise conducted
in compliance with this section.
(a) Slash actively used to protect soil from disturbance by
equipment or to stabilize exposed soil, may be left in place,
provided that no part thereof extends more than 4 feet
above the ground.
(b) Adjacent to great ponds, rivers and wetlands:
(i) No accumulation of slash shall be left within 50 feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line or
upland edge of a wetland; and
(ii) Between 50 feet and 250 feet, horizontal distance, of
the normal high-water line or upland edge of a
wetland, all slash larger than 3 inches in diameter
must be disposed of in such a manner that no part
thereof extends more than 4 feet above the ground.
(3) Timber harvesting and related activities must leave adequate
tree cover and shall be conducted so that a well-distributed
stand of trees is retained. This requirement may be satisfied by
following one of the following three options:
(a) Option 1 (40% volume removal), as follows:
(i) Harvesting of no more than 40 percent of the total
volume on each acre of trees 4.5 inches DBH or
greater in any 10 year period is allowed. Volume may
be considered to be equivalent to basal area;
(ii) A well-distributed stand of trees which is wind-firm,
and other vegetation including existing ground cover,
must be maintained; and
(iii) Within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of rivers, streams, and great ponds, and
within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge
of a freshwater or coastal wetlands, there must be no
cleared openings. At distances greater than 75 feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a
river or great pond, or upland edge of a wetland,
timber harvesting and related activities must not
create single cleared openings greater than 14,000
square feet in the forest canopy. Where such openings
exceed 10,000 square feet, they must be at least 100
feet, horizontal distance, apart. Such cleared openings
will be included in the calculation of total volume
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:400
removal. Volume may be considered equivalent to
basal area.
(b) Option 2 (60 square foot basal area retention), as follows:
(i) The residual stand must contain an average basal area
of at least 60 square feet per acre of woody vegetation
greater than or equal to 1.0 inch DBH, of which 40
square feet per acre must be greater than or equal to
4.5 inches DBH;
(ii) A well-distributed stand of trees which is wind-firm,
and other vegetation including existing ground cover,
must be maintained; and
(iii) Within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of water bodies and within 75 feet,
horizontal distance, of the upland edge of wetlands,
there must be no cleared openings. At distances
greater than 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of a river or great pond, or
upland edge of a wetland, timber harvesting and
related activities must not create single cleared
openings greater than 14,000 square feet in the forest
canopy. Where such openings exceed 10,000 square
feet, they must be at least 100 feet, horizontal
distance, apart. Such cleared openings will be
included in the calculation of the average basal area.
Volume may be considered equivalent to basal area.
(c) Option 3 (outcome based), which requires: An alternative
method proposed in an application, signed by a licensed
forester or certified wildlife professional, submitted by the
landowner or designated agent to the State of Maine
Department of Conservation's Bureau of Forestry (Bureau)
for review and approval, which provides equal or better
protection of the shoreland area than this rule.
Landowners must designate on the forest operations
notification form required by 12 M.R.S.A. Chapter 805,
Subchapter 5, which option they choose to use. If
landowners choose Option 1 or Option 2, compliance will
be determined solely on the criteria for the option chosen.
If landowners choose Option 3, timber harvesting and
related activities may not begin until the Bureau has
approved the alternative method.
The Bureau may verify that adequate tree cover and a
well-distributed stand of trees is retained through a field
procedure that uses sample plots that are located
randomly or systematically to provide a fair
representation of the harvest area.
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:401
(4) Skid trails, yards, and equipment operation. This requirement
applies to the construction, maintenance, and use of skid trails
and yards in shoreland areas.
(a) Equipment used in timber harvesting and related activities
shall not use river, stream or tributary stream channels as
travel routes except when surface waters are frozen and
snow covered and the activity will not result in any ground
disturbance.
(b) Skid trails and yards must be designed and constructed to
prevent sediment and concentrated water runoff from
entering a water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Upon
termination of their use, skid trails and yards must be
stabilized.
(c) Setbacks:
(i) Equipment must be operated to avoid the exposure of
mineral soil within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of any
water body, tributary stream, or wetland. On slopes of
10 percent or greater, the setback for equipment
operation must be increased by 20 feet, horizontal
distance, plus an additional 10 feet, horizontal
distance, for each 5 percent increase in slope above
10 percent. Where slopes fall away from the resource,
no increase in the 25-foot setback is required.
(ii) Where such setbacks are impracticable, appropriate
techniques shall be used to avoid sedimentation of the
water body, tributary stream or wetland. Such
techniques may include the installation of sump holes
or settling basins, and/or the effective use of
additional ditch relief culverts and ditch water
turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation of the water
body, tributary stream, or wetland. If, despite such
precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of
shoreline integrity occurs, such conditions must be
corrected.
(5) Land management roads. Land management roads, including
approaches to crossings of water bodies, tributary stream
channels, and freshwater wetlands, ditches and other related
structures, must be designed, constructed, and maintained to
prevent sediment and concentrated water runoff from directly
entering the water body, tributary stream or wetland. Surface
water on or adjacent to water crossing approaches must be
diverted through vegetative filter strips to avoid sedimentation
of the watercourse or wetland. Because roadside ditches may
not extend to the resource being crossed, vegetative filter
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:402
strips must be established in accordance with the setback
requirements in Subsection 15O-1(7) of this rule.
(a) Land management roads and associated ditches,
excavation, and fill must be set back at least:
(i) 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal highwater
line of a great pond, river or freshwater or
coastal wetland;
(ii) 50 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal highwater
line of streams; and
(iii) 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal highwater
line of tributary streams.
(b) The minimum 100 foot setback specified in Subsection
15O-1(5)(a)(i) above may be reduced to no less than 50
feet, horizontal distance, and the 50 foot setback specified
in Subsection 15O-1(5)(a)(ii) above may be reduced to no
less than 25 feet, horizontal distance, if, prior to
construction, the landowner or the landowner's
designated agent demonstrates to the Planning Board's
satisfaction that no reasonable alternative exists and that
appropriate techniques will be used to prevent
sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland. Such techniques may include, but are not limited
to, the installation of settling basins, and/or the effective
use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed
to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream
or wetland. If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or
the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such
conditions must be corrected.
(c) On slopes of 10 percent or greater, the land management
road setback must be increased by at least 20 feet,
horizontal distance, plus an additional 10 feet, horizontal
distance, for each 5 percent increase in slope above 10
percent.
(d) New land management roads are not allowed within the
shoreland area along significant river segments as
identified in 38 M.R.S.A. § 437, nor in a Resource
Protection District, unless, prior to construction, the
landowner or the landowner's designated agent makes a
clear demonstration to the Planning Board's satisfaction
that no reasonable alternative route exists outside the
Shoreland Zone, and that the new road must be set back as
far as practicable from the normal high-water line and
screened from the river by existing vegetation.
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:403
(e) Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other
water control installations associated with roads must be
maintained on a regular basis to assure effective
functioning. Drainage structures shall deliver a dispersed
flow of water into an unscarified filter strip no less than the
width indicated in the setback requirements in Subsection
15O-1(7). Where such a filter strip is impracticable,
appropriate techniques shall be used to avoid
sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland. Such techniques may include the installation of
sump holes or settling basins, and/or the effective use of
additional ditch relief culverts and ditch water turnouts
placed to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary
stream, or wetland. If, despite such precautions,
sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity
occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
(f) Road closeout and discontinuance. Maintenance of the
water control installations required in Subsection
15O-1(5)(e) must continue until use of the road is
discontinued and the road is put to bed by effective
installation of water bars or other adequate road drainage
structures at appropriate intervals, constructed to avoid
surface water flowing over or under the water bar, and
extending a sufficient distance beyond the traveled way so
that water does not reenter the road surface.
(g) Upgrading existing roads. Extension or enlargement of
presently existing roads must conform to the provisions of
Subsection 15O-1. Any nonconforming existing road may
continue to exist and to be maintained, as long as the
nonconforming conditions are not made more
nonconforming.
(h) Exception. Extension or enlargement of presently existing
roads need not conform to the setback requirements of
Subsection 15O-1(5)(a) if, prior to extension or
enlargement, the landowner or the landowner's
designated agent demonstrates to the Planning Board's
satisfaction that no reasonable alternative exists and that
appropriate techniques will be used to prevent
sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland. Such techniques may include, but are not limited
to, the installation of settling basins, and/or the effective
use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed
to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream,
or wetland. If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or
the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such
conditions must be corrected.
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:404
(i) Additional measures. In addition to the foregoing
minimum requirements, persons undertaking construction
and maintenance of roads and river, stream and tributary
stream crossings must take reasonable measures to avoid
sedimentation of surface waters.
(6) Crossings of waterbodies. Crossings of rivers, streams, and
tributary streams must allow for fish passage at all times of the
year, must not impound water, and must allow for the
maintenance of normal flows.
(a) Determination of flow. Provided they are properly applied
and used for the circumstances for which they are
designed, methods including but not limited to the
following are acceptable as a means of calculating the 10
year and 25 year frequency water flows and thereby
determining water crossing sizes as required in
Subsection 15O-1: The United States Geological Survey
(USGS) Methods, specifically: Hodgkins, G. 1999.
Estimating the Magnitude of Peak Flows for Streams in
Maine for Selected Recurrence Intervals. U.S. Geological
Survey. Water Resources Investigations Report 99-4008.
45 pp.
(b) Upgrading existing water crossings. Extension or
enlargement of presently existing water crossings must
conform to the provisions of Subsection 15O-1. Any
nonconforming existing water crossing may continue to
exist and be maintained, as long as the nonconforming
conditions are not made more nonconforming; however,
any maintenance or repair work done below the normal
high-water line must conform to the provisions of
Subsection 15O-1.
(c) Other agency permits. Any timber harvesting and related
activities involving the design, construction, and
maintenance of crossings on waterbodies other than a
river, stream or tributary stream may require a permit
from the Land Use Regulation Commission, the
Department of Environmental Protection, or the US Army
Corps of Engineers.
(d) Any timber harvesting and related activities involving the
design, construction, and maintenance of crossings of
freshwater wetlands identified by the Department of
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as essential wildlife habitat
require prior consultation with the Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife.
(e) Notice to Bureau of Forestry. Written notice of all water
crossing construction maintenance, alteration and
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:405
replacement activities in shoreland areas must be given to
the Bureau prior to the commencement of such activities.
Such notice must contain all information required by the
Bureau, including:
(i) A map showing the location of all proposed permanent
crossings;
(ii) the GPS location of all proposed permanent crossings;
(iii) For any temporary or permanent crossing that
requires a permit from state or federal agencies, a
copy of the approved permit or permits; and
(iv) A statement signed by the responsible party that all
temporary and permanent crossings will be
constructed, maintained, and closed out in accordance
with the requirements of this section.
(f) Water crossing standards. All crossings of rivers require a
bridge or culvert sized according to the requirements of
Subsection 15O-1(6)(g) below. Streams and tributary
streams may be crossed using temporary structures that
are not bridges or culverts provided:
(i) Concentrated water runoff does not enter the stream
or tributary stream;
(ii) Sedimentation of surface waters is reasonably
avoided;
(iii) There is no substantial disturbance of the bank, or
stream or tributary stream channel;
(iv) Fish passage is not impeded; and
(v) Water flow is not unreasonably impeded.
Subject to Subsection 15O-1(6)(f)(i) through (v)
above, skid trail crossings of streams and tributary
streams when channels of such streams and tributary
streams are frozen and snow-covered or are
composed of a hard surface which will not be eroded
or otherwise damaged are not required to use
permanent or temporary structures.
(g) Bridge and culvert sizing. For crossings of river, stream
and tributary stream channels with a bridge or culvert, the
following requirements apply:
(i) Bridges and culverts must be installed and maintained
to provide an opening sufficient in size and structure
to accommodate 10 year frequency water flows or
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:406
with a cross-sectional area at least equal to 2 1/2
times the cross-sectional area of the river, stream, or
tributary stream channel.
(ii) Temporary bridge and culvert sizes may be smaller
than provided in Subsection 15O-1(6)(g)(i) if
techniques are effectively employed such that in the
event of culvert or bridge failure, the natural course of
water flow is maintained and sedimentation of the
water body or tributary stream is avoided. Such
crossing structures must be at least as wide as the
channel and placed above the normal high-water line.
Techniques may include, but are not limited to, the
effective use of any, a combination of, or all of the
following:
1. Use of temporary skidder bridges;
2. Removing culverts prior to the onset of frozen
ground conditions;
3. Using water bars in conjunction with culverts;
4. Using road dips in conjunction with culverts.
(iii) Culverts utilized in river, stream and tributary stream
crossings must:
1. be installed at or below river, stream or tributary
stream bed elevation;
2. be seated on firm ground;
3. have soil compacted at least halfway up the side
of the culvert;
4. be covered by soil to a minimum depth of 1 foot or
according to the culvert manufacturer's
specifications, whichever is greater; and
5. have a headwall at the inlet end which is
adequately stabilized by riprap or other suitable
means to reasonably avoid erosion of material
around the culvert.
(iv) River, stream and tributary stream crossings allowed
under Subsection 15O-1, but located in flood hazard
areas (i.e., A Zones) as identified on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) or Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps (FHBM), must be designed and
constructed under the stricter standards contained in
that community's National Flood Insurance Program
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:407
(NFIP). For example, a water crossing may be
required to pass a 100-year flood event.
(v) Exception. Skid trail crossings of tributary streams
within shoreland areas and wetlands adjacent to such
streams may be undertaken in a manner not in
conformity with the requirements of the foregoing
subsections, provided persons conducting such
activities take reasonable measures to avoid the
disruption of shoreline integrity, the occurrence of
sedimentation of water, and the disturbance of stream
banks, stream channels, shorelines, and soil lying
within ponds and wetlands. If, despite such
precautions, the disruption of shoreline integrity,
sedimentation of water, or the disturbance of stream
banks, stream channels, shorelines, and soil lying
within ponds and wetlands occurs, such conditions
must be corrected.
(h) Skid trail closeout. Upon completion of timber harvesting
and related activities, or upon the expiration of a Forest
Operations Notification, whichever is earlier, the following
requirements apply:
(i) Bridges and culverts installed for river, stream and
tributary stream crossings by skid trails must either
be removed and areas of exposed soil stabilized, or
upgraded to comply with the closeout standards for
land management roads in Subsection 15O-1(6)(i)
below.
(ii) Water crossing structures that are not bridges or
culverts must either be removed immediately
following timber harvesting and related activities or, if
frozen into the river, stream or tributary stream bed or
bank, as soon as practical after snowmelt.
(iii) River, stream and tributary stream channels, banks
and approaches to crossings of water bodies and
tributary streams must be immediately stabilized on
completion of harvest, or if the ground is frozen and/or
snow-covered, as soon as practical after snowmelt. If,
despite such precautions, sedimentation or the
disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such
conditions must be corrected.
(i) Land management road closeout. Maintenance of the
water control features must continue until use of the road
is discontinued and the road is put to bed by taking the
following actions:
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:408
(i) Effective installation of water bars or other adequate
road drainage structures at appropriate intervals,
constructed to reasonably avoid surface water flowing
over or under the water bar, and extending sufficient
distance beyond the traveled way so that water does
not reenter the road surface.
(ii) Water crossing structures must be appropriately sized
or dismantled and removed in a manner that
reasonably avoids sedimentation of the water body or
tributary stream.
(iii) Any bridge or water crossing culvert in roads to be
discontinued shall satisfy one of the following
requirements:
1. It shall be designed to provide an opening
sufficient in size and structure to accommodate
25 year frequency water flows;
2. It shall be designed to provide an opening with a
cross-sectional area at least 3 1/2 times the crosssectional
area of the river, stream or tributary
stream channel; or
3. It shall be dismantled and removed in a fashion to
reasonably avoid sedimentation of the river,
stream or tributary stream.
If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or
the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such
conditions must be corrected.
(7) Slope Table.
Filter strips, skid trail setbacks, and land management road
setbacks must be maintained as specified in Subsection
15O-1, but in no case shall be less than shown in the following
table.
Average Slope of Land
Between Exposed Mineral
Soil and the Shoreline
(percent)
Width of Strip Between
Exposed Mineral Soil and
Shoreline
(feet along surface of the
ground)
0 25
10 45
20 65
30 85
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:409
Average Slope of Land
Between Exposed Mineral
Soil and the Shoreline
(percent)
Width of Strip Between
Exposed Mineral Soil and
Shoreline
(feet along surface of the
ground)
40 105
50 125
60 145
70 165
P. Clearing or removal of vegetation for activities other than timber
harvesting.
(1) In a Resource Protection District abutting a great pond, there
shall be no cutting of vegetation within the strip of land
extending 75 feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal
high-water line, except to remove safety hazards.
Elsewhere, in any Resource Protection District the cutting
or removal of vegetation shall be limited to that which is
necessary for uses expressly authorized in that district.
(2) Except in areas as described in Subsection 15P(1), above, and
except to allow for the development of permitted uses, within a
strip of land extending seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal
distance, from any other water body, tributary stream, or the
upland edge of a wetland, a buffer strip of vegetation shall be
preserved as follows:
(a) There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square
feet in the forest canopy (or other existing woody
vegetation if a forested canopy is not present) as measured
from the outer limits of the tree or shrub crown. However,
a footpath not to exceed six (6) feet in width as measured
between tree trunks and/or shrub stems is allowed,
provided that a cleared line of sight to the water through
the buffer strip is not created.
(b) Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is allowed,
provided that a well-distributed stand of trees and other
natural vegetation is maintained. For the purposes of
Subsection 15P(2)(b), a "well-distributed stand of trees"
adjacent to a great pond classified GPA or a river or stream
flowing to a great pond classified GPA, shall be defined as
maintaining a rating score of 24 or more in each 25-foot by
50-foot rectangular (1250 square feet) area as determined
by the following rating system.
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:410
Diameter of Tree at 4 1/2 feet Above
Ground Level
(inches) Points
2 - less than 4 1
4 - less than 8 2
8 - less than 12 4
12 or greater 8
Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and
wetlands, a "well-distributed stand of trees" is defined as
maintaining a minimum rating score of 16 per 25-foot by
50-foot rectangular area.
The following shall govern in applying this point system:
(i) The 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular plots must be
established where the landowner or lessee proposes
clearing within the required buffer;
(ii) Each successive plot must be adjacent to, but not
overlap a previous plot;
(iii) Any plot not containing the required points must have
no vegetation removed except as otherwise allowed by
this ordinance;
(iv) Any plot containing the required points may have
vegetation removed down to the minimum points
required or as otherwise allowed by this ordinance;
(v) Where conditions permit, no more than 50% of the
points on any 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular area may
consist of trees greater than 12 inches in diameter.
For the purposes of Subsection 15P(2)(b) "other
natural vegetation" is defined as retaining existing
vegetation under three (3) feet in height and other
ground cover and retaining at least five (5) saplings
less than two (2) inches in diameter at four and one
half (4 1/2) feet above ground level for each 25-foot
by 50-foot rectangle area. If five saplings do not exist,
no woody stems less than two (2) inches in diameter
can be removed until 5 saplings have been recruited
into the plot.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than
40% of the total volume of trees four (4) inches or
more in diameter, measured at 4 1/2 feet above
ground level may be removed in any ten (10) year
period.
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:411
(c) In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat,
existing vegetation under three (3) feet in height and other
ground cover, including leaf litter and the forest duff layer,
shall not be cut, covered, or removed, except to provide for
a footpath or other permitted uses as described in
Subsections 15P(2) and P(2)(a) above.
(d) Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is
allowed.
(e) In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the
removal of storm-damaged, diseased, unsafe, or dead trees
results in the creation of cleared openings, these openings
shall be replanted with native tree species unless existing
new tree growth is present.
Subsection 15P(2) does not apply to those portions of
public recreational facilities adjacent to public swimming
areas as long as cleared areas are limited to the minimum
area necessary.
(3) At distances greater than seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of any other water
body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland, there
shall be allowed on any lot, in any ten (10) year period,
selective cutting of not more than forty (40) percent of the
volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured
4 1/2 feet above ground level. Tree removal in conjunction with
the development of permitted uses shall be included in the
forty (40) percent calculation. For the purposes of these
standards volume may be considered to be equivalent to basal
area.
In no event shall cleared openings for any purpose, including
but not limited to, principal and accessory structures,
driveways, lawns and sewage disposal areas, exceed in the
aggregate, 25% of the lot area within the Shoreland Zone
or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is greater,
including land previously cleared. This provision shall not
apply to the General Development or Commercial Fisheries/
Maritime Activities Districts.
(4) Legally existing nonconforming cleared openings may be
maintained, but shall not be enlarged, except as allowed by
this ordinance.
(5) Fields and other cleared openings which have reverted to
primarily shrubs, trees, or other woody vegetation shall be
regulated under the provisions of Subsection 15P.
Q. Erosion and sedimentation control.
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:412
(1) All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or other
similar activities which result in unstabilized soil conditions
and which require a permit shall also require a written soil
erosion and sedimentation control plan. The plan shall be
submitted to the permitting authority for approval and shall
include, where applicable, provisions for:
(a) Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
(b) Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt
fencing or diversion ditches.
(c) Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls
or rip-rap.
(2) In order to create the least potential for erosion, development
shall be designed to fit with the topography and soils of the
site. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be
required shall be avoided wherever possible, and natural
contours shall be followed as closely as possible.
(3) Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all
aspects of the proposed project involving land disturbance, and
shall be in operation during all stages of the activity. The
amount of exposed soil at every phase of construction shall be
minimized to reduce the potential for erosion.
(4) Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently
stabilized within one (1) week from the time it was last actively
worked, by use of riprap, sod, seed, and mulch, or other
effective measures. In all cases permanent stabilization shall
occur within nine (9) months of the initial date of exposure. In
addition:
(a) Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least
one (1) bale per five hundred (500) square feet and shall
be maintained until a catch of vegetation is established.
(b) Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other
suitable method may be required to maintain the mulch
cover.
(c) Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in
order to avoid siltation into the water. Such measures may
include the use of staked hay bales and/or silt fences.
(5) Natural and man-made drainageways and drainage outlets
shall be protected from erosion from water flowing through
them. Drainageways shall be designed and constructed in
order to carry water from a twenty five (25) year storm or
greater, and shall be stabilized with vegetation or lined with
riprap.
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:413
R. Soils. All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the
proposed uses or structures can be established or maintained
without causing adverse environmental impacts, including severe
erosion, mass soil movement, improper drainage, and water
pollution, whether during or after construction. Proposed uses
requiring subsurface waste disposal, and commercial or industrial
development and other similar intensive land uses, shall require a
soils report based on an on-site investigation and be prepared by
state-certified professionals. Certified persons may include Maine
certified soil scientists, Maine registered professional engineers,
Maine state certified geologists and other persons who have
training and experience in the recognition and evaluation of soil
properties. The report shall be based upon the analysis of the
characteristics of the soil and surrounding land and water areas,
maximum groundwater elevation, presence of ledge, drainage
conditions, and other pertinent data which the evaluator deems
appropriate. The soils report shall include recommendations for a
proposed use to counteract soil limitations where they exist.
S. Water quality. No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or
discharge to the waters of the state any pollutant that, by itself or
in combination with other activities or substances, will impair
designated uses or the water classification of the water body,
tributary stream or wetland.
T. Archaeological site. Any proposed land use activity involving
structural development or soil disturbance on or adjacent to sites
listed on, or eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic
Places, as determined by the permitting authority, shall be
submitted by the applicant to the Maine Historic Preservation
Commission for review and comment, at least twenty (20) days
prior to action being taken by the permitting authority. The
permitting authority shall consider comments received from the
Commission prior to rendering a decision on the application.
16. Administration.
A. Administering bodies and agents.
(1) Code Enforcement Officer. A Code Enforcement Officer shall
be appointed or reappointed annually by July 1st.
(2) Board of Appeals. A Board of Appeals shall be created in
accordance with the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691.
(3) Planning Board. A Planning Board shall be created in
accordance with the provisions of state law.
B. Permits required. After the effective date of this ordinance no
person shall, without first obtaining a permit, engage in any activity
or use of land or structure requiring a permit in the district in
which such activity or use would occur; or expand, change, or
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:414
replace an existing use or structure; or renew a discontinued
nonconforming use. A person who is issued a permit pursuant to
this ordinance shall have a copy of the permit on site while the
work authorized by the permit is performed.
(1) A permit is not required for the replacement of an existing road
culvert as long as:
(a) The replacement culvert is not more than 25% longer than
the culvert being replaced;
(b) The replacement culvert is not longer than 75 feet; and
(c) Adequate erosion control measures are taken to prevent
sedimentation of the water, and the crossing does not
block fish passage in the watercourse.
(2) A permit is not required for an archaeological excavation as
long as the excavation is conducted by an archaeologist listed
on the State Historic Preservation Officer's Level 1 or Level 2
approved list, and unreasonable erosion and sedimentation is
prevented by means of adequate and timely temporary and
permanent stabilization measures.
(3) Any permit required by this ordinance shall be in addition to
any other permit required by other law or ordinance.
C. Permit application.
(1) Every applicant for a permit shall submit a written application,
including a scaled site plan, on a form provided by the
municipality, to the appropriate official as indicated in
Subsection 14.
(2) All applications shall be signed by an owner or individual who
can show evidence of right, title or interest in the property or
by an agent, representative, tenant, or contractor of the owner
with authorization from the owner to apply for a permit
hereunder, certifying that the information in the application is
complete and correct.
(3) All applications shall be dated, and the Code Enforcement
Officer or Planning Board, as appropriate, shall note upon each
application the date and time of its receipt.
(4) If the property is not served by a public sewer, a valid plumbing
permit or a completed application for a plumbing permit,
including the site evaluation approved by the Plumbing
Inspector, shall be submitted whenever the nature of the
proposed structure or use would require the installation of a
subsurface sewage disposal system.
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:415
D. Procedure for administering permits. Within 35 days of the date of
receiving a written application, the Planning Board or Code
Enforcement Officer, as indicated in Subsection 14, shall notify the
applicant in writing either that the application is a complete
application, or, if the application is incomplete, that specified
additional material is needed to make the application complete.
The Planning Board or the Code Enforcement Officer, as
appropriate, shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny all
permit applications in writing within 35 days of receiving a
completed application. However, if the Planning Board has a
waiting list of applications, a decision on the application shall occur
within 35 days after the first available date on the Planning Board's
agenda following receipt of the completed application, or within 35
days of the public hearing, if the proposed use or structure is found
to be in conformance with the purposes and provisions of this
ordinance.
The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the proposed
land use activity is in conformity with the purposes and provisions
of this ordinance.
After the submission of a complete application to the Planning
Board, the Board shall approve an application or approve it with
conditions if it makes a positive finding based on the information
presented that the proposed use:
(1) Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
(2) Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to
surface waters;
(3) Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
(4) Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish,
aquatic life, bird or other wildlife habitat;
(5) Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points
of access to inland and coastal waters;
(6) Will protect archaeological and historic resources as
designated in the Comprehensive Plan;
(7) Will not adversely affect existing commercial fishing or
maritime activities in a Commercial Fisheries/Maritime
Activities District;
(8) Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development
and use; and
(9) Is in conformance with the provisions of Subsection 15, Land
Use Standards.
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:416
If a permit is either denied or approved with conditions, the
reasons as well as conditions shall be stated in writing. No
approval shall be granted for an application involving a
structure if the structure would be located in an unapproved
subdivision or would violate any other local ordinance or
regulation or statute administered by the municipality.
E. Special exceptions. In addition to the criteria specified in
Subsection 16D above, excepting structure setback requirements,
the Planning Board may approve a permit for a single-family
residential structure in a Resource Protection District, provided
that the applicant demonstrates that all of the following conditions
are met:
(1) There is no location on the property, other than a location
within the Resource Protection District, where the structure
can be built.
(2) The lot on which the structure is proposed is undeveloped and
was established and recorded in the Registry of Deeds of the
county in which the lot is located before the adoption of the
Resource Protection District.
(3) All proposed buildings, sewage disposal systems and other
improvements are:
(a) Located on natural ground slopes of less than 20%; and
(b) Located outside the floodway of the 100-year floodplain
along rivers and artificially formed great ponds along
rivers and outside the velocity zone in areas subject to
tides, based on detailed flood insurance studies and as
delineated on the Federal Emergency Management
Agency's Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood
Insurance Rate Maps; all buildings, including basements,
are elevated at least one foot above the 100-year floodplain
elevation; and the development is otherwise in compliance
with any applicable municipal floodplain ordinance.
If the floodway is not shown on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency Maps, it is deemed to be 1/2 the
width of the 100-year floodplain.
(4) The total ground floor area, including cantilevered or similar
overhanging extensions, of all principal and accessory
structures is limited to a maximum of 1,500 square feet. This
limitation shall not be altered by variance.
(5) All structures, except functionally water-dependent structures,
are set back from the normal high-water line of a water body,
tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland to the greatest
practical extent, but not less than 75 feet, horizontal distance.
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:417
In determining the greatest practical extent, the Planning
Board shall consider the depth of the lot, the slope of the
land, the potential for soil erosion, the type and amount of
vegetation to be removed, the proposed building site's
elevation in regard to the floodplain, and its proximity to
moderate-value and high-value wetlands.
F. Expiration of permit. Permits shall expire one year from the date of
issuance if a substantial start is not made in construction or in the
use of the property during that period. If a substantial start is made
within one year of the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall
have one additional year to complete the project, at which time the
permit shall expire.
G. Installation of public utility service. A public utility, water district,
sanitary district or any utility company of any kind may not install
services to any new structure located in the Shoreland Zone unless
written authorization attesting to the validity and currency of all
local permits required under this or any previous ordinance has
been issued by the appropriate municipal officials or other written
arrangements have been made between the municipal officials and
the utility.
H. Appeals.
(1) Powers and duties of the Board of Appeals. The Board of
Appeals shall have the following powers:
(a) Administrative appeals: To hear and decide administrative
appeals, on an appellate basis, where it is alleged by an
aggrieved party that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by, or
failure to act by, the Planning Board in the administration
of this ordinance; and to hear and decide administrative
appeals on a de novo basis where it is alleged by an
aggrieved party that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by, or failure
to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer in his or her
review of and action on a permit application under this
ordinance. Any order, requirement, decision or
determination made, or failure to act, in the enforcement
of this ordinance is not appealable to the Board of Appeals.
(b) Variance appeals: to authorize variances upon appeal,
within the limitations set forth in this ordinance.
(2) Variance appeals. Variances may be granted only under the
following conditions:
(a) Variances may be granted only from dimensional
requirements including, but not limited to, lot width,
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:418
structure height, percent of lot coverage, and setback
requirements.
(b) Variances shall not be granted for establishment of any
uses otherwise prohibited by this ordinance.
(c) The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds that:
(i) The proposed structure or use would meet the
provisions of Section 15 except for the specific
provision which has created the nonconformity and
from which relief is sought; and
(ii) The strict application of the terms of this ordinance
would result in undue hardship. The term "undue
hardship" shall mean:
a. That the land in question cannot yield a
reasonable return unless a variance is granted;
b. That the need for a variance is due to the unique
circumstances of the property and not to the
general conditions in the neighborhood;
c. That the granting of a variance will not alter the
essential character of the locality; and
d. That the hardship is not the result of action taken
by the applicant or a prior owner.
(d) Notwithstanding Subsection 16H(2)(c)(ii) above, the
Board of Appeals may grant a variance to an owner of a
residential dwelling for the purpose of making that
dwelling accessible to a person with a disability who
resides in or regularly uses the dwelling. The Board shall
restrict any variance granted under this subsection solely
to the installation of equipment or the construction of
structures necessary for access to or egress from the
dwelling by the person with the disability. The Board may
impose conditions on the variance, including limiting the
variance to the duration of the disability or to the time that
the person with the disability lives in the dwelling. The
term "structures necessary for access to or egress from
the dwelling" shall include railing, wall or roof systems
necessary for the safety or effectiveness of the structure.
(e) The Board of Appeals shall limit any variances granted as
strictly as possible in order to ensure conformance with
the purposes and provisions of this ordinance to the
greatest extent possible, and in doing so may impose such
conditions to a variance as it deems necessary. The party
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:419
receiving the variance shall comply with any conditions
imposed.
(f) A copy of each variance request, including the application
and all supporting information supplied by the applicant,
shall be forwarded by the municipal officials to the
Commissioner of the Department of Environmental
Protection at least twenty (20) days prior to action by the
Board of Appeals. Any comments received from the
Commissioner prior to the action by the Board of Appeals
shall be made part of the record and shall be taken into
consideration by the Board of Appeals.
(3) Administrative appeals.
When the Board of Appeals reviews a decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer the Board of Appeals shall hold a "de
novo" hearing. At this time the Board may receive and
consider new evidence and testimony, be it oral or written.
When acting in a "de novo" capacity the Board of Appeals
shall hear and decide the matter afresh, undertaking its own
independent analysis of evidence and the law, and reaching its
own decision.
When the Board of Appeals hears a decision of the Planning
Board, it shall hold an appellate hearing, and may reverse
the decision of the Planning Board only upon finding that the
decision was contrary to specific provisions of the Ordinance
or contrary to the facts presented to the Planning Board.
The Board of Appeals may only review the record of the
proceedings before the Planning Board. The Board Appeals
shall not receive or consider any evidence which was not
presented to the Planning Board, but the Board of Appeals
may receive and consider written or oral arguments. If the
Board of Appeals determines that the record of the Planning
Board proceedings are inadequate, the Board of Appeals may
remand the matter to the Planning Board for additional fact
finding.
(4) Appeal procedure.
(a) Making an appeal.
(i) An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to
the Board of Appeals by an aggrieved party from any
decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or the
Planning Board, except for enforcement related
matters as described in Subsection 16H(1)(a) above.
Such an appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days
of the date of the official, written decision appealed
from, and not otherwise, except that the Board, upon a
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:420
showing of good cause, may waive the thirty (30) day
requirement.
(ii) Applications for appeals shall be made by filing with
the Board of Appeals a written notice of appeal which
includes:
a. A concise written statement indicating what relief
is requested and why the appeal or variance
should be granted.
b. A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location
of existing buildings and structures and other
physical features of the lot pertinent to the relief
sought.
(iii) Upon receiving an application for an administrative
appeal or a variance, the Code Enforcement Officer or
Planning Board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the
Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the
record of the decision appealed from.
(iv) The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on an
administrative appeal or a request for a variance
within thirty-five (35) days of its receipt of a complete
written application, unless this time period is
extended by the parties.
(b) Decision by Board of Appeals.
(i) A majority of the full voting membership of the Board
shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of deciding
an appeal.
(ii) The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of
proof.
(iii) The Board shall decide all administrative appeals and
variance appeals within thirty five (35) days after the
close of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision
on all appeals.
(iv) The Board of Appeals shall state the reasons and basis
for its decision, including a statement of the facts
found and conclusions reached by the Board. The
Board shall cause written notice of its decision to be
mailed or hand-delivered to the applicant and to the
Department of Environmental Protection within seven
(7) days of the Board's decision. Copies of written
decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be given to the
Planning Board, Code Enforcement Officer, and the
municipal officers.
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-19
202:421
(5) Appeal to Superior Court. Except as provided by 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 2691(3)(F), any aggrieved party who participated as a party
during the proceedings before the Board of Appeals may take
an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with state laws
within forty-five (45) days from the date of any decision of the
Board of Appeals.
(6) Reconsideration. In accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 2691(3)(F), the Board of Appeals may reconsider any decision
within forty-five (45) days of its prior decision. A request to the
Board to reconsider a decision must be filed within ten (10)
days of the decision that is being reconsidered. A vote to
reconsider and the action taken on that reconsideration must
occur and be completed within forty-five (45) days of the date
of the vote on the original decision. Reconsideration of a
decision shall require a positive vote of the majority of the
Board members originally voting on the decision, and proper
notification to the landowner, petitioner, Planning Board, Code
Enforcement Officer, and other parties of interest, including
abuttors and those who testified at the original hearing(s). The
Board may conduct additional hearings and receive additional
evidence and testimony.
Appeal of a reconsidered decision to Superior Court must
be made within fifteen (15) days after the decision on
reconsideration.
I. Enforcement.
(1) Nuisances. Any violation of this ordinance shall be deemed to
be a nuisance.
(2) Code Enforcement Officer.
(a) It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to
enforce the provisions of this ordinance. If the Code
Enforcement Officer shall find that any provision of this
ordinance is being violated, he or she shall notify in
writing the person responsible for such violation,
indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the
action necessary to correct it, including discontinuance of
illegal use of land, buildings or structures, or work being
done, removal of illegal buildings or structures, and
abatement of nuisance conditions. A copy of such notices
shall be submitted to the municipal officers and be
maintained as a permanent record.
(b) The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct on-site
inspections to insure compliance with all applicable laws
and conditions attached to permit approvals. The Code
§ 225-19 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-19
202:422
§ 225-20. Aquifer Protection Overlay District.
Enforcement Officer shall also investigate all complaints of
alleged violations of this ordinance.
(c) The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete
record of all essential transactions of the office, including
applications submitted, permits granted or denied,
variances granted or denied, revocation actions,
revocation of permits, appeals, court actions, violations
investigated, violations found, and fees collected. On a
biennial basis, a summary of this record shall be submitted
to the Director of the Bureau of Land and Water Quality
within the Department of Environmental Protection.
(3) Legal actions. When the above action does not result in the
correction or abatement of the violation or nuisance condition,
the municipal officers, upon notice from the Code Enforcement
Officer, are hereby directed to institute any and all actions and
proceedings, either legal or equitable, including seeking
injunctions of violations and the imposition of fines, that may
be appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this
ordinance in the name of the municipality. The municipal
officers, or their authorized agent, are hereby authorized to
enter into administrative consent agreements for the purpose
of eliminating violations of this ordinance and recovering fines
without court action. Such agreements shall not allow an
illegal structure or use to continue unless there is clear and
convincing evidence that the illegal structure or use was
constructed or conducted as a direct result of erroneous advice
given by an authorized municipal official and there is no
evidence that the owner acted in bad faith, or unless the
removal of the structure or use will result in a threat or hazard
to public health and safety or will result in substantial
environmental damage.
(4) Fines. Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a
landowner's agent or a contractor, who violates any provision
or requirement of this ordinance shall be penalized in
accordance with 30-A, M.R.S.A. § 4452.
A. Purpose. The preservation of pure, clean supplies of groundwater is
declared to be public purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote
the preservation and wise utilization of groundwater through the
control of land uses and activities which might otherwise degrade or
destroy the use of aquifers for public and private drinking water
supplies.
B. Establishment of Aquifer Protection Districts. Sand and gravel aquifers
have been mapped by the Maine Geological Service (MGS) which
indicate significant groundwater aquifers and recharge areas. District
§ 225-19 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-20
202:423
boundaries may be verified or amended or additional districts added by
the submission of new or additional geological data by either the staff
of the MGS or registered professional geologist.
C. Land use restrictions. All land uses, except the following, are
prohibited: single-family dwellings; multifamily dwellings; agriculture;
animal husbandry; public utility service lines; public water utility
facilities; forest management; educational facilities; retail and service
businesses which do not use chemical processes or require bulk storage
of hazardous materials; and accessory uses, except those using
chemical processes. [Amended 5-15-2019 STM, Art. 10]
D. Dimensional standards. The dimensional standards for residential uses
shall be based upon the development contributing no more than twentyfive
percent (25%) of the public drinking water standards for
concentrations of listed chemicals into the defined development area
based upon average annual precipitation infiltration. In the event that
new technologies may reduce one (1) or more chemical components,
the concentration of the next highest shall control the density of the
development. Calculations for nitrate contributions shall be based upon
five (5) pounds per person at three and five-tenths (3.5) persons per
household and one and eight-tenths (1.8) pounds per one thousand
(1,000) square feet of fertilized lawn and garden area. The nitrogen
loading formula is pounds of nitrogen multiplied by four hundred fiftyfour
thousand (454,000) mg/lb divided by infiltration in gallons per year
multiplied by three and eight-tenths (3.8) liters per gallon is equal to
parts per million concentration. A five-acre lot with fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet of lawn will not exceed twenty-five (25%) of the
public drinking water standards. Single-family lots shall be five (5)
acres unless otherwise documented to contribute less than twenty-five
(25%) of the standard. Animal nitrate contributions shall not exceed the
following area requirements: dairy cattle, one (1) per acre; beef cattle,
three (3) per acre; swine, four (4) per acre; sheep, eight (8) per acre;
goats, twelve (12) per acre; horses, three (3) per acre; chickens, one
hundred thirty-nine (139) per acre; and dogs, twenty-four (24) per acre.
E. Runoff and drainage. The stormwater management provisions shall
conform to the requirements of § 225-34, Stormwater management.
[Amended 5-17-2017 STM, Art. 13]
F. Safeguards.
(1) Provision shall be made to protect against toxic or hazardous
materials discharge or loss resulting from erosion, accidental
drainage, spillage or vandalism through measures such as spill
control provisions and secured storage areas for toxic or hazardous
materials. Handling and storage of toxic and hazardous materials
shall meet performance standards established by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 225-20 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-20
202:424
§ 225-20.1. Development Transfer Overlay Zone (DTO District).
[Added 5-19-2010 STM, Art. 11]
(2) All retail and service businesses shall be connected to the public
sewer system in accordance with the criteria set forth by the
Topsham Sewer District.
(3) Monitoring wells shall be required for subdivisions of eight or more
lots and any use deemed by the Planning Board to be an actual or
potential source of pollution. The number, location and depth of
monitoring wells shall be determined by a hydrogeologist approved
by the Town and shall be installed and sampled in accordance with
the recommendations of the hydrogeologist. Monitoring wells shall
be installed on the property at the expense of the owner or
occupier. The Town shall be provided with all monitoring well
information and shall be granted access to all monitoring wells.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Development Transfer Overlay Zone (DTO
District) is to create livable neighborhoods in areas of the community
that are designated as residential growth areas in the Town's adopted
Comprehensive Plan as amended while minimizing development in
rural areas of the community where intensive residential development
is not desired. This will be accomplished by allowing well-planned
residential development in designated growth areas at higher densities
than otherwise allowed in exchange for the payment of a fee to the
Town to obtain development transfer credits. The fees from the
purchase of development transfer credits will be used by the Town to
purchase conservation land and/or easements and open space.
B. Applicability.
The provisions of the DTO District are optional. A land owner within
the DTO District may choose to develop in accordance with the
provisions of this overlay district or the provisions of the underlying
zoning district in which it is located. Once a project is developed under
the DTO District provisions, it shall continue to be governed by those
DTO District provisions.
The provisions of the DTO District may only be utilized by residential
subdivisions or two-family or multifamily residential projects,
including mixed-use subdivisions or projects that are primarily
residential but include a small amount of nonresidential use, that are
subject to site plan review and that meet the following provisions:
(1) The development is located within the Development Transfer
Overlay Zone as shown on the map of the Development Transfer
Overlay Zone adopted as part of the Official Zoning Map; and
(2) The owner or developer will obtain development transfer credits in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection F and § 225-60.15.
§ 225-20 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-20.1
202:425
The provisions of the DTO District supplement and modify the
provisions of the underlying zoning district in which the project
is located. Where the provisions of the overlay district differ from
or conflict with the provisions of the underlying district, these
provisions shall govern if the property owner has chosen to
develop in accordance with the DTO District provisions. The plan
of any development approved in accordance with the DTO District
provisions must include a plan note stating that the plan was
approved in accordance with the Development Transfer Overlay
Zone, that the applicant will be required to obtain development
transfer credits from the Town for each dwelling unit in the
development, and that all future development of the lots created
as part of the approval must be done in accordance with the
provisions of the DTO District. Any documents conveying a
property interest in the lots or units that are approved in
accordance with the provisions of the DTO and any related
covenants must include an indication that the issuance of the
building permit for the dwelling unit is conditioned upon a
development transfer credit (or partial credit) being obtained from
the Town.
The provisions of the DTO District only apply to residential
subdivisions and other two-family and multifamily residential
developments approved in accordance with the overlay district.
The overlay district provisions may not be applied to the following:
(1) A lot with a lot area of less than five times the required
minimum lot area for the zone in which it is located if that lot
is part of a subdivision that was approved prior to the effective
date of this section;
(2) A lot in a subdivision that was approved and developed in
accordance with the provisions of the underlying zoning
district subsequent to the adoption of this section; or
(3) A lot that is not part of a subdivision unless it will be developed
as a two-family or multifamily project in accordance with
provisions of the overlay district.
C. Allowed uses. Only uses allowed in the underlying zoning district in
which the project is located shall be allowed in the DTO District. Uses
that are permitted uses in the underlying zoning district remain
permitted uses and uses that are conditional uses in the underlying
zoning district remain conditional uses. Uses that are prohibited in the
underlying zoning district are prohibited in the DTO District.
D. Dimensional requirements.
§ 225-20.1 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-20.1
202:426
Residential subdivisions and two-family and multifamily residential
developments that elect to obtain development transfer credits and
be governed by the provisions of the DTO District are subject to
the following dimensional requirements rather than the dimensional
requirements for the underlying zone in which it is located as set forth
in §§ 225-17 and the density requirements for apartment buildings and
multifamily developments as set forth in § 225-50:
If underlying Zone is
R1
If Underlying Zone is
R2 or MUL
If Underlying Zone is
R3
Standard
Projects
Served by
Public
Sewerage
Projects
Not Served
by Public
Sewerage
Projects
Served by
Public
Sewerage
Projects
Not Served
by Public
Sewerage
Projects
Served by
Public
Sewerage
Projects
Not Served
by Public
Sewerage
Minimum lot size
(square feet):
One-family
dwelling 8,500 20,000 15,000 20,000 15,000 30,000
Two-family
dwelling 15,000 30,000 20,000 40,000 30,000 60,000
Multifamily
dwelling 22,500 45,000 30,000 60,000 45,000 90,000
Nonresidential
use1 15,000 20,000 20,000 30,000 30,000 60,000
Minimum lot
area per
dwelling unit for
units in a
multifamily
dwelling (square
feet per dwelling
unit) 7,500 15,000 10,000 20,000 15,000 30,000
Minimum street
frontage (feet):
One-family
dwelling 70 100 90 100 90 125
Two-family
dwelling 90 125 110 125 120 125
Multifamily
dwelling 120 150 130 150 150 150
Nonresidential
use1 100 125 125 150 150 175
§ 225-20.1 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-20.1
202:427
If underlying Zone is
R1
If Underlying Zone is
R2 or MUL
If Underlying Zone is
R3
Standard
Projects
Served by
Public
Sewerage
Projects
Not Served
by Public
Sewerage
Projects
Served by
Public
Sewerage
Projects
Not Served
by Public
Sewerage
Projects
Served by
Public
Sewerage
Projects
Not Served
by Public
Sewerage
Minimum front
yard setback
(feet):
Local street or
private way 15 25 20 25 20 25
Collector
street 25 30 25 30 25 30
Arterial street 40 50 40 50 40 50
Minimum side
yard setbacks2
(feet):
One-family
dwelling 10 15 10 20 10 25
Two-family
dwelling 15 20 15 25 20 30
Multifamily
dwelling or
nonresidential
use1
25 or
height of
building
whichever
is greater
30 or height
of building
whichever is
greater
30 or
height of
building
whichever
is greater
30 or height
of building
whichever is
greater
30 or
height of
building
whichever
is greater
30 or height
of building
whichever is
greater
Minimum rear
yard setbacks
(feet):
One-family
dwelling 20 20 20 25 20 25
Two-family
dwelling 20 20 20 25 20 25
Multifamily
dwelling or
nonresidential
use1
30 or
height of
building
whichever
is greater
30 or height
of building
whichever is
greater
30 or
height of
building
whichever
is greater
30 or height
of building
whichever is
greater
30 or
height of
building
whichever
is greater
40 or height
of building
whichever is
greater
Maximum
building height
(feet) 35 35 35 35 35 35
§ 225-20.1 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-20.1
202:428
If underlying Zone is
R1
If Underlying Zone is
R2 or MUL
If Underlying Zone is
R3
Standard
Projects
Served by
Public
Sewerage
Projects
Not Served
by Public
Sewerage
Projects
Served by
Public
Sewerage
Projects
Not Served
by Public
Sewerage
Projects
Served by
Public
Sewerage
Projects
Not Served
by Public
Sewerage
Minimum
landscape ratio
(open space
ratio) 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4
NOTES:
1 The dimensional requirements for nonresidential uses apply only to lots or buildings that are
part of an approved plan for a mixed-use subdivision or development.
2 The side yard setback for a yard that abuts a lot that is not part of a project developed in
accordance with DTO District provisions shall not be less than the required side yard setback in
the underlying zoning district.
If any portion of the lot that is proposed to be subdivided or developed
in accordance with the DTO District provisions is located within the
Shoreland Overlay District and is within a zone other than the
Resource Protection District, the residential density associated with
that portion of the property may be increased in accordance with the
following requirements:
(1) The minimum lot size requirement for the shoreland portion of the
lot shall be reduced in the same proportion as the reduction in the
lot size allowed through the application of the DTO provisions to
the underlying zoning district. Therefore if the DTO requirements
reduce the minimum lot size in the underlying zone by half, the
minimum lot size for the shoreland area shall also be reduced by
half.
(2) Any additional units resulting from the reduction in the minimum
lot size requirement in the Shoreland Overlay District must be
located on the portion of the lot that is outside of the Shoreland
Overlay. If the lot is located entirely within the Shoreland Overlay
District or if some or all of the bonus units cannot be developed on
the portion of the property outside of the Shoreland Overlay
District, the density bonus is lost. In no case, shall the number of
units constructed within the Shoreland Overlay District utilizing
the DTO District provisions exceed the number of units that could
have been constructed within the Shoreland Overlay under the
minimum lot size requirements of the Shoreland Overlay District.
E. Other requirements of the underlying zone. Residential subdivisions
and two-family and multifamily residential developments that elect to
obtain development transfer credits and be governed by the provisions
of the DTO District must comply with all requirements of the underlying
§ 225-20.1 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-20.1
202:429
zone in which it is located except for the dimensional requirements
as set forth in Subsection D. These projects must also conform to all
performance standards and other requirements that apply to the same
type of residential use in the underlying zone.
F. Development transfer credit calculation.
Residential subdivisions and two-family and multifamily residential
developments that elect to be governed by the provisions of the DTO
District must obtain development transfer credits in accordance with
the provisions of § 225-60.15. The number of development transfer
credits needed for a residential subdivision or two-family or
multifamily development shall be based upon the number, type, and
size of the “bonus units” included in the approved subdivision or
development plan. "Bonus units" are approved dwelling units in excess
of the number of dwelling units that could be built on the site in
accordance with the provisions of the underlying zone.
The number of development transfer credits needed for a project shall
be determined by the Planning Board as part of the approval of the
subdivision or site plan based on the number of bonus units included
in the plan and the type and size of the bonus units. The number of
bonus units shall be calculated by determining the maximum number
of dwelling units that could be developed on the site based on the
underlying zoning, site conditions, the type of units proposed, and
allowable density bonuses and subtracting those units from the
number of approved dwelling units.
The maximum number of dwelling units allowed in the underlying zone
shall be calculated as follows:
(1) If the underlying zone has a maximum density provision based
upon net residential density or net acreage per dwelling unit, the
maximum number of units allowed under the underlying zoning
shall be calculated based upon this requirement and calculated by
dividing the net acreage of the area proposed to be subdivided or
developed by the per unit density factor allowed in the underlying
district, including any allowances for the use of public sewerage
and/or public water.
(2) If the underlying zone does not have a maximum density
requirement based upon net residential density or net acreage per
dwelling unit, the maximum number of units allowed under the
underlying zoning shall be determined by multiplying the gross
acreage of the area proposed to be subdivided or developed by
sixty-five percent (65%) to allow for access and unusable land and
then dividing the resulting net area by the minimum lot size for
one-family dwellings or the minimum lot area per dwelling unit for
two-family dwellings or multifamily housing, including any
allowance in the underlying district for the use of public sewerage
and/or public water.
§ 225-20.1 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-20.1
202:430
The Planning Board shall determine the total number of
development transfer credits needed for a residential subdivision
or other residential development by multiplying the number of
“bonus units” of each type by the following type and size factors:
• Single-family dwelling = 1.0 credit.
• Dwelling unit in a two-family or multifamily dwelling with a
livable area of less than 800 square feet = 0.5 credit.
• Dwelling unit in a two-family or multifamily dwelling with a
livable area of 800 to 1,200 square feet = 0.75 credit.
• Dwelling unit in a two-family or multifamily dwelling with a
livable area of more than 1,200 square feet = 1.0 credit.
For the purposes of this calculation, livable area in a dwelling unit
in a two-family or multifamily dwelling is the total habitable area
of the dwelling unit not including unfinished basements or attics,
common or shared hallways, entryways, or stairways, garages, or
storage areas that are not accessible from within the dwelling
units.
G. Additional development standards. Residential subdivisions and twofamily
and multifamily residential developments that elect to be
governed by the provisions of the DTO District must comply with the
following additional requirements if applicable:
(1) Additional standards for one- and two-family lots. If a residential
subdivision approved in accordance with these overlay provisions
contains individual lots that will be developed with one- or twofamily
dwellings, the layout of those lots should be deeper than
they are wide to provide a suitable, private rear yard. At least
eighty percent (80%) of lots within the subdivision that will contain
single-family or two-family dwellings must have an average lot
depth that is at least one hundred forty percent (140%) of the lot
width as measured between the side lot lines of the lot at the rear
of the required minimum front yard.
(2) Access limitations. Access to residential subdivisions or residential
developments shall be designed to minimize the number of
entrances onto arterial or collector roads. Direct vehicular access
to individual lots or uses from existing roads classified as arterials
or collectors shall not be allowed unless the Planning Board finds
that there is no reasonable alternative access.
(3) Garage locations. If the vehicle doors for a garage face the street,
the garage shall be located so that the front wall of the portion of
the structure containing the garage is located so that it is at least
two (2) feet further from the front property line than the front wall
of the rest of the building and that the space between the garage
doors and the sidewalk (if any) is at least twenty (20) feet.
§ 225-20.1 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-20.1
202:431
§ 225-20.2. Vernal Pools Overlay District (VPO District). [Added
5-18-2016 STM, Art. 14; amended 5-17-2017 STM, Art. 14 ]
(4) Parking lot locations. Parking lots for five or more vehicles to serve
multifamily housing and/or nonresidential uses shall be located to
the side or rear of the building where feasible. No parking lots for
these uses shall be permitted in the required front yard setback
area.
A. Purpose. The Vernal Pools Overlay District (referred to as the
designated development district in the SAMP) is intended to provide
owners of property located within the overlay district that is subject to
state or federal regulation with respect to vernal pools the option of
developing and using the property in accordance with: 1) the applicable
state and federal wetland regulations and associated requirements for
the protection of vernal pools, or 2) the provisions of this section
including the enhanced protection of other vernal pools through
payment of a vernal pools mitigation fee or by undertaking
permittee-responsible mitigation activities. Mitigation fees
collected under this section shall be used only for the purpose of
protecting other vernal pools within the community or in other nearby
communities identified through the application of the Vernal Pools
Conservation Criteria in the Town of Topsham Vernal Pools Special Area
Management Plan (SAMP) and the conservation priorities of the Maine
Vernal Pools SAMP.
B. Applicability.
The provisions of this section apply only to land located within the
Vernal Pools Overlay District as shown on the Official Zoning Overlay
District Map. These provisions are optional. After a preapplication
meeting with the Town Planner, an applicant may choose to invoke the
provisions of this section under the following conditions in accordance
with the Maine Vernal Pools SAMP:
(1) The impact occurs within the vernal pool or within a two-hundredfifty-
foot zone around the pool.
(2) The total impacts to aquatic resources of a single and complete
project fall below 3 acres.
(3) The vernal pool does not support state or federal threatened or
endangered species unless a determination of no effect or not likely
to adversely affect is made by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers in consultation with the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service.
§ 225-20.1 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-20.2
202:432
With respect to any application to develop land within the Overlay
District that is subject to state or federal regulation with respect to
wetlands and vernal pools, the applicant shall indicate at the time
of application whether he/she intends to develop the project in
accordance with those applicable state and federal requirements
or to utilize the provisions of this section. If the applicant invokes
the provisions of this section, he/she must still obtain all other
local, state and federal permits and provide appropriate notice to
the United States Army Corps of Engineers. Developers that elect
to opt out of this program should continue to consult with state
and federal regulatory agencies for project-specific requirements.
Authority for the Town to issue vernal pool permits as referred
to in this chapter and the SAMP are provided under 38 M.R.S.A.
§ 480-F.
C. Effective date of this section. Notwithstanding the adoption of this
section as part of the chapter, the provisions of this section shall be
effective only when the Maine Department of Environmental Protection
has certified in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer that the Town
has been granted partial delegated authority with respect to the
issuance of vernal pools permits in accordance with the Maine Vernal
Pool Special Area Management Plan (SAMP). If the Maine Department
of Environmental Protection notifies the Code Enforcement Officer in
writing that the Town is no longer in compliance with the SAMP, or if
the Town, Maine Department of Environmental Protection, or United
States Army Corps of Engineers terminates the SAMP, this section shall
no longer be in effect.
D. Definitions. For definitions of words or phrases in this section that are
shown in bold font, see § 225-6, Definitions, of this chapter.
E. Vernal pool mitigation. As an alternative to complying with the
applicable state vernal pool regulations and/or the United States Army
Corps of Engineers general permit for the state, the applicant for any
development approval or building permit with respect to land located
within the overlay district that elects to develop or build in accordance
with the provisions of this section shall either: 1) pay a vernal pools
mitigation fee, or 2) undertake permittee-responsible mitigation
activities in accordance with the provisions of this section and the
SAMP.
(1) Vernal pool mitigation fee.
(a) Regulatory flexibility. An applicant that elects to pay a vernal
pools mitigation fee in accordance with the following
provisions will have to comply with the provisions of this
section rather than the otherwise applicable vernal pool
provisions found in 38 M.R.S.A. Chapter 3, § 480, DEP Rules-
Chapter 335 and federal vernal pool provisions found in the
Maine General Permit. This provision of the Maine Vernal Pools
§ 225-20.2 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-20.2
202:433
SAMP shall not extend to other state and federal wetland
regulations or other natural resource regulations that may
apply to the development.
(b) Amount of the mitigation fee. The amount of the mitigation fee
is the greater of: 1) 40% of the difference in the appraised
value of the parcel proposed to be developed if it is subject to
applicable state regulations and/or the United States Army
Corps of Engineers general permit for the state with respect to
vernal pools and the appraised value of the parcel if those state
and federal vernal pool requirements no longer apply, or 2) the
minimum mitigation fee if such a minimum is established by
the Town. The minimum mitigation fee shall be adequate to
accomplish vernal pool preservation at the programmatic level
of two pools plus 70 acres of terrestrial amphibian postbreeding
habitat conserved for each impacted pool.
The difference in the appraised value of the parcel with and
without the vernal pool requirements shall be determined by a
certified general appraiser (CGA) currently licensed in Maine.
The appraiser shall be employed by the applicant subject to
approval by the Planning Department. The appraisal shall meet
the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice
(USPAP) and will be subject to a peer review by a CGA selected
by the Town.
(c) Appraisal review fee. If the applicant elects the difference in
appraised value approach, the applicant shall deposit the
estimated cost for the peer review of the appraisal with the
Town. The Town shall hold the fee in a separate account and
shall use the fee only for the purpose of compensating the
review appraiser. Should the amount of the initial deposit not
cover the full costs for the review, the applicant shall be
responsible for the difference and shall pay the Town prior to
the issuance of any permits or approvals for the project. If the
amount of the initial deposit exceeds the full costs for the
review, the Town shall refund the balance to the applicant
within 30 days of paying the peer review appraiser.
(d) Payment of the mitigation fee. The mitigation fee shall be
payable to the Town of Topsham and submitted to the Planning
and Code Enforcement Office as part of a site plan review
application or a subdivision plan review application, if such
review is required for the proposed development; or, if no such
review is required, prior to the commencement of any site
work on the parcel or the issuance of any building or plumbing
permits for the project whichever occurs first.
(2) Permittee-responsible mitigation activities.
§ 225-20.2 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-20.2
202:434
(a) Regulatory flexibility. An applicant that elects to undertake
permittee-responsible mitigation activities in accordance
with the following provisions will have to comply with the
provisions of this section rather than the otherwise applicable
vernal pool provisions found in 38 M.R.S.A. Chapter 3, § 480,
DEP Rules- Chapter 335 and federal vernal pool provisions
found in the Maine General Permit. This flexibility shall not
extend to other state and federal wetland regulations or other
natural resource regulations that may apply to the
development.
(b) Acceptable permittee-responsible mitigation activities. The
applicant shall arrange for the protection of other vernal pools
and associated amphibian terrestrial post-breeding habitat
within designated Rural Areas of the community or in other
communities in accordance with the municipality's vernal
pool conservation plan and the conservation priorities of the
SAMP. The compensation activities shall be adequate to
accomplish vernal pool preservation at the programmatic level
of two pools plus 70 acres of terrestrial amphibian postbreeding
habitat conserved for each impacted pool. The
adequacy of the conservation shall be determined by the
Planning Board in consultation with the Town's designated
third-party conservation organization.
(c) Verification. An applicant that elects to undertake permitteeresponsible
mitigation activities shall include in his or her
site plan review or subdivision plan application evidence of
title, right or interest in the property or properties subject to
the proposed compensation activities, if the proposed
development requires such review and certification that the
designated third-party conservation organization is
willing to accept the conservation project. In all cases, the
designated third-party conservation organization must
certify to the Code Enforcement Officer that the permitteeresponsible
mitigation activities have occurred prior to the
commencement of any site work on the parcel or the issuance
of any building or plumbing permits for the project, whichever
occurs first.
F. Management of collected mitigation fees. All vernal pool mitigation
fees shall be accounted for in a separate financial account maintained
by the municipality. All revenue and disbursements shall be posted to
this account and an annual report of the financial status of the account
shall be provided to the Maine Department of Environmental Protection
and the Army Corps of Engineers, New England District, within 90 days
of the end of the Town's fiscal year as part of the annual report as
described in the SAMP. These funds are subject to audit by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection and the Army Corps of
Engineers, New England District.
§ 225-20.2 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-20.2
202:435
G. Use of mitigation fees. Vernal pool mitigation fees collected by the
Town shall be used only to fund vernal pool conservation projects
carried out by the designated third-party conservation
organization in accordance with the Town's approved vernal pool
conservation plan or other vernal pool conservation in accordance
with the conservation priorities set forth in the SAMP. Any third party
receiving mitigation funds shall enter into a formal agreement with the
Town spelling out its roles and responsibilities with respect to the
management and use of the funds, administrative fees, monitoring of
conservation projects, and annual reporting requirements in
accordance with the requirements of the SAMP. No funds shall be
provided to the designated third-party conservation organization
from the Vernal Pools Mitigation Fees account until such an agreement
is in place.
H. Annual reporting. The Planning Department shall prepare an annual
report on the use of the Vernal Pools Overlay District and provide the
report to the Board of Selectmen, Maine Department of Environmental
Protection, and Army Corps of Engineers within 90 days of the end of
each fiscal year covering the prior fiscal year. The report shall
document the number of times the mitigation provisions were utilized,
the permittees' and projects' names, the permit/authorization numbers
or other identifiers, the number and location of vernal pools within the
Overlay District that were involved, the conservation projects
undertaken with mitigation fees or through permittee-responsible
mitigation activities, the financial accounting for all collected
mitigation fees, and the documentation of ongoing monitoring of
properties conserved through the use of the mitigation fees.
Documentation of monitoring visits shall include photos and a report
describing the condition of each pool, the surrounding landscape, and
other relevant factors.
§ 225-20.2 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-20.2
202:436
ARTICLE VII
General Performance Standards
§ 225-21. Applicability.
The following standards shall apply to all uses, both conditional and
permitted, as appropriate in the various zoning districts.
§ 225-22. Air emissions.
No emission of dust, ash, smoke or other particle matter which can cause
damage to human or animal health, vegetation or property by reason of
concentration or toxicity, or which can cause soiling beyond the property
boundaries, is permitted which is composed of solid or liquid particles in
concentrations exceeding three-tenths (0.3) grains per cubic foot of the
conveying gas or air at the point of emission from a chimney stack. The
emission of nonfarming, odorous matter in such quantities, as determined
by the Code Enforcement Officer, to be offensive at the lot boundaries is
prohibited.
§ 225-23. Erosion control.
Erosion of soil and sedimentation of watercourses and water bodies shall be
minimized by employing the following management practices:
A. Stripping of vegetation, soil removal and regrading or other
development shall be accomplished in such a way as to minimize
erosion.
B. The duration of exposure of the disturbed area shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
C. Temporary vegetation, mulching and/or siltation fabrics shall be used to
protect exposed areas during development.
D. Permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control measures,
in accordance with the standards of the Androscoggin Valley Soil and
Water Conservation District, shall be installed prior to the completion of
construction, but no later than six months after completion of the
construction.
E. Until a disturbed area is stabilized, sediment in runoff water shall be
trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins or silt traps.
F. The top of a cut or the bottom of a fill section shall not be closer than 10
feet to an adjoining property unless otherwise mutually agreed to by
the affected landowner and Town but in no instance shall said cut or fill
exceed a three to one (3:1) slope.
G. During grading operations, methods of dust control shall be employed.
§ 225-21 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-23
202:437
§ 225-24. Explosive materials.
All flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in a
manner and location which is in compliance with appropriate rules and
regulations of the Maine Department of Public Safety and other appropriate
federal, state and local regulations.
§ 225-25. Floodplain management. [Amended 1-30-1997 STM, Art.
11; 11-18-1997 STM, Art. 12; 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 17; 5-20-2015
STM, Art. 13]
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT
Certain areas of the Town of Topsham, Maine, are subject to periodic
flooding, causing serious damages to properties within these areas. Relief
is available in the form of flood insurance as authorized by the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
Therefore, the Town of Topsham, Maine, has chosen to become a
participating community in the National Flood Insurance Program, and
agrees to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as delineated in this Floodplain
Management Ordinance.
It is the intent of the Town of Topsham, Maine, to require the recognition
and evaluation of flood hazards in all official actions relating to land use in
the floodplain areas having special flood hazards.
The Town of Topsham has the legal authority to adopt land use and control
measures to reduce future flood losses pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA,
§§ 3001 through 3007, 4352, 4401 through 4407, and Title 38 MRSA § 440.
The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid Act,
provides that areas of the Town of Topsham having a special flood hazard
be identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and that
floodplain management measures be applied in such flood hazard areas.
This section establishes a flood hazard development permit system and
review procedure for development activities in the designated flood hazard
areas of the Town of Topsham, Maine.
The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A and AE, for the Town of
Topsham, Sagadahoc County, Maine, identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a report entitled "Flood Insurance Study —
Sagadahoc County, Maine," dated July 16, 2015, with accompanying "Flood
Insurance Rate Map" dated July 16, 2015, with panels: 70F, 90F, 156F,
157F, 158F, 159F, 167F, 178F, 179F, 180F, 181F, 182F, 183F, 184F, 186F,
187F, 191F, 192F, 201F and 203F, derived from the county wide digital
Flood Insurance Rate Map entitled "Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map,
Sagadahoc County, Maine," are hereby adopted by reference and declared
to be a part of this section.
H. On slopes greater than 25% there shall be no grading or filling within
100 feet of the normal high-water mark except to protect the shoreline
and prevent erosion.
§ 225-23 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-25
202:438
ARTICLE II - PERMIT REQUIRED
Before any construction or other development (as defined in Article XIII),
including the placement of manufactured homes, begins within any areas
of special flood hazard established in Article I, a flood hazard development
permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer. This permit
shall be in addition to any other permits which may be required pursuant
to the codes and ordinances of the Town of Topsham, Maine.
ARTICLE III - APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
The application for a flood hazard development permit shall be submitted
to the Code Enforcement Officer and shall include:
A. The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and
contractor;
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction
site;
C. A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed
development, including but not limited to structures, sewage
disposal facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut and filled,
and lot dimensions;
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or
development;
E. A statement of the cost of the development, including all materials
and labor;
F. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
G. Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or
development;
[Items H-K.2 apply only to new construction and substantial
improvements.]
H. The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or to a locally
established datum in Zone A only, of the:
1. base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially
improved structures, which is determined:
a. in Zones AE, from data contained in the "Flood Insurance
Study - Sagadahoc County, Maine," as described in Article I; or
b. in Zone A:
(1) from any base flood elevation data from federal, state, or
other technical sources (such as FEMA's Quick-2 model),
including information obtained pursuant to Article VI.K.
and VIII.D.;
§ 225-25 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-25
202:439
(2) from the contour elevation extrapolated from a best fit
analysis of the floodplain boundary when overlaid onto
a USGS Quadrangle Map or other topographic map
prepared by a professional land surveyor or registered
professional engineer, if the floodplain boundary has a
significant correlation to the elevation contour line(s); or,
in the absence of all other data;
(3) to be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of
the floodplain boundary and a line perpendicular to the
shoreline which passes along the ground through the site
of the proposed building.
2. highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the
proposed building;
3. lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such
structures contain a basement; and
4. level, in the case of nonresidential structures only, to which the
structure will be floodproofed;
I. A description of an elevation reference point established on the site
of all developments for which elevation standards apply as required
in Article VI;
J. A written certification by a professional land surveyor, registered
professional engineer or architect that the base flood elevation and
grade elevations shown on the application are accurate;
K. The following certifications as required in Article VI by a registered
professional engineer or architect:
1. a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65, as amended),
to verify that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential
structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of Article III.H.4.;
Article VI.G.; and other applicable standards in Article VI;
2. a Hydraulic Openings Certificate to verify that engineered
hydraulic openings in foundation walls will meet the standards of
Article VI.L.2.a.;
3. a certified statement that bridges will meet the standards of
Article VI.M.;
4. a certified statement that containment walls will meet the
standards of Article VI.N.;
L. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of the proposed development; and
M. A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each
applicable development standard in Article VI will be met.
ARTICLE IV - APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE
A nonrefundable application fee as established under Chapter 109 of the
Town Code shall accompany the application.
§ 225-25 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-25
202:440
An additional fee may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer and/or
Board of Appeals needs the assistance of a professional engineer or other
expert. The expert's fee shall be paid in full by the applicant within 10 days
after the Town submits a bill to the applicant. Failure to pay the bill shall
constitute a violation of this section and be grounds for the issuance of a
stop work order. An expert shall not be hired by the municipality at the
expense of an applicant until the applicant has either consented to such
hiring in writing or been given an opportunity to be heard on the subject.
An applicant who is dissatisfied with a decision to hire expert assistance
may appeal that decision to the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE V - REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATIONS
The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
A. Review all applications for the flood hazard development permit
to assure that proposed developments are reasonably safe from
flooding and to determine that all pertinent requirements of Article
VI (Development Standards) have been, or will be met;
B. Utilize, in the review of all flood hazard development permit
applications:
1. the base flood and floodway data contained in the "Flood
Insurance Study - Sagadahoc County, Maine," as described in
Article I;
2. in special flood-hazard areas where base flood elevation and
floodway data are not provided, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data from federal, state, or other
technical sources, including information obtained pursuant to
Article III.H.1.b.; Article VI.K.; and Article VIII.D., in order to
administer Article VI of this section; and
3. when the community establishes a base flood elevation in a Zone
A by methods outlined in Article III.H.1.b., the community shall
submit that data to the Maine Floodplain Management Program.
C. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood
hazard areas shown on the maps described in Article I of this
section;
D. In the review of flood hazard development permit applications,
determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those
federal, state, and local government agencies from which prior
approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited
to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344;
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental
Protection, and the Maine Floodplain Management Program prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit copies of
such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
§ 225-25 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-25
202:441
F. If the application satisfies the requirements of this section, approve
the issuance of one of the following flood hazard development
permits based on the type of development:
1. A two part flood hazard development permit for elevated
structures. Part I shall authorize the applicant to build a
structure to and including the first horizontal floor only above the
base flood level. At that time the applicant shall provide the Code
Enforcement Officer with an elevation certificate completed by
a professional land surveyor, registered professional engineer or
architect based on the Part I permit construction, "as built," for
verifying compliance with the elevation requirements of Article
VI, Paragraph F, G, or H. Following review of the elevation
certificate data, which shall take place within 72 hours of receipt
of the application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue Part
II of the flood hazard development permit. Part II shall authorize
the applicant to complete the construction project; or
2. A flood hazard development permit for floodproofing of
nonresidential structures that are new construction or
substantially improved nonresidential structures that are not
being elevated but that meet the floodproofing standards of
Article VI.G.1.a., b., and c. The application for this permit shall
include a floodproofing certificate signed by a registered
professional engineer or architect; or
3. A flood hazard development permit for minor development for
all development that is not new construction or a substantial
improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or
additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value of
the structure. Minor development also includes, but is not limited
to: accessory structures as provided for in Article VI.J., mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations,
storage of equipment or materials, deposition or extraction of
materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water
supply facilities that do not involve structures; and nonstructural
projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines,
wharves and piers.
G. Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all flood hazard
development permit applications, corresponding permits issued,
and data relevant thereto, including reports of the Board of Appeals
on variances granted under the provisions of Article IX of this
section, and copies of elevation certificates, floodproofing
certificates, certificates of compliance and certifications of design
standards required under the provisions of Articles III, VI, and VII of
this section.
ARTICLE VI - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following
applicable standards:
A. All Development - All development shall:
§ 225-25 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-25
202:442
1. be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation (excluding piers and docks), collapse or lateral
movement of the development resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
3. use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage; and
4. use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during flooding conditions.
B. Water Supply - All new and replacement water supply systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into
the systems.
C. Sanitary Sewage Systems - All new and replacement sanitary
sewage systems shall be designed and located to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters.
D. On Site Waste Disposal Systems - On site waste disposal systems
shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during floods.
E. Watercourse Carrying Capacity - All development associated with
altered or relocated portions of a watercourse shall be constructed
and maintained in such a manner that no reduction occurs in the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse.
F. Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any
residential structure located within:
1. Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
to at least one foot above the base flood elevation utilizing
information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article V.B; or
Article VIII.D.
G. Nonresidential - New construction or substantial improvement of
any nonresidential structure located within:
1. Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation, or
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall:
a. be floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood
elevation so that below that elevation the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and
§ 225-25 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-25
202:443
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing design and methods of construction are
in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be
provided with the application for a flood hazard development
permit, as required by Article III.K., and shall include a record
of the elevation above mean sea level to which the structure is
floodproofed.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
to at least one foot above the base flood elevation utilizing
information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article V.B; or
Article VIII.D., or
a. together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities meet the
floodproofing standards of Article VI.G.1.
H. Manufactured Homes - New or substantially improved
manufactured homes located within:
1. Zone AE shall:
a. be elevated such that the lowest floor (including basement)
of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base
flood elevation;
b. be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured masonry
slab or foundation walls, with hydraulic openings, or may be
reinforced piers or block supports, any of which support the
manufactured home so that no weight is supported by its
wheels and axles; and
c. be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to:
(1) over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four
corners of the manufactured home, plus two additional
ties per side at intermediate points (manufactured homes
less than 50 feet long require one additional tie per side);
or by
(2) frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five additional
ties along each side at intermediate points (manufactured
homes less than 50 feet long require four additional ties
per side).
(3) all components of the anchoring system described in
Article VI.H.1.c.(1) and (2) shall be capable of carrying a
force of 4,800 pounds.
2. Zone A shall:
§ 225-25 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-25
202:444
a. be elevated on a permanent foundation, as described in Article
VI.H.1.b., such that the lowest floor (including basement) of
the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base
flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to
Article III.H.1.b.; Article V.B; or Article VIII.D.; and
b. meet the anchoring requirements of Article VI.H.1.c.
I. Recreational vehicles - Recreational vehicles located within:
1. Zones A and AE shall either:
a. be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
b. be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions; or
c. be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring
requirements for "manufactured homes" in Article VI.H.1.
J. Accessory Structures - Accessory structures, as defined in Article
XIII, located within Zones A and AE, shall be exempt from the
elevation criteria required in Article VI.F. and G. above, if all other
requirements of Article VI and all the following requirements are
met. Accessory structures shall:
1. be 500 square feet or less and have a value less than $3,000;
2. have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation;
3. have hydraulic openings, as specified in Article VI.L.2., in at least
two different walls of the accessory structure;
4. be located outside the floodway;
5. when possible, be constructed and placed on the building site so
as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters and
be placed further from the source of flooding than is the primary
structure; and
6. have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electric
service disconnect shall be located above the base flood elevation
and when possible outside the special flood hazard area.
K. Floodways -
1. In Zone AE riverine areas, encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvement, and other development,
shall not be permitted within a regulatory floodway which is
designated on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map,
unless a technical evaluation certified by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such
encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels
within the community during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
§ 225-25 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-25
202:445
2. In Zones A and AE, riverine areas for which no regulatory
floodway is designated, encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvement, and other development,
shall not be permitted in the floodway as determined in Article
VI.K.3. unless a technical evaluation certified by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined
with all other existing development and anticipated development:
a. will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community; and
b. is consistent with the technical criteria contained in FEMA's
guidelines and standards for flood risk analysis and mapping.
3. In Zones A and AE riverine areas for which no regulatory
floodway is designated, the regulatory floodway is determined to
be the channel of the river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain as
measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of
the floodplain.
L. Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor - New construction or
substantial improvement of any structure in Zones A and AE that
meets the development standards of Article VI, including the
elevation requirements of Article VI, Paragraphs F, G, or H, and is
elevated on posts, columns, piers, piles, "stilts," or crawlspaces may
be enclosed below the base flood elevation requirements, provided
all the following criteria are met or exceeded:
1. Enclosed areas are not "basements" as defined in Article XIII;
2. Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either:
a. be engineered and certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect; or
b. meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) a minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of the
enclosed area;
(2) the bottom of all openings shall be below the base flood
elevation and no higher than one foot above the lowest
grade; and
(3) openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves,
or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit
the entry and exit of floodwaters automatically without
any external influence or control such as human
intervention, including the use of electrical and other
nonautomatic mechanical means;
§ 225-25 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-25
202:446
3. The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and
4. The enclosed areas are usable solely for building access, parking
of vehicles, or storage.
M. Bridges - New construction or substantial improvement of any
bridge in Zones A and AE shall be designed such that:
1. when possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the
pilings or columns) is elevated to at least one foot above the base
flood elevation; and
2. a registered professional engineer shall certify that:
a. the structural design and methods of construction shall meet
the elevation requirements of this section and the floodway
standards of Article VI.K.; and
b. the foundation and superstructure attached thereto are
designed to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due
to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on
all structural components. Water loading values used shall be
those associated with the base flood.
N. Containment Walls - New construction or substantial improvement
of any containment wall located within:
1. Zones A and AE shall:
a. have the containment wall elevated to at least one foot above
the base flood elevation;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions
of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the
application for a flood hazard development permit, as required
by Article III.K.
O. Wharves, Piers and Docks - New construction or substantial
improvement of wharves, piers, and docks are permitted in Zones A
and AE, in and over water, if the following requirements are met:
1. wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local,
state, and federal regulations; and
2. for commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered
professional engineer shall develop or review the structural
design, specifications, and plans for the construction.
ARTICLE VII - CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no
structure which is constructed or substantially improved shall be occupied
until a certificate of compliance is issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
subject to the following provisions:
§ 225-25 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-25
202:447
A. For new construction or substantial improvement of any elevated
structure, the applicant shall submit to the Code Enforcement
Officer an elevation certificate completed by a professional land
surveyor, registered professional engineer, or architect, for
compliance with Article VI, Paragraph F, G, or H.
B. The applicant shall submit written notification to the Code
Enforcement Officer that the development is complete and complies
with the provisions of this section.
C. Within 10 working days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall:
1. review the elevation certificate and the applicant's written
notification; and
2. upon determination that the development conforms with the
provisions of this section, shall issue a certificate of compliance.
ARTICLE VIII - REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT
PROPOSALS
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed
developments that require review under other federal law, state law or
local ordinances or regulations and all projects on 5 or more disturbed
acres, or in the case of manufactured home parks divided into two or more
lots, assure that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damages.
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
D. All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and,
in a riverine floodplain, floodway data. These determinations shall
be based on engineering practices recognized by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
E. Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan
approval requiring that structures on any lot in the development
having any portion of its land within a special flood hazard area
are to be constructed in accordance with Article VI of this section.
Such requirement will be included in any deed, lease, purchase and
sale agreement, or document transferring or expressing an intent to
transfer any interest in real estate or structure, including but not
limited to a time-share interest. The condition shall clearly articulate
that the municipality may enforce any violation of the construction
requirement, and that fact shall also be included in the deed or any
other document previously described. The construction requirement
shall also be clearly stated on any map, plat, or plan to be signed
by the Planning Board or local reviewing authority as part of the
approval process.
§ 225-25 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-25
202:448
ARTICLE IX - APPEALS AND VARIANCES
The Board of Appeals of the Town of Topsham may, upon written
application of an aggrieved party, hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer
or Planning Board in the administration or enforcement of the provisions
of this section.
The Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the requirements of this
section consistent with state law and the following criteria:
A. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
B. Variances shall be granted only upon:
1. a showing of good and sufficient cause; and
2. a determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood
occur, the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, public expense, or
create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and
3. a showing that the issuance of the variance will not conflict with
other state, federal or local laws or ordinances; and
4. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
"undue hardship," which in this subsection means:
a. that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return
unless a variance is granted; and
b. that the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances
of the property and not to the general conditions in the
neighborhood; and
c. that the granting of a variance will not alter the essential
character of the locality; and
d. that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the
applicant or a prior owner.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief, and the Board of Appeals may impose such conditions
to a variance as it deems necessary.
D. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use, provided that:
1. other criteria of Article IX and Article VI.K. are met; and
2. the structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety.
§ 225-25 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-25
202:449
E. Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, or restoration of historic structures upon the
determination that:
1. the development meets the criteria of Article IX, Paragraphs A
through D above; and
2. the proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
F. Any applicant who meets the criteria of Article IX, Paragraphs A
through E, shall be notified by the Board of Appeals in writing over
the signature of the Chairman of the Board of Appeals that:
1. the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in greatly increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 per $100 of insurance
coverage;
2. such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property; and
3. the applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware
of all the risks inherent in the use of land subject to flooding,
assumes those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the
municipality against any claims filed against it that are related
to the applicant's decision to use land located in a floodplain and
that the applicant individually releases the municipality from any
claims the applicant may have against the municipality that are
related to the use of land located in a floodplain.
G. Appeal procedure for administrative and variance appeals.
1. An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board
of Appeals by an aggrieved party within thirty days after receipt
of a written decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning
Board.
2. Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer
or Planning Board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of
Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the decision
appealed from.
3. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal
within thirty-five days of its receipt of an appeal request.
4. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
5. The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals within thirty-five
days after the close of the hearing, and shall issue a written
decision on all appeals.
§ 225-25 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-25
202:450
6. The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Code Enforcement
Officer a report of all variance actions, including justification for
the granting of the variance and an authorization for the Code
Enforcement Officer to issue a flood hazard development permit,
which includes any conditions to be attached to said permit.
7. Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the
proceedings before the Board of Appeals may take an appeal to
Superior Court in accordance with state laws within forty-five
days from the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE X - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the
provisions of this section pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA § 4452.
B. The penalties contained in Title 30-A MRSA § 4452 shall apply to any
violation of this section.
C. In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer,
upon determination that a violation exists, may submit a declaration
to the Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration
requesting a denial of flood insurance. The valid declaration shall
consist of:
1. the name of the property owner and address or legal description
of the property sufficient to confirm its identity or location;
2. a clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in
violation of a cited state or local law, regulation, or ordinance;
3. a clear statement that the public body making the declaration has
authority to do so and a citation to that authority;
4. evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the
violation and the prospective denial of insurance; and
5. a clear statement that the declaration is being submitted
pursuant to Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of
1968, as amended.
ARTICLE XI - VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
If any section or provision of this section is declared by the courts to be
invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of
this section.
ARTICLE XII - CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
This section shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of
compliance with any other applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw,
permit, or provision of law. Where this section imposes a greater restriction
upon the use of land, buildings, or structures, the provisions of this section
shall control.
ARTICLE XIII - DEFINITIONS
§ 225-25 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-25
202:451
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this section
shall have the same meaning as they have at common law and to give
this section its most reasonable application. Words used in the present
tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and the
plural number includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall"
is mandatory and not discretionary.
Accessory Structure - means a small detached structure that is
incidental and subordinate to the principal structure.
Adjacent Grade - means the natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
Area of Special Flood Hazard - means the land in the floodplain
having a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year,
as specifically identified in the Flood Insurance Study cited in Article
I of this section.
Base Flood - means the flood having a one percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year, commonly called the
100-year flood.
Basement - means any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
Building - see "structure."
Certificate of Compliance - A document signed by the Code
Enforcement Officer stating that a structure is in compliance with
all of the provisions of this section.
Code Enforcement Officer - A person certified under Title 30-A
MRSA, § 4451 (including exceptions in § 4451, Paragraph 1) and
employed by a municipality to enforce all applicable comprehensive
planning and land use laws and ordinances.
Development - means any man made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or
other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - see "Flood Insurance
Rate Map."
Elevated Building - means a nonbasement building:
a. built, in the case of a building in Zone A or AE, to have the top
of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of
pilings, columns, post, piers, or "stilts"; and
b. adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity
of the building during a flood of up to one foot above the
magnitude of the base flood.
In the case of Zone A or AE, "elevated building" also includes a building
elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with hydraulic
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters,
as required in Article VI.L.
§ 225-25 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-25
202:452
Elevation Certificate - An official form (FEMA Form 81-31, as
amended) that:
a. is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management
regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program; and
b. is required for purchasing flood insurance.
Flood or Flooding - means:
a. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
b. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused
by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical
levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a
natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal
tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event
which results in flooding as defined in Paragraph a.1. of this
definition.
Flood Elevation Study - means an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - means an official map of a
community, on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has
delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study - see "flood elevation study."
Floodplain or Flood-prone Area - means any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see "flooding").
Floodplain Management - means the operation of an overall
program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood
damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness
plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations - means zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading
ordinance, and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of
police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in
any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose
of flood damage prevention and reduction.
§ 225-25 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-25
202:453
Floodproofing - means any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved
real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents.
Floodway - see "regulatory floodway."
Floodway Encroachment Lines - mean the lines marking the limits
of floodways on federal, state, and local floodplain maps.
Freeboard - means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above
a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard
tends to compensate for the many unknown factors, such as wave
action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization
of the watershed that could contribute to flood heights greater
than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions.
Functionally Dependent Use - means a use which cannot perform
its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close
proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port
facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo
or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does
not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Historic Structure - means any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic
district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior, or
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
§ 225-25 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-25
202:454
Locally Established Datum - means, for purposes of this section, an
elevation established for a specific site to which all other elevations
at the site are referenced. This elevation is generally not referenced
to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) or any other established datum and is used
in areas where mean sea level data is too far from a specific site to
be practically used.
Lowest Floor - means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure,
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's
lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render
the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements described in Article VI.L. of this section.
Manufactured Home - means a structure, transportable in one or
more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed
for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected
to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the
term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel
trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than
180 consecutive days.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - means a parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level - means, for purposes of the National Flood
Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)
of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD), or other datum,
to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
Minor Development - means all development that is not new
construction or a substantial improvement, such as repairs,
maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less than
50% of the market value of the structure. It also includes, but
is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Article
VI.J., mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling
operations, storage of equipment or materials, deposition or
extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems
or water supply facilities that do not involve structures; and
nonstructural projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing,
pipelines, wharves, and piers.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) - means the national
vertical datum, whose standard was established in 1929, which is
used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). NGVD was
based upon mean sea level in 1929 and also has been called "1929
Mean Sea Level (MSL)."
§ 225-25 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-25
202:455
New Construction - means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the initial
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) - means the national datum
whose standard was established in 1988, which is the new vertical
datum used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) for
all new Flood Insurance Rate Maps. NAVD is based upon vertical
datum used by other North American countries such as Canada and
Mexico and was established to replace NGVD because of constant
movement of the earth's crust, glacial rebound, and subsidence and
the increasing use of satellite technology.
100-Year Flood - see "base flood."
Recreational Vehicle - means a vehicle which is:
a. built on a single chassis;
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection, not including slideouts;
c. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor
vehicle; and
d. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
Regulatory Floodway -
a. means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot, and
b. when not designated on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map, it is considered to be the channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half
the width of the floodplain, as measured from the normal high
water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
Riverine - means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river
(including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard Area - see "area of special flood hazard."
§ 225-25 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-25
202:456
Start of Construction - means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial
improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the
permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement
of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/
or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual
start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, or modification of any
construction element, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
Structure - means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled
and roofed building. A gas or liquid storage tank that is principally
above ground is also a structure.
Substantial Damage - means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement - means any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the start of construction of the improvement. This term
includes structures which have incurred substantial damage,
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local Code
Enforcement Official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
b. Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation
as an historic structure, and a variance is obtained from the
community's Board of Appeals.
Variance - means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of
a floodplain management regulation.
Violation - means the failure of a structure or development to comply
with a community's floodplain management regulations.
§ 225-25 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-25
202:457
ARTICLE XIV - ABROGATION
This section repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously
enacted to comply with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L.
90-488, as amended).
§ 225-26. Lighting. [Amended 5-17-2000 STM, Art. 15]
Lighting may be provided which serves security, safety and operational
needs but which does not directly or indirectly produce deleterious effects
on abutting properties or which would impair the vision of a vehicle
operator on adjacent roadways. Lighting fixtures shall be shielded or
hooded so that the lighting elements are not exposed to normal view by
motorists, pedestrians or from adjacent dwellings. Direct or indirect
illumination shall not exceed 0.5 footcandle upon abutting residential
properties.
§ 225-27. Off-street parking and loading. [Amended 5-15-1996
STM, Art. 31; 5-21-1997 STM, Art. 34; 5-17-2000 STM, Art. 15;
5-24-2006 STM, Art. 14; 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15; 5-24-2007 STM,
Art. 16; 1-23-2008 STM, Art. 3; 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 8; 5-20-2009
STM, Art. 15; 5-17-2017 STM, Art. 10]
A. Purpose. The purposes of the off-street parking and loading regulations
are to:
(1) Ensure that off-street parking and loading facilities are provided
for new land uses and for major alterations and enlargements of
existing uses in proportion to the need for such facilities created by
each use.
(2) Establish parking standards for commercial and residential uses
consistent with need and with the feasibility of providing parking
on specific sites.
(3) Allow flexible methods of providing an adequate number of parking
and loading spaces, while creating or improving a pedestrianoriented
community, and reducing excessive paved surfaces which
lead to unnecessary heat buildup and stormwater runoff.
(4) Ensure that off-street parking and loading facilities are designed in
a manner that will ensure efficiency, protect the public safety, and,
where appropriate, insulate surrounding land uses from adverse
impacts.
B. General standards. A permitted use in any district shall not be
expanded, and no structure shall be constructed or enlarged, unless offstreet
automobile and bicycle parking spaces, on-street parking where
allowed, shared parking arrangements where allowed, or alternative
parking arrangements [NOTE: Alternative parking arrangements are
based upon an alternative parking analysis approved by the Planning
Board which consists of a parking analysis submitted by a Maine
§ 225-25 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-27
202:458
licensed engineer and outlined in § 225-27C(2).] are provided in
accordance with the following requirements.
(1) Handicapped spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of the current edition of ADA Standards for
Accessible Design.
(2) Parking spaces shall be provided as required and made available
for use prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
(3) Off-street parking and loading spaces for nonresidential uses shall
conform to the parking standards found within §§ 175-10 and
175-12.
(4) All of the performance standards for parking found within this
section [excluding § 225-27C(2)] may be waived utilizing the waiver
procedure found in § 225-27I.
C. Minimum parking requirements. Parking in accordance with the
requirements of this section shall be provided for the enlargement of a
permitted use in any district and the construction or enlargement of
any structure. Parking shall meet the minimum requirements set forth
in Table 225-27C(1) or in an alternative parking plan approved by the
Planning Board or Planning Office per staff review following the
standards found within § 225-27C(2).
(1) Minimum parking standards. Parking spaces shall be provided to
conform to the number required in the following schedule, unless
the Planning Board has approved an alternative parking plan in
accordance with § 225-27C(2).
Table 225-27C(1)
Off-Street Vehicle Parking Space Requirements
Principal Use Minimum Number of
Parking Spaces
Residential Use
Per dwelling unit 1 per unit
Group Living
Per facility 1 per 5 beds
Addiction treatment facility
Nursing home/congregate care
Public, Institutional, Civic Uses
Facility
Church 1 per 5 seats
Club 1 per 125 square feet of
assembly space
Day care/Preschool 1 per 6 children
§ 225-27 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-27
202:459
Hospital 1 per 6 inpatient beds
Medical clinic 3 per doctor
Library/museum 1 per 500 square feet
School
Primary 1 per classroom
Secondary 4 per classroom
Post-secondary 4 per classroom
Agriculture, Animal Care
Farm n/a
Veterinary 1 per 500 square feet
Kennel 1 per 500 square feet of
boarding area
Food, Beverage, Entertainment
Adult entertainment 1 per 500 square feet
Golf course 1 per 500 square feet plus
number of holes
Commercial recreation 1 per 500 square feet of
indoor area
Restaurant 1 per 6 seats
Theater 1 per 6 seats
Amusement facility/park 1 per 500 square feet of
activity area
Lodging
Campground 1 per campsite
Hotel/motel/Inn 1 per guest room + 1 per
800 square feet of assembly
space
Retail Sales and Services
Auto sales 1 per 500 square feet of
sales area
Food processing 1 per 400 square feet of
office area
Gasoline sale 1 per 500 square feet
Motor vehicle service/repair 2 per service bay
Neighborhood grocery store 1 per 400 square feet of
sales area
Professional office 1 per 400 square feet
Seasonal retail sales 1 per 500 square feet of
sales area
§ 225-27 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-27
202:460
Service business 1 per 500 square feet of
office area
Retail business 1 per 500 square feet
Industrial Uses/Warehousing
All uses noted below require 1
space per employee on maximum
working shift in addition to the
following:
Auto salvage 1 per 300 square feet of
office area
Batch plant 1 per 300 square feet of
office area
Manufacturing 1 per 300 square feet of
office area
Transmission tower na
Wholesale business 1 per 300 square feet of
office area
Warehouse 1 per 300 square feet of
office area
Self storage 1 per 300 square feet of
office area
Notes:
1. Where the calculation of the aforementioned parking
spaces results in a fractional part of a complete parking
space, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be
the next highest number.
2. The above are minimum standards, and additional parking
spaces shall be required if these prove to be inadequate.
3. Where floor space is to be used in calculating the number
of required parking stalls, gross floor space shall be used
unless otherwise noted.
4. In the LV, MV, VC, LI and R4 Zones, the first two residential
spaces may be waived in calculating the total required
parking for a mixed-use building or project.
(2) Alternative parking plan. A property owner or applicant for new or
existing development approval may prepare an alternative parking
plan in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. If the
plan is approved by the Planning Board, the standards of the plan
shall govern the provision of parking to serve the property rather
than the minimum standards of § 225-27C(1). The provisions for an
alternative parking plan as detailed in this section are applicable to
all zoning districts.
§ 225-27 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-27
202:461
(a) An alternative parking plan must conform to the following
requirements:
[1] Be prepared by a professional engineer with experience in
traffic and parking planning;
[2] Identify project uses and parking demand of each use. The
parking demand shall include an analysis of peak and offpeak
use including employees, customer/user demand,
residential demand, and service demand (i.e., deliveries).
The projection of parking demand may utilize either
common industry standards such as the most current
Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) parking
demand manual or other applicable published parking
standards that are applicable to the proposed use in a
community like Topsham, or parking demand data from
professional sources for similar uses in a community like
Topsham;
[3] Identify surrounding land uses and their associated
parking demand within 1,000 feet of the project site,
including any available public parking, and quantify
potential impacts to surrounding properties; and
[4] Include recommendations to ensure the long-term
availability of off-street parking for the proposed use and
protection from negatively impacting surrounding
properties.
(b) The Planning Board shall review the alternative parking plan to
determine if it will provide adequate parking to serve the uses
without negatively impacting surrounding properties or public
health, safety, and welfare. If the plan is approved, it shall be
established as a condition of approval for any use relying on an
alternative parking plan.
(c) If sufficient parking is not provided, the use or that portion of
the use out of compliance shall be terminated or the property
owner(s) will be subject to code enforcement in accordance
with §§ 225-65 and 225-66.
D. Methods of meeting the parking requirements. A property owner or
applicant for development approval may meet the minimum parking
requirements established in Subsection C by one or more of the
following methods:
(1) On-site exclusive use vehicle parking. Some or all of the required
parking may be met with parking spaces and ancillary facilities
meeting the requirements of § 225-27E.
(2) Shared use vehicle parking. Some or all of the required parking
may be met through the use of shared parking spaces approved by
§ 225-27 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-27
202:462
the Planning Board, except that the use of shared parking facilities
in the LV, VC, LI, BP2 and R4 Zones, and that portion of the
CC that fronts on Route 201, does not require approval from the
Planning Board. The joint use of a parking space by two or more
principal buildings or uses is permitted when the property owner or
applicant for development approval clearly demonstrates that such
use will meet the intent of these parking requirements by reason
of the variation in the times or days of maximum use by patrons,
residents, or employees of the buildings or uses.
(3) Off-site vehicle parking. Required off-street parking in all districts
shall be located on the same lot as the principal building or use
except that the Planning Board may authorize off-street parking to
be located within 1,000 feet of the lot on which the principal use is
located, measured along lines of public access, where it cannot
reasonably be provided on the same lot. Such parking areas shall
be held under the same ownership or lease as the uses served and
evidence of such control or lease shall be required. In cases in
which off-street parking is provided upon leased land, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for
such premises valid for a period longer than the duration of such
lease.
(4) Public parking. The Planning Board may permit the required offstreet
parking for all nonresidential uses to be provided by
municipal parking facilities, including public parking lots and onstreet
public parking spaces. The availability of public parking shall
be shown to be representative of the off-street parking turnover or
requirements of the particular business or use in question and shall
take into consideration the needs of other businesses with similar
demands upon such public parking spaces. No public parking
spaces shall be considered as meeting the parking requirement
unless located within 1,000 feet of the principal building as
measured along lines of public access.
(5) Motorcycle, scooter, bicycle parking. When a property in a
nonresidential use or a mixed use is required to provide more than
40 parking spaces, the property owner or applicant for
development approval may meet up to 2.5% of the required parking
spaces (or one space per 40 required spaces) with designated
motorcycle, scooter, e-bike, or bicycle parking spaces. Any parking
spaces for such use must be appropriately signed and must meet
the following minimum size:
(a) Motorcycle: four feet by eight feet.
(b) Scooter: three feet by five feet.
(c) E-bike or bicycle: two feet by five feet or space on a bike rack
or other facility for locking up the bike.
§ 225-27 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-27
202:463
E. Parking design criteria (not applicable to single-family dwellings and
duplexes).
(1) Parking areas. Parking areas with more than two parking spaces
shall be arranged so that it is not necessary for vehicles to back into
the street, except where on-street parking is allowed.
(2) Limits on vehicular entrances and exits. Each off-street parking
area shall have no more than two openings onto the same street,
each opening not to exceed 26 feet in width, except as further
limited below:
(a) Within CC, BP2, MUC, and MUC-1 Zones, only one twenty-sixfoot-
wide access drive shall be allowed per 100 feet of
frontage.
(b) Within RCU Zones, only one twenty-six-foot-wide access drive
shall be allowed per 200 feet of frontage.
(c) Within the LV, VC and R4 Zones, only one twenty-foot-wide
drive shall be allowed for lots with less than 100 feet of
frontage.
(d) Within the MV Zone, only one twenty-six-foot-wide access drive
shall be allowed for lots with less than 200 feet of frontage.
(e) Within the LI Zone, and that portion of the CC that fronts on
Route 201, only one twenty-six-foot-wide access drive shall be
allowed per 200 feet of frontage on Route 201. For lots without
frontage on Route 201, only one twenty-six-foot-wide access
drive shall be allowed per 100 feet of frontage.
(3) Entrances and exits shall be clearly identified by the use of signs,
curb cuts and landscaping.
(4) Entrance/exit design shall be reviewed by the Town of Topsham
Public Works Director, and be in conformance with the standards
found in Chapter 184 of the Town of Topsham Code, as well as
Maine Department of Transportation access management
standards for size, location, sight distance, grade separation and
possible future changes in highway alignment on any affected
public roads.
(5) Interior vehicular circulation.
(a) Major interior travel lanes shall be designed to allow
continuous and uninterrupted traffic movement.
(b) Enclosures, such as guardrails, curbs, fences, walls and
landscaping, shall be used to identify circulation patterns of
parking areas and to restrict driving movements diagonally
across parking aisles, but not to reduce visibility of oncoming
pedestrians and vehicles.
§ 225-27 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-27
202:464
(6) Parking.
(a) Access to parking stalls shall not be from major interior travel
lanes, and shall not be immediately accessible from any public
way, except where on-street parking is allowed.
(b) Parking areas shall be designed to permit each motor vehicle
to proceed to and from the parking space provided for it
without requiring the moving of any other motor vehicles,
except in the LV, MV, VC, LI, R4 and BP2 Zones where it can be
demonstrated that stacked parking arrangements are feasible.
(c) Parking aisles shall be oriented perpendicular to stores or
businesses for easy pedestrian access and visibility.
Parking
Angle
Stall
Width
Skew
Width
Stall
Depth
Aisle
Width
90° 9'0" N/A 18'5" 24'0"
60° 8'6" 10'5" 18'0" *16'0"
45° 8'6" 12'9" 17'5" *12'0"
30° 8'6" 17'0" 17'0" *12'0"
NOTE:
* One-way only.
(d) All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least five feet
from any side or rear lot line, except for the additional
requirements in buffer yards.
(e) Painted stripes shall be used to delineate parking stalls.
Stripes shall be a minimum of four inches in width. Where
double lines are used, they shall be separated a minimum of
one foot on center.
(f) In aisles utilizing diagonal parking, arrows shall be painted on
the pavement to indicate proper traffic flow.
(g) Bumpers and/or wheel stops shall be provided where overhang
of parked cars might restrict traffic flow on adjacent through
roads, restrict pedestrian movement on adjacent walkways or
damage landscape materials.
(h) Parking spaces shall be provided to conform to the number
required in Table 225-27C(1), unless it can be demonstrated
that fewer parking spaces for on-site parking can meet
anticipated demand in accordance with § 225-27C(2) or an
alternative parking plan approved by the Planning Board.
F. Additional requirements for commercial and industrial establishments.
§ 225-27 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-27
202:465
(1) Access points from a public road to commercial and industrial
operations shall be so located as to minimize traffic congestion and
to avoid generating traffic on local access streets of a primarily
residential character.
(2) All parking areas, driveways and other areas serving 10 or more
vehicles shall be paved with bituminous concrete or an equivalent
surfacing over a gravel subbase at least six inches in thickness, and
shall have appropriate bumper or wheel guards where needed.
Porous bituminous concrete and pavers designed for low-impact
development applications approved by the Planning Board are
acceptable alternatives. Gravel parking/work yard areas are
allowed subject to Planning Board approval with the specific
requirement that there will be no environmental impacts, such as
dust, erosion or the tracking of gravel onto public rights-of-way.
(3) All driveway entrances and exits shall be kept free from visual
obstructions higher than three feet above street level for a distance
of 30 (as measured along the property line) feet measured along
the intersecting driveway and street lines in order to provide
visibility for entering and leaving vehicles.
(4) Loading facilities shall be located entirely on the same lot as the
building or use to be served so that trucks, trailers and containers
shall not be located for loading or storage upon any Town way.
(5) No loading docks shall be on any street frontage. Provision for
handling all freight shall be on those sides of any buildings which
do not face on any street or proposed streets.
G. Additional requirements for Mixed Use Limited (MUL) and Mixed Use
Commercial (MUC) Zones:
(1) Driveways are not permitted within the setback areas of a lot
except for access drives which are perpendicular to the setback for
access to parking areas.
(2) All parking in the Mixed Use Limited Zone must be located to one
side and/or the rear of buildings.
(3) Side yard driveways serving commercial properties and multifamily
developments must have a planting strip and sidewalk which leads
from the parking area to the street.
(4) A sidewalk with a minimum width of six feet must be constructed
the width of the front property line of each developed property.
(a) When the Planning Board finds that a sidewalk is not
appropriate, the applicant may pay an in-lieu fee equal to the
cost of providing one upon his or her own frontage. The
calculated costs must be reviewed and approved by the
§ 225-27 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-27
202:466
Planning Board and a payment must be made prior to any
construction.
(5) A minimum six-foot wide raised or physically separated pedestrian
walk must be constructed between all parking areas and drives
which abut buildings, except in areas of drive-through facilities and
loading bays.
H. Drive-through services. Drive-through services shall comply with the
following requirements:
(1) Within the CC, RCU, MUL and MUC Zones, drive-through services
shall be placed to the side or rear of the building.
(2) Within the LV and VC Zones, drive-through services shall be placed
to the rear of the building.
(3) Within the MV, R4, BP2 and CC 196 Zones, drive-through services
are not permitted.
(4) Within the MUC-1 Zone, drive-through services shall be placed to
the side or rear of the building or, if part of a planned mixed-use
development, the location and design shall conform to the master
plan for the planned mixed-use development.
(5) Within the LI Zone, and that portion of the CC that fronts on Route
201, no drive-through services shall be placed such that more than
a single drive-through lane or window is visible from Route 201. No
drive-through services shall be placed on the side of the building
facing Route 201.
I. Waiver procedures for parking performance standards.
(1) Waiver. The Planning Board may modify or waive any of the above
performance standards when the Planning Board determines that
because of the special circumstances of the site such application
requirements or standards would not be applicable or would be an
unnecessary burden upon the applicant and not adversely affect
the abutting landowners and the general health, safety and welfare
of the Town.
(2) The approval of a waiver shall not have the effect of making null
and void the intent and purpose of this chapter. In the approval of a
waiver, the Planning Board may impose such conditions as will, in
its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards
and requirements of this chapter.
(3) Procedure for waiver. All requests for waivers shall be processed in
accordance with the following:
(a) A request for a waiver shall be submitted to the Town of
Topsham Planning Office on any business day. The request
shall be made in writing and identify a) the specific section of
§ 225-27 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-27
202:467
§ 225-28. Traffic.
§ 225-29. Landscaping. [Amended 5-15-1996 STM, Art. 31]
this chapter which is requested for waiver; b) the proposed
alternative to the requirement, when applicable; and c)
justifications for an approval of the waiver or appeal.
(b) The Planning staff shall a) schedule the request for
consideration by the Planning Board at a public meeting within
60 days of receipt and b) provide adequate notice to the
applicant and any other involved parties of the meeting at
which consideration of the request is scheduled.
(c) The Planning staff or Planning Board at their discretion shall
refer the matter to the Town Peer Review Engineer for
recommendations.
(d) The Planning Board shall, following the consideration of the
request, take such public action as it shall deem advisable.
A. Proposed developments shall provide for safe access and egress to
roads. Safe access shall be assured by providing an adequate number
and location of access/egress points with respect to sight distances,
intersections and other traffic generators. The proposed development
shall not have an unreasonable impact on local roads by degrading the
levels of service and shall assure safe interior circulation patterns by
separating vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the site. Access/
egress points shall be designed in accordance with the following safe
sight distance:
Speed Limit
(mph)
Recommended
(feet)
Minimum
(feet)
25 250 175
30 300 210
35 350 245
40 400 280
45 450 315
50 500 350
55 550 385
B. The Maine Department of Transportation may be consulted on plans
reviewed under this chapter.
C. Proposed developments shall also comply with the driveway/entrance
permit requirements contained in § 184-4 of the Topsham Code.
[Added 5-15-2002 STM, Art. 20]
§ 225-27 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-29
202:468
§ 225-30. Refuse disposal.
The applicant shall provide for the disposal of all solid and liquid wastes on
a timely basis and in an environmentally safe manner. The Planning Board
A. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state insofar as
practical, by minimizing tree removal and grade changes in keeping
with the general appearance of neighboring developed areas.
Landscaping shall be designed to soften, screen or enhance the
physical design of structures and parking areas to avoid the
encroachment of the proposed use on abutting land uses. All parking
lots shall be landscaped along the property boundaries with shrubbery,
trees and other landscape materials. In the LV, MV, VC, LI, and R4
Zones, and that portion of the CC that fronts on Rt. 201, a combination
of fencing, landscaping and grading shall be utilized to screen parking
areas and minimize the impact of vehicle head lights on adjacent
residential uses. [Amended 5-17-2000 STM, Art. 15; 5-20-2009
STM, Art. 15]
(1) No industrial or commercial buildings or uses shall be established
in, or abut, a residential district or use, unless a landscaped buffer
strip is provided to visually screen the uses. Where no natural
vegetation can be maintained or due to varying site conditions the
landscaping may consist of fences, walls, hedges or combinations
thereof. The buffering shall be sufficient to minimize the impacts of
any kind of potential use such as loading and unloading operations,
outdoor storage areas, vehicle parking, mineral extraction, waste
collection and disposal areas. Where a potential safety hazard to
small children would exist, physical screening barriers shall be
used to deter entry to such premises. The buffer areas shall be
maintained and vegetation replaced to ensure continuous yearround
screening.
(2) Landscaping must consist of full vegetative ground cover. Rock,
bark and other nonliving material may be used only for accent in
landscaped areas. All landscaped areas must be maintained in a
healthy growing condition.
(3) A minimum six-foot wide landscaped area must be installed
adjacent to all sides of commercial buildings and structures except
in the LV Zone and industrial buildings in the LI Zone. In the LV, VC,
BP2 and LI Zones, and that portion of the CC that fronts on Rt. 201,
where the front of the building directly abuts a streetscape, a sixfoot
wide landscaped area is not required. The design of the
streetscape shall meet all other applicable standards.
B. Additional requirements for the Mixed Use Limited (MUL) and Mixed
Use Commercial (MUC) Zones:
(1) There shall be a minimum thirty-five-foot setback from the top of
the bank of any stream channel or ravine area.
§ 225-29 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-30
202:469
or Zoning Board of Appeals, as appropriate, shall consider the impact of
particular industrial or chemical wastes or by-products upon the town's
facilities (in terms of volume, flammability or toxicity) and may require
the applicant to dispose of such wastes elsewhere, in conformance with
all applicable state and federal regulations. The Boards may require the
applicant to specify the amount and exact nature of all industrial or
chemical wastes to be generated by the proposed operation.
§ 225-31. Sanitary provisions.
A. On-site disposal.
(1) When a lot is not served by the public sewerage system, the
approval of building permit applications shall be subject to
presentation of a completed site evaluation form (HHE-200) which
evidences adequate soil conditions for sewage disposal. The septic
tank and leaching field system serving a structure shall be entirely
located on the same lot as that structure. The only exception to the
foregoing requirement shall be private sewage collection and
disposal systems serving subdivisions of individual single-family
homes, provided that:
(a) The subdivision is located within the jurisdiction of the
Topsham Sewer District and in an area that is scheduled to be
served by the Topsham Sewer District, as documented in its
current master plan;
(b) The subdivision includes no more than 10 lots;
(c) Each home has its own septic tank, and the private system
collects and disposes of septic tank effluent;
(d) The common leaching facility is located on a separate lot large
enough to include a standby disposal area equal in size to the
original;
(e) The design of the sewage collection and disposal system is
prepared by a registered professional engineer and is
approved by the Maine Department of Human Services and by
the Topsham Sewer District;
(f) The leaching facility is located at least 300 feet from any
private well;
(g) All lots shall have deed covenants noting the financial
obligation of the owner to pay his pro rata share of all system
maintenance, repair and replacement; and
(h) All sewer lines shall be installed within easements outside the
limits of roadways in the subdivision.
(2) No on-site sewage treatment and disposal system of greater than
2,000 gallon-per-day capacity shall be approved until the applicant
§ 225-30 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-31
202:470
has conducted a hydrogeologic analysis which demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board that:
(a) The soils are suitable for the expected volume and
characteristics of waste;
(b) Adequate land exists on the lot for complete replacement of the
leaching facility;
(c) The direction of groundwater flow and subsurface conditions
are such as not to imperil proposed on-site water supplies; and
(d) The quality of groundwater at the property line is maintained
within federal drinking water standards. The applicant shall
base hydrogeologic analysis on soil borings and monitoring
wells sufficient to document existing soil, bedrock and
groundwater conditions. As a condition of approval, the
applicant shall agree to install sufficient monitoring wells (at
least one up-gradient and two down-gradient) and to provide
for adequate sampling and analysis therefrom over an
appropriate time period to demonstrate that groundwater
quality is maintained.
B. Off-site disposal. Industrial wastewaters may be discharged to
municipal sewers only and in such quantities and/or of such quality as
to be compatible with commonly accepted municipal sewage treatment
operations. Such wastes may require pretreatment at the industrial site
in order to render them amenable to municipal treatment processes.
Pretreatment includes, but is not limited to, screening, grinding,
sedimentation, pH adjustment, surface skimming, chemical oxidation
and reduction and dilution. The disposal of industrial wastewaters by
means other than the municipal sewerage system must comply with the
laws of the State of Maine concerning water pollution. Wash water or
other process water carrying stone dust, stone particles, silt or other
mineral matter will not be accepted into the municipal system.
(1) Prohibited wastes. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any
public sanitary sewers or, except as set forth in Subsection B(1)(a)
below, to any storm drains or any part thereof:
(a) Water from roof downspouts, foundation drains or areaway
drains or any other sources of surface runoff or groundwater;
nor discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process
waters, except into storm drains.
(b) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel, oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
§ 225-31 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-31
202:471
(c) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, as determined by the
sewer district, either singular or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a
public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of
any wastewater treatment plant now or in the future to be
treating wastewater from the city; including but not limited to
those as defined in standards issued from time to time under
Section 30(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-500.
(d) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater
works, such as but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand, mud,
straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics
(including disposable diapers), wood, unground garbage, any
whole or ground seafood shells, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk
containers, etc., either whole or ground.
(e) In the case of a major contributing industry containing an
incompatible pollutant in an amount or concentration in excess
of that allowed under standards or guidelines issued from time
to time pursuant to Sections 304, 306 and/or 307 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Public Law
92-500.
(2) The Sewer District may prohibit the discharge of the following
wastes if any discharge is, in its opinion, of sufficient quantity to
create a hazard, public nuisance or deleterious effect upon
receiving waters or the waste treatment facilities:
(a) Any hexavalent, chromium, aluminum, iron, tin, fluorides,
arsenic, phenols, chlorides or sulfates. In addition, those
metals specified in 4 CFR 433.17 shall not exceed the
concentrations therein listed.
Metal In
Milligrams Per
Liter
Maximum For
Any One Day
Average of Daily
Values For 30
Consecutive Days
Shall Not Exceed
Cadmium 0.064 0.016
Chromium 2.87 0.80
Copper 3.72 1.09
Lead 0.67 0.23
Nickel 3.51 1.26
Silver 0.44 0.13
§ 225-31 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-31
202:472
Metal In
Milligrams Per
Liter
Maximum For
Any One Day
Average of Daily
Values For 30
Consecutive Days
Shall Not Exceed
Zinc 0.00 0.00
Mercury 0.00 0.00
(b) Any reducing substances having an immediate chlorine
demand exceeding 30.0 mg/l.
(c) Any radioactive wastes greater than allowable releases as
specified by current United States Bureau of Standards
Handbooks dealing with the handling and release of
radioactivity.
(d) Any waters or wastes containing any combination of solids,
liquids or gases listed in this section but at concentrations not
prohibited when such commingle waters or wastes shall yield a
concentration of contamination which the Sewer District
deems detrimental to the wastewater works or wastewater
treatment processes.
(e) Any waters or wastes which cause corrosive structural damage
to the sewers or treatment works, including but not limited to
any waste having a concentration of caustic alkalinity
exceeding one thousand (1,000) mg/l, or all wastes with a pH
lower than five point zero (5.0).
(f) Any liquid or vapor other than water having a temperature
higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150° F.)
[sixty-five degrees Celsius (65° C.)].
(g) Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l,
or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous
at temperatures between thirty-two degrees and one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (32° and 150° F.) [zero degrees and
sixty-five degrees Celsius (0 and 65° C.)].
(h) Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids exceeding a
concentration of 400 mg/l or dissolved solids of such character
and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle such materials at the wastewater treatment plant or in
the public wastewater works.
(i) Any waters or wastes having any color which is not removable
in the existing treatment plant processes.
(j) Any waters or wastes having an average BOD in excess of 400
mg/l.
§ 225-31 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-31
202:473
§ 225-32. Setbacks and screening.
§ 225-33. Signs. [Amended 5-20-1992 ATM, Art. 18; 10-3-1994 STM,
Art. 9; 5-18-1995 STM, Art. 23; 5-15-1996 STM, Art. 31; 5-21-1997
STM, Art. 35; 5-21-1997 STM, Art. 36; 5-21-1997 STM, Art. 37;
5-21-1997 STM, Art. 38; 11-18-1997 STM, Art. 5; 5-20-1998 STM,
Art. 33; 5-20-1998 STM, Art. 34; 5-17-2000 STM, Art. 15; 5-24-2007
STM, Art. 15; 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 16; 5-21-2008 STM, Art. 10;
5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15; 11-30-2011 STM, Art. 4; 5-16-2012 STM,
Art. 10]
(k) Any waters or wastes having an average COD in excess of 600
mg/l.
(3) Discharge of prohibited waste. If any waters or wastes are
discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewer,
which waters or wastes contain any of the substance or possess the
characteristics listed in Subsection B(1) or (2) above, the Sewer
District may:
(a) Reject the wastes; or
(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge
to the public sewer; and/or
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge (flow
equalization); and/or
(d) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling treating
the wastes.
A. Exposed storage areas, raw materials for the production of finished
items for sale, exposed machinery, sand and gravel extraction
operations and areas used for the storage or collection of discarded
automobiles, auto parts, metals or any other articles of salvage or
refuse shall have sufficient setbacks and screening (such as a stockade
fence or a dense evergreen hedge six feet or more in height) to provide
a visual buffer sufficient to minimize their impact on other land uses
and properties in the area. In the LI Zone, and that portion of the CC
that fronts on Rt. 201, this vegetated buffer shall be at least 25 feet
wide. [Amended 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
B. Where a potential safety hazard to children would be likely to arise,
physical screening sufficient to deter small children from entering the
premises shall be provided and maintained in good condition.
A. Purpose. The purposes of these sign regulations are to encourage the
effective use of signs as a means of communication within the Town; to
maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment of the Town and the
Town's ability to attract economic development; to improve pedestrian,
bike and vehicular safety; and to minimize possible adverse effects of
signs on nearby public and private property.
§ 225-31 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-33
202:474
B. General requirements.
(1) No signs, other than those not requiring permits in the
Consolidated Sign Table,65 shall be erected prior to obtaining a
permit.
(2) All signs must be stationary and permanently installed except
where exempted by this section.
(3) 66All lighting shall be hooded or shielded to prevent direct
illumination of public streets or abutting properties and shall be
designed and installed to minimize lighting the sky.
(4) Projecting signs shall maintain height clearance of ten (10) feet
above ground level and shall not extend more than four feet from
the building surface.
(5) No sign shall be installed within ten (10) feet of the travelway,
unless the applicant presents information that demonstrates to the
Codes Enforcement Officer that the sign doesn't impede safe-sight
lines.
(6) Signs may be located within the setback area (the area between the
property line and the setback line) of the property in which they are
erected, but no sign shall overhang any property line, except where
projecting signs are permitted to overhang the sidewalk.
(7) All signs shall be located below the ridgeline of the building.
(8) Wall signs may only be installed in the signable area of the facade.
(9) Only one post or monument sign is permitted per building, lot or
project, except as provided in Subsection H below. [Amended
5-17-2017 STM, Art. 12]
(10) For purposes of calculating total sign area, only one face of post
signs shall be included in the calculation. If a sign has more than
two (2) faces, or if the 2 faces are not parallel to each other, all
sides shall be calculated.
(11)No signage, other than approved traffic and directional signs, shall
be placed within traffic islands.
(12) Limits on the number or size, or the method of measuring, post
signs shall also apply to monument signs.
(13) Banners. Only one banner is allowed per business, for a single
period not to exceed 90 days, and shall be included in the total
square footage of signage allowed. The maximum size of a banner
65.Editor's Note: The Consolidated Sign Table is included in Subsection L of this section.
66.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), regarding signs comprised of intermittent light,
was repealed 5-15-2019 STM, Art. 9. This article also redesignated former Subsection B(4)
through (14) as Subsection B(3) through (13), respectively.
§ 225-33 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-33
202:475
is included in the Consolidated Sign Table.67 In the Commercial
Sign District, banners used to announce the availability of leasable
space shall not be subject to the single 90-day restriction.
C. Prohibited signs:
(1) Any sign comprised of, or illuminated by, intermittent light, except
digital public service messages, such as time, date, temperature,
public notice signs displayed in accordance with Subsection J,
public safety signs, or as otherwise noted. [Amended 5-15-2019
STM, Art. 9]
(2) Movable signs.
(3) Off-premises signs, except as allowed by the State of Maine
through its off premises business direction signs.
(4) Temporary signs, unless otherwise permitted.
(5) Portable signs.
(6) Signs located in, on, or projecting over any Town-owned or -leased
property, or over public rights-of-way, with the exception of signs
authorized by the Topsham Selectman or their designee or as
otherwise permitted by this chapter. [Added 5-17-2017 STM,
Art. 12]
(7) Noncommercial signs located in, on, or projecting over any Townowned
or -leased property, or over public rights-of-way, with the
exception of signs authorized by the Topsham Board of Selectmen
(in accordance with guidelines adopted by the Board) or its
designee or as otherwise permitted by this chapter. [Added
5-17-2017 STM, Art. 12]
D. Exempt signs: signs that are not counted toward the total square
footage allowed to a business in a particular zoning district, but are
otherwise exempt from the general standards of this section, unless
otherwise noted. The following is a list of signs that shall be exempt
from the general standards of this section:
(1) Information signs: signs which provide direction or instruction and
are located entirely on the property to which they pertain, such as
restroom, public telephone, parking entrances, and exit signs.
Information signs may not include the name of the business or the
business logo.
(2) Public safety signs.
(3) Real estate signs. Only one real estate sign per lot or parcel is
permitted, to be removed upon sale or lease.
67.Editor's Note: The Consolidated Sign Table is included in Subsection L of this section.
§ 225-33 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-33
202:476
(4) (Reserved)68
(5) (Reserved)69
(6) (Reserved)70
(7) (Reserved)71
(8) (Reserved)72
(9) (Reserved)73
(10) Project/contractor signs: a single temporary sign advertising a
builder(s), engineer(s), designer(s), or similar individual(s) who is
(are) responsible for the development under construction. One
contractor sign is permitted per development, with a maximum
height of eight feet above grade. The sign may contain multiple
listings of those involved with the project and must be removed at
the issuance of the last certificate of occupancy for such
development, or when the project is complete as determined by the
Codes Enforcement Officer.
(11) One development sign is permitted per project entrance, with a
maximum height of eight feet above grade.
(12) Public notice sign. [Amended 5-15-2019 STM by Art. 9]
(13) A single sandwich board sign may be placed in front of businesses
daily but shall be removed nightly.
E. Official business directional signs: signs indicating to the traveling
public the distance to public accommodations, facilities or commercial
services which are located within the Town of Topsham. Such signs
shall meet the requirements of the Maine Department of Transportation
regulations for the installation and location of official business
directional signs. No official business directional sign shall be
permitted on any residential street that is not a collector street as
defined in § 185-1 of the Topsham Code of Ordinances. Any existing
official business directional sign that is located on a residential street as
of May 21, 2008, shall not be permitted to be renewed upon expiration
of its current MDOT permit and shall be removed. MDOT sign
applications shall be approved by the Codes Enforcement Officer. Such
68.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(4), Flags, was repealed 5-17-2017 STM, Art. 12.
69.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(5), Symbols or insignias, was repealed 5-17-2017
STM, Art. 12.
70.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(6), House numbers, was repealed 5-17-2017 STM, Art.
12.
71.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(7), Political/political campaign signs, was repealed
5-17-2017 STM, Art. 12.
72.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(8), Service club signs, was repealed 5-17-2017 STM,
Art. 12.
73.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(9), Community, charitable and nonprofit fund-raising
event signs, was repealed 5-17-2017 STM, Art. 12.
§ 225-33 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-33
202:477
signs shall not exceed 12 inches by 48 inches and shall be green in color
with white letters. A colored logo is permitted only within the elevenby-
eleven area designated by MDOT regulations. The total number of
such signs per business shall be limited to four.
F. Nonconformance.
(1) The eventual elimination of nonconforming signs is an objective of
the Town. Such elimination of nonconforming signs shall be
brought about over a period of time and in such a manner as to
avoid the invasion of vested rights of the sign's owner and the
infliction of unnecessary hardship.
(2) A nonconforming sign is an otherwise legally erected sign that does
not comply with the provisions of § 225-33, including location,
structure, size, dimension, setback, or type, or any other provision
of this section upon adoption by Town Meeting.
(3) Nonconforming signs may be retained and maintained until the
earlier of any of the following criteria are met:
(a) No later than two (2) years following the close of a business
that uses a nonconforming sign to advertise its name, location
or any other feature of the business, unless a new business
occupies the building before the end the two (2) year period;
(b) Upon the change of use of a structure utilizing a
nonconforming sign, when such change in use requires a site
plan review by the Planning Board;
(c) Changes made to the braces, poles or any portion of the system
used to affix the sign to the ground or wall or structure.
(d) Upon the sale of the property when the use on the property is
also nonconforming at the time of the sale which results in any
change in signage.
(e) No later than ten years following the adoption of a sign
ordinance amendment that results in a sign being made
nonconforming;
(4) Temporary and/or portable signs shall be removed within 60 days
of the adoption of this section.
(5) Exceptions:
(a) Off-premises signs that do not pose a hazard to the travelling
public (either pedestrian or vehicular) may continue in that
location, until there is a change to the braces, uprights, poles
or any portion of the system used to affix the sign to the
ground, wall or structure.
§ 225-33 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-33
202:478
(b) Any signs that have been determined by the Topsham Historic
Commission, the State Historic Preservation Office, or the
National Park Service to be of historic value.
(6) Maintenance.
(a) Nonconforming signs may be maintained, given new lettering,
colors or logos, or otherwise altered, as long as there is no
change to the size or the location of the sign, changes to the
dimensions of the sign, or as long as the braces, uprights, poles
or any portion of the system used to affix the sign to the
ground, wall or structure is not changed.
G. Maintenance and removal.
(1) Every sign shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good
structural condition by the timely replacement of defective parts,
periodic cleaning and painting when necessary. The construction,
alteration, maintenance and repair of all signs shall conform to all
applicable building and electrical codes adopted by the Town.
(2) The Codes Enforcement Officer shall cause to be removed any sign
that endangers public safety, including signs which are materially,
electrically or structurally defective, or signs for which no permit
has been issued.
H. Planned residential and planned commercial developments. Signs for
planned residential or planned commercial developments, or signs for
shopping centers, office/business or industrial parks shall be governed
by the following criteria:
(1) One directory sign for each project shall be allowed at each major
entrance of the project from a public way, subject to the following
criteria:
(a) Directory signs for developments with leasable floor space of
10,000 to 100,000 square feet shall not exceed 100 square feet
per face.
(b) Directory signs for developments with leasable space of more
than 101,001 square feet shall not exceed 200 square feet per
face.
(c) Directory signs shall not be calculated as part the sign
allowance in the Consolidated Sign Table.74
(2) A master plan for signage shall be reviewed by the Topsham
Planning Board during the site plan review process. The master
plan for signage shall include the following:
74.Editor's Note: The Consolidated Sign Table is included in Subsection L of this section.
§ 225-33 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-33
202:479
(a) A plot plan of the lot(s) at a scale of not more than one inch
equals 100 feet.
(b) Computation of the maximum total sign area, the maximum
area for individual signs, the height of signs and the number of
post signs allowed on the lot(s) under this chapter.
(c) The proposed location of present and future signs.
(d) The location of buildings, parking lots, driveways and
landscaped areas.
I. Marquee signs. All marquee signs shall be permanently attached to the
structure in which the theater is located or placed on the same lot as
the theater is located. The marquee sign area is in addition to the sign
area permitted for other signs, except that any area of a marquee sign
which is used for the advertisement of the theater or other business
shall be included in the computation of the maximum sign area per
building. One marquee sign per building shall be permitted.
J. Electronic message center signs. Electronic message center (EMC)
signs are permitted as indicated in the Consolidated Sign Table,75 but
are subject to the following additional standards:
(1) Except for time and temperature information, changeable signs
may change no more often than once per minute.
(2) Time/date/temperature information must be displayed for a
minimum of 3 seconds each time it is shown.
(3) When changing messages, the message must change instantly and
may not include any phasing, rolling, scrolling, flashing or blending
of messages.
(4) Streaming of information or video animation is not permitted.
(5) While being displayed, the message shall remain fixed, with no
flashing, phasing, rolling, scrolling or blending of information.
(6) All such signs shall be designed, and operated, to be in
conformance to § 225-26, Lighting, and § 175-9 at all times.
(7) The location, directional expression, and illumination must not be
functionally visible from Interstate 295.
(8) When used as gas station pricing signs, they shall be limited to a
single sign of no more than 8 square feet at any facility that sells
gasoline, including neighborhood grocery stores.
K. Sign district regulations. For the purposes of this ordinance, signs are
regulated by district type. The Town is divided into the following Sign
Districts:
75.Editor's Note: The Consolidated Sign Table is included in Subsection L of this section.
§ 225-33 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-33
202:480
Residential: This includes those portions of Town that are zoned
residential, including the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zoning Districts, and
that portion of the MUL Zoning District that does not front on Route
196.
Commercial: This includes those portions of Town that are zoned for
significant commercial, retail, and business development. This
designation includes the MUC and MUC-1 Zoning Districts.
Highway Commercial: This includes those portions of Town that are
zoned for commercial, business, and retail uses, but to a lesser degree
than the Commercial District. This designation includes the CC-196,
BP and CC Zoning Districts.
Lower Village: This includes those portions of Town that are zoned for
commercial, retail, or business uses but are subject to Main Street
design guidelines, and includes the LV Zoning District.
Village Center: This includes those portions of Town that are zoned
for commercial, retail or business uses but are subject to Main Street
design guidelines, and includes the VC Zoning District.
Middle Village: This includes the area of Town that represents the
historic core of Topsham, which consists largely of a mix of residential
and small-scale businesses. This designation includes the MV Zoning
District.
Highway Corridor: This includes those areas of Town that are zoned
commercial, primarily along major roads leading to Town, including
the RCU, BP-2, LI, and I Zoning Districts, and that portion of the MUL
Zoning District that fronts on Route 196.
L. Sign types and sizes by sign district. [Amended 5-17-2017 STM, Art.
12; 5-15-2019 STM, Art. 9]
Consolidated Sign Table
X Not permitted
# Indicates size allowed with permit
#-A Indicates size allowed with no permit required
P Indicates permit is required; standards are in Subsections G and H
Sign District
Residential2,3Commercial
Highway
Commercial LV3 VC4 MV3
Highway
Corridor
Maximum
Signage1
50 200 175 150 175 50 175
Sign Type
Post 62 755 605 406 506 86,7,8 755
§ 225-33 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-33
202:481
Sign District
Residential2,3Commercial
Highway
Commercial LV3 VC4 MV3
Highway
Corridor
Wall X2 40%9 40%9 20%9 40%9 20%9 40%9
Roof X2 50 50 X X X 50
Banner X 50 50 50 50 X 50
Monument X 75 60 40 50 86,7 75
Public notice 50-A 75-A 75-A 75-A 75-A 50-A 75-A
Information X 3-A 3-A 2-A 3-A 2-A 3-A
Canopy X 32 32 20 32 X 32
Projecting X 32 32 32 32 X 32
Marquee X 50 50 50 50 X 50
Multi-tenant X 10 10 10 10 7 10
Portable X X X X X X X
Real estate 16-A 32-A11 32-A 16-A 16-A 16-A 32-A
Off-premises
business
X 4 4 4 4 4 4
Temporary X X X X X X X
Sandwich
board
X 6 X 6 X 6 X
Arcade X 8 8 X X X 8
Home
occupation
4 X 4 4 4 4 4
Movable X X X X X X X
Development 32 32 32 X 32 X 32
Project/
contractor
16 32 32 16 16 16 32
Project
directory
X P P P P P P
EMC X2,13 7514 X13 X X X X13
Seasonal
retail
16 32 32 16 16 16 32
§ 225-33 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-33
202:482
§ 225-34. Stormwater management. [Amended 5-17-2000 STM, Art.
15; 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15; 5-17-2017 STM, Art. 13]
NOTES:
1 Maximum square feet of signage per business, except in the R and MV Districts, which is
per parcel.
2 Neighborhood grocery stores in residential districts shall be allowed one post/monument
sign not to exceed 40 square feet, and total signage of no more than 150 square feet.
Canopy signs shall be limited to 32 square feet of total signage. Roof signs shall be no
higher than 25 feet above finished grade, measured to the top of the sign. No internally
illuminated signs are permitted. Only gasoline prices may be changeable.
3 No internally illuminated signs are permitted, except public notice signs displayed in
accordance with Subsection J.
4 No internally illuminated signs are permitted, except on those lots that abut Route 196 and
public notice signs displayed in accordance with Subsection J.
5 Post signs shall not exceed 25 feet in height from original grade to top of sign.
6 Signs shall not exceed 15 feet in height from original grade to top of sign.
7 Eight square feet of post signage per business, up to a maximum of 18 square feet of
signage for the property, all on a single post or monument.
8 Post signs shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height from original grade to top of sign.
9 Percent of signable area of the facade.
10 No more than 10 square feet per tenant.
11 Up to 200 square feet when attached to a building.
12 (Reserved)
13 EMCs are allowed as gasoline pricing signs only.
14 Within the MUC Zoning District only.
A. Intent. Recognizing that development activity increases the rate and
volume of stormwater runoff by reducing the infiltrative capacity of
soils and that stormwater runoff increases the potential of flooding and
adds pollution to water resources, and increases erosion and
sedimentation, the purpose of this section is to encourage the
management of stormwater on the land at the site of development and,
to the extent practical, to do so through the use of the natural features
of the site. This policy will preserve the natural drainage system,
valuable topsoil, water quality, and wildlife habitat during and after
construction through infiltration, detention, or retention of water
falling on the site. The management of stormwater shall not constitute a
threat to public health, safety and welfare and shall not degrade the
quality of Topsham's surface water or groundwater below state or Town
standards. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner and/or
developer to adequately provide for the necessary control of
stormwater runoff and erosion.
§ 225-33 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-34
202:483
B. Applicable standards for stormwater management. The standards for
stormwater management vary depending on the type of project and the
amount of disturbed area as follows:
(1) Post-construction stormwater management plan. Subdivisions and
activities subject to site plan review that involve more than one
acre of disturbed area must meet the requirements for a postconstruction
stormwater management plan.
(2) Municipal stormwater management plan. Subdivisions and
activities subject to site plan review by the Planning Board that are
not subject to the requirements for a post-construction stormwater
management plan must meet the requirements for a municipal
stormwater management plan.
C. Standards for a post-construction stormwater management plan.
(1) Design standard.
The applicant shall make adequate provision for the management
of the quantity and quality of all stormwater generated by the
activity through a post-construction stormwater management plan.
This post-construction stormwater management plan shall be
designed to meet the appropriate standards and requirements
based on the project's scale for a stormwater permit from the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) under its
Chapter 500 Stormwater Management Rules, as may be amended
from time to time (DEP Chapter 500 Rules). The Town's approval
shall be under its municipal capacity to approve stormwater plans
that are exempt from DEP review under the Town's delegated
review authority.
In addition, projects located in the watershed of an urban impaired
stream must comply with the requirements for chlorides
management set forth in Subsection E, Standards for chlorides
management.
(2) Additional requirements.
(a) The applicant may meet the standards above either on-site or
off-site, but where off-site facilities are used, the applicant
must submit to the Town Planner documentation approved as
to legal sufficiency by the Town's legal counsel that the
applicant has a sufficient property interest in the property
where the off-site facilities are located, by perpetual easement
or other appropriate legal instrument, to ensure that the
facilities will be able to provide post-construction stormwater
management for the project and that the property will not be
altered in a way that interferes with the off-site facilities.
(b) Where the applicant proposes to retain ownership of the
stormwater management facilities shown in its stormwater
§ 225-34 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-34
202:484
management plan, the applicant shall submit to the Town
Planner documentation, approved as to legal sufficiency by the
Town's legal counsel, that the applicant, his/her/its successors,
heirs and assigns, shall have the legal obligation to operate,
repair, maintain and replace the stormwater management
facilities. Applications requiring stormwater management
facilities that will not be dedicated to the Town shall enter into
a drainage maintenance agreement with the Town in a form
acceptable to the Town's legal counsel.
(c) Whenever elements of the stormwater management facilities
are not within the right-of-way of a public street and the
facilities will not be offered to the Town for acceptance as
public facilities, the Planning Board may require that perpetual
easements be provided to the Town allowing access for
maintenance, repair, replacement and improvement of the
stormwater management facilities in accordance with the
approved drainage maintenance agreement. If an offer of
dedication is proposed, the applicant shall be responsible for
the maintenance of these stormwater management facilities
until such time (if ever) as they are accepted by the Town.
(d) In addition to any other applicable requirements of this
chapter, any activity which would have required a stormwater
management permit from the DEP under 38 M.R.S.A. § 420-D
but that is subject to the Town's delegated review authority
shall comply with the rules adopted by DEP under 38 M.R.S.A.
§ 420-D(1), as the same may be amended from time to time,
and the applicant shall document such compliance to the
Planning Board. Where the standards or other provisions of
such stormwater rules conflict with Town ordinances, the
stricter (more protective) standard shall apply.
(e) At the time of application, the applicant shall notify the
Director of Public Works if its stormwater management plan
includes any stormwater BMP(s) that will discharge to the
Town's stormwater system and shall include in this notification
a listing of which stormwater BMP(s) will so discharge.
(f) Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the
project, the applicant must submit an inspection report to the
Code Enforcement Officer documenting that the stormwater
facilities have been installed and are functioning as designed
and approved and are fully operational. This inspection report
must be prepared by a qualified third party inspector as
defined in Subsection C(3)(e).
(3) Requirement for compliance. Any person owning, leasing or having
control over stormwater management facilities required by a postconstruction
stormwater management plan shall demonstrate
compliance with that plan as follows:
§ 225-34 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-34
202:485
(a) That person shall, at least annually, inspect, clean and maintain
the stormwater management facilities, including, but not
limited to, any parking areas, catch basins, drainage swales,
detention basins and ponds, pipes and related structures, in
accordance with all Town and state inspection, cleaning and
maintenance requirements of the approved post-construction
stormwater management plan.
(b) That person shall repair, or cause to be repaired, any
deficiencies found during inspection of the stormwater
management facilities.
(c) That person shall, on or by July 15 of every other year
commencing with the second year following occupancy,
provide a completed and signed certification to the Director of
Public Works in a form provided by that Department, certifying
that the person has inspected, cleaned and maintained the
stormwater management facilities, describing any deficiencies
found during inspection of the stormwater management
facilities and certifying that the person has repaired any
deficiencies in the stormwater management facilities noted
during the annual inspection.
(d) The required inspection(s) must be conducted by a qualified
third-party inspector employed or engaged by the responsible
person if the property would have been subject to a DEP
stormwater permit. The third-party inspector shall perform an
initial inspection to determine the status of the stormwater
management facilities. If the initial inspection identifies any
deficiencies with the facilities, the same third-party inspector
shall reinspect the facilities after they have been maintained or
repaired to determine if they are performing as intended.
(e) The qualified third-party inspector must meet both of the
following standards:
[1] The inspector must not have any ownership or financial
interest in the property being inspected nor be an
employee or partner of any entity having an ownership or
financial interest in the property; and
[2] The inspector must be on the list of approved third-party
inspectors maintained by the Planning and Development
Department. An individual may request to be included on
the list by submitting documentation of his/her
qualifications to the Planning Director. The Director shall
approve third-party inspectors only if they meet the
following criteria:
[a] Have a college degree in an environmental science or
civil engineering, or comparable expertise;
§ 225-34 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-34
202:486
[b] Have a practical knowledge of stormwater hydrology
and stormwater management techniques, including
the maintenance requirements for stormwater
management facilities; and
[c] Have the ability to determine if stormwater facilities
are performing as intended.
(f) In order to determine compliance with this section and with
the post-construction stormwater management plan, the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee may enter upon a
property at reasonable hours and after making a good faith
effort to contact the owner, occupant or agent to inspect the
stormwater management facilities. Entry into a building shall
only be after actual notice to the owner, occupant or agent.
(4) Submission requirements.
A post-construction stormwater management plan shall conform
to the applicable submission requirements of the DEP Chapter
500 Rules. If the project is located within the watershed of an
urban impaired stream, the submission must include a chlorides
management plan as set forth in Subsection E.
The applicant shall provide the Town with an electronic version
of the post-construction stormwater management plan in a format
that is compatible with the Town's requirements. Following
completion of construction, the applicant shall provide the
Department of Planning and Development with an updated version
of the plan showing the stormwater management facilities as
actually constructed.
(5) Relationship to other provisions. Post-construction stormwater
management plans are subject to the requirements of Subsection
F, Standards for easements or rights-of-way; Subsection G,
Modification of the standards and requirements; and Subsection H,
Discharge of stormwater.
D. Standards for a municipal stormwater management plan.
(1) Design standard.
The applicant shall make adequate provision for the management
of the quantity and quality of all stormwater generated by the
activity through a municipal stormwater management plan. This
municipal stormwater management plan shall be designed to meet
the basic standard of DEP Chapter 500 Rules and the runoff from
the site LID design practices and techniques determined by the
Planning Board to be appropriate to the site or other stormwater
management provisions. The treatment techniques used may
include those set forth in the DEP Stormwater Manual, Volume
III-BMPs Technical Design Manual, and/or any other LID practices
§ 225-34 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-34
202:487
adopted by the Planning Board. The Planning Board may approve
the use of other treatment techniques on a case-by-case basis
based upon the recommendation of the Director of the Department
of Planning and Development that the proposed treatment
techniques are appropriate for the site and will provide at least
the same level of treatment as the specified techniques. Provisions
must be made in the stormwater management plan for all
stormwater treatment techniques to be maintained in perpetuity.
In addition, projects located in the watershed of an urban impaired
stream must comply with the requirements for chlorides
management set forth in Subsection E, Standards for chlorides
management.
(2) Additional requirements.
(a) The applicant may meet the standards above either on-site or
off-site, but where off-site facilities are used, the applicant
must submit to the Planning Director documentation approved
as to legal sufficiency by the Town's legal counsel that the
applicant has a sufficient property interest in the property
where the off-site facilities are located, by perpetual easement
or other appropriate legal instrument, to ensure that the
facilities will be able to provide post-construction stormwater
management for the project and that the property will not be
altered in a way that interferes with the off-site facilities.
(b) Where the applicant proposes to retain ownership of the
stormwater management facilities shown in its stormwater
management plan, the applicant shall submit to the Planning
Director documentation, approved as to legal sufficiency by the
Town's legal counsel, that the applicant, his/her/its successors,
heirs and assigns, shall have the legal obligation to operate,
repair, maintain and replace the stormwater management
facilities. Applications requiring stormwater management
facilities that will not be dedicated to the Town shall enter into
a drainage maintenance agreement with the Town in a form
acceptable to the Town's legal counsel.
(c) Whenever elements of the stormwater management facilities
are not within the right-of-way of a public street and the
facilities will not be offered to the Town for acceptance as
public facilities, the Planning Board may require that perpetual
easements be provided to the Town allowing access for
maintenance, repair, replacement and improvement of the
stormwater management facilities in accordance with the
approved drainage maintenance agreement. If an offer of
dedication is proposed, the applicant shall be responsible for
the maintenance of these stormwater management facilities
until such time (if ever) as they are accepted by the Town.
§ 225-34 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-34
202:488
(d) In addition to any other applicable requirements of this
chapter, any activity which would require a stormwater
management permit from the DEP under 38 M.R.S.A. § 420-D
shall comply with the rules adopted by DEP under 38 M.R.S.A.
§ 420-D(1), as the same may be amended from time to time,
and the applicant shall document such compliance to the
Planning Board. Where the standards or other provisions of
such stormwater rules conflict with Town ordinances, the
stricter (more protective) standard shall apply.
(e) At the time of application, the applicant shall notify the
Director of Public Works if its stormwater management plan
includes any stormwater BMP(s) that will discharge to the
Town's stormwater system and shall include in this notification
a listing of which stormwater BMP(s) will so discharge.
(f) If the municipal stormwater management plan includes the use
of proprietary water quality treatment devices, the applicant
shall provide documentation of how the proprietary devices
will be maintained, including what firm will be responsible and
frequency of maintenance.
(3) Requirement for compliance. Any person owning, leasing or having
control over stormwater management facilities required by a
municipal stormwater management plan shall be responsible for
maintaining all stormwater management facilities and BMPs so
they function as designed and approved.
(4) Submission requirements.
A general stormwater management plan shall conform to the
applicable submission requirements for basic standards
submissions of the DEP Chapter 500 Rules. If the project is located
within the watershed of an urban impaired stream, the submission
must include a chlorides management plan as set forth in
Subsection E.
The applicant shall provide the Town with an electronic version
of the municipal stormwater management plan in a format that is
compatible with the Town's requirements. Following completion of
construction, the applicant shall provide the Town with an updated
version of the plan showing the stormwater management facilities
as actually constructed.
(5) Relationship to other provisions. Municipal stormwater
management plans are subject to the requirements of Subsection
F, Standards for easements or rights-of-way; Subsection G,
Modification of the standards and requirements; and Subsection H,
Discharge of stormwater.
E. Standards for chlorides management. Any project located within the
watershed of an urban impaired stream that is subject to site plan
§ 225-34 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-34
202:489
review by the Planning Board under Chapter 175 or subdivision review
under Chapter 191 must prepare a chlorides management plan (CMP)
in accordance with the provisions of this section. This requirement
applies to any amendment to a previously approved site plan that
requires Planning Board approval and any amendment to a previously
approved subdivision plan that increases the number of lots.
(1) Purpose. The CMP requirement is intended to minimize the impact
of chlorides from snow and ice control activities on the impaired
stream by limiting the amount of impervious surface that needs to
be treated and by managing snow and ice control facilities and
operations.
(2) Contents of the chlorides management plan. The CMP must
address the following areas:
(a) How the project will be designed and constructed to minimize
the need for the use of chlorides for snow and ice control. The
plan should address how the site layout and design minimizes
the amount of impervious surface and how the need for snow
and ice control treatments will be reduced. This can include
approaches such as limiting the area of access drives, parking,
and service areas, providing areas that will be designated for
limited or no snow and ice control treatment, and the use of
alternative provisions for snow and ice control such as covered
or heated walkways that reduce the need for the use of
chlorides.
(b) If chlorides for ice and snow removal will be stored on-site,
how the project will be designed and constructed to manage
the stormwater runoff from chloride storage areas. The plan
should address how the materials will be stored to prevent
chloride contaminated runoff, including the location and
design of the storage area, and provisions for stormwater
management.
(c) How the project will be designed and constructed to manage
the stormwater runoff from snow storage areas. The plan must
indicate if snow will be stored on-site and if so, designate
where this will occur. The plan should address how the snow
storage area will be designed to prevent surface drainage from
getting into the storage area and how the meltwater will be
handled to direct it to the stormwater system and to avoid
infiltration into the ground.
(d) How the project will be designed and constructed to manage
the stormwater runoff from treated areas. The plan must
address how stormwater will be handled to direct it to the
stormwater system and to avoid infiltration into the ground.
(e) How snow and ice control activities will be carried out to
minimize the use of chlorides. The plan must include an
§ 225-34 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-34
202:490
operations manual that spells out who will be responsible for
overseeing snow and ice control activities, requirements for
the training of snow and ice control equipment operators, the
provision and use of appropriate equipment for the particular
site, the calibration of spreaders or other applicators, and
guidance for determining the proper materials and application
rates based on the site and weather conditions.
(3) Review and approval of the chlorides management plan. The
Planning Board shall review the CMP as part of the overall project
review since the CMP is an integral part of the overall layout and
design of the project. In its review of a CMP, the Planning Board
may require the applicant to modify the proposed location of the
building on the site or the layout and design of the project on the
site if necessary to meet the requirements of this section. The
Planning Board shall find that all of the following standards are met
to approve an application including a CMP:
(a) The location, overall layout and design of the project will
minimize the amount of impervious surface that will require
snow and ice control to the extent reasonable with the planned
use of the site.
(b) The location and design of any chloride storage areas will
minimize the potential for adverse impact on the stream from
chlorides to the extent reasonable with the planned use of the
site.
(c) The location and design of any snow storage areas will
minimize the potential for adverse impact on the stream from
chlorides to the extent reasonable with the planned use of the
site.
(d) The overall design of the site and the stormwater management
system will minimize the potential for the infiltration of
stormwater containing chlorides into the ground.
(e) The operations manual will assure that snow and ice control
operations, if carried out in accordance with the manual, will
minimize the potential for adverse impact on the stream from
chlorides to the extent reasonable with the planned use of the
site.
F. Standards for easements or rights-of-way. Drainage easements or
rights-of-way containing components of the stormwater runoff system
lying outside of public street right-of-way lines shall conform to the
following standards:
(1) The minimum width of the easement shall be 30 feet, provided that
where a watercourse or retention area is wider than 30 feet, the
Planning Board may require a drainage right-of-way of adequate
width to conform substantially to the lines of such watercourse or
§ 225-34 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-34
202:491
retention area, including additional width to provide for access.
The Planning Board may reduce the width of the easement upon
the positive recommendation of the Director of Public Works or his/
her designee if the narrower easement will allow the stormwater
facilities to be maintained or if the unique characteristics of the site
make the creation of a wider easement impractical.
(2) Where a drainage easement will contain an open channel, stream
or drainageway, the easement shall be designed and landscaped to
further the objectives of the stormwater management plan. The
natural landscape shall be retained to the extent practical as
determined by the Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer, as
applicable.
(3) Where the easement will contain a closed conduit the facility shall
be constructed in accordance with the approved plan.
G. Modification of the standards and requirements.
(1) The Planning Board or Planning Director where he/she is the
reviewing authority may modify or waive any of the submission
requirements for a post-construction stormwater management plan
or a general stormwater management plan if the Planning Board or
Planning Director finds that, due to the unique physical
characteristics of the site or the scale of the proposed activity, the
information is not required to allow the Planning Board or Planning
Director to determine if the applicable stormwater management
standards are met.
(2) The Planning Board or Planning Director where he/she is the
reviewing authority may approve a post-construction stormwater
management plan that does not comply with the detailed
requirements of Subsection C or a municipal stormwater
management plan that does not comply with the detailed
requirements of Subsection D if the Planning Board or Planning
Director finds that the proposed plan will provide the same or
higher level of water quality protection than strict conformance
with the applicable standard or that due to the unique physical
characteristics of the site and/or the receiving waters, full
conformance with the standard is not warranted to assure that the
quality of the receiving waters will not be degraded.
H. Discharge of stormwater.
(1) The volume of stormwater discharged from any parcel must be
minimized to the extent practical. When stormwater must be
discharged from a parcel, the preferred method is discharge into
the natural drainage system. Discharge of stormwater to the
Town's stormwater system shall be allowed only when on-site
retention and/or discharge to the natural system is not practical or
when necessary to minimize the impacts of chlorides on an urban
impaired stream.
§ 225-34 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-34
202:492
§ 225-35. Water quality. [Amended 5-21-1997 STM, Art. 39]
All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, chemicals, chemical or industrial
wastes and biodegradable raw materials shall be located on impervious
pavement, and shall be completely enclosed by an impervious dike which
shall be high enough to contain the total volume of liquid kept within the
storage area, plus the rain falling into this storage area during a twenty-fiveyear
storm (a twenty-five-year storm is defined as 5.5 inches in a twentyfour-
hour period) so that such liquid shall not be able to spill onto or seep
into the ground surrounding the paved storage area. Storage for home
heating fuel, not exceeding 275 gallons in size, may be exempted from this
requirement in situations where neither a high seasonal water table (within
15 inches of the surface) nor rapidly permeable sandy soils are involved.
(2) The direct connection of new or expanded stormwater
management facilities to a combined sewer is not permitted.
I. Aquifer recharge.
(1) Stormwater management systems should be designed to facilitate
aquifer recharge when it is advantageous to compensate for
groundwater withdrawals. Conversely, designs should avoid
recharge where groundwater effects might be harmful. Design of
permanent storage facilities should consider safety, appearance,
recreational use and cost and effectiveness of maintenance
operations, in addition to the primary storage function. Natural
overland flows and open drainage channel and swale locations
should be the preferred alignments for major components of a
residential drainage system. The use of enclosed components (such
as underground piping) should be minimized where the existing
natural systems are able to accommodate storm runoff. Energy
dissipaters (to reduce high flow velocities) and other forms of
outfall protection shall be employed where enclosed drains
discharge onto erodible soils.
J. Overall design.
(1) Stormwater management systems should be integrated into the
overall landscape plan. Stormwater structures such as swales,
basins, culverts, rip rap and headwalls shall be located and
designed to blend with the natural environment. Native and
wetland tolerant plants should be used to soften hard structures
and add wildlife value. Stormwater systems should be considered
as engineered wetland systems that have visual and ecological
value.
K. Green roofs.
(1) Green roof systems may be utilized as part of a stormwater
management system plan if the efficacy of the system can be
demonstrated using the Rational or S.C.S. Method.
§ 225-34 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-36
202:493
§ 225-36. Water supplies.
All uses must connect to the Brunswick-Topsham Water District system
when service can be extended to satisfy the daily consumption demands
and fire protection needs required for the development or facility. Wherever
the development cannot be adequately serviced by the Brunswick-Topsham
Water District, evidence of the estimated quantity of groundwater or
surface water to be used shall be provided. The quantity of the water to be
taken or used shall not substantially lower the groundwater table or surface
water levels; cause adverse changes in groundwater flow patterns; or cause
ground subsidence.
§ 225-37. Noise.
A. The maximum permissible sound pressure level of any continuous
regular or frequent source of sound produced by any activity shall be
limited by the time period and use district listed below. Sound levels
shall be measured at least four feet above ground at the property
boundary. [Amended 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15; 11-13-2008 STM,
Art. 8; 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
Sound Pressure Level Limits
[Measured in dB(A) scale]
7 a.m. to 10 p.m. 10 p.m. to 7 a.m.
R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zones 55 45
LV, MV, VC, BP2 and
MUC-1 Zones
55 45
BP Zone 60, except 55 for
any property line
that abuts a
residential district
50, except 45 for
any property line
that abuts a
residential district
CC 196 and LI Zones 60, except 55 for
any property line
that abuts a
residential district
50, except 45 for
any property line
that abuts a
residential district
CC, RCU, MUL and MUC
Zones
60 50
I Zones 65 60
B. The levels specified may be exceeded by 10 dBA for a single fifteenminute
period per day. Noise shall be measured by a meter set on the Aweighted
response scale, slow response. The meter shall meet the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI S1. 4-1961) American
Standard Specification for General Purpose Sound Level Meters.
C. No person shall engage in construction activities on a site abutting any
residential use between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. which
§ 225-36 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-37
202:494
§ 225-38. Soils.
No activity shall be permitted in any area where the soil is rated severe or
very severe for the proposed activity, according to the Sagadahoc County
Soil Suitability Guide of the United States Soil Conservation Service, unless
satisfactory evidence is presented to the Code Enforcement Officer, within
the application for a permit, that construction methods will overcome any
pertinent soil inadequacies if modification of the soil is made meeting the
requirements of the United States Soil Conservation Service for upgrading
the area to a rating of fair or higher, building on soils initially rated poor or
lower may be permitted.
§ 225-39. Storage.
All materials stored outdoors shall be stored in such a manner as to prevent
the breeding and harboring of insects, rats or other vermin. This shall be
accomplished by enclosures in containers, raising materials above ground,
separation of material, prevention of stagnant water, extermination
procedures or other means. Exposed storage areas for machinery, raw
materials or furnished products or mineral excavation and processing
operations shall have setbacks and screening (such as a stockade fence or
dense evergreen hedge) sufficient to provide a visual buffer to minimize
their adverse impact on abutting land uses. Where a potential safety hazard
to small children would likely arise, physical screening to prevent access
shall be provided.
§ 225-40. Toxic and noxious discharges.
No use shall for any period of time discharge across the boundaries of the
lot wherein it is located toxic and noxious matter in concentrations in excess
of one-fourth (1/4) of the maximum allowable concentrations set forth in the
Industrial Hygiene Standards Maximum Allowable Concentrations, of the
Air Pollution Abatement Manual, by Manufacturing Chemists' Association,
Inc., Washington D.C., as subsequently amended or revised, which is hereby
incorporated in and made a part of this section by reference.
§ 225-41. Vibration.
Vibration inherently and recurrently generated shall be imperceptible
without instruments at lot boundaries.
exceed those limits established for residential districts. Otherwise, the
following activities shall be exempt from these regulations:
(1) Sounds emanating from construction and maintenance activities
conducted between 7 a.m. and 10 p.m.
(2) Sounds emanating from safety signals, warning devices,
emergency pressure relief valves and other emergency activities.
(3) Sounds emanating from traffic on public transportation facilities.
§ 225-37 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-41.1
202:495
§ 225-41.1. Vernal pools. [Added 5-18-2016 STM, Art. 14]
All activities shall be carried out to minimize the impact on vernal pools
except for projects involving vernal pool mitigation in accordance with
§ 225-20.2, Vernal Pools Overlay District. All development activities on a site
with one or more vernal pools shall be located and designed to conserve
the pools plus the necessary terrestrial amphibian post-breeding habitat
adjacent to each pool to the maximum extent reasonable consistent with the
proposed use of the property unless vernal pool mitigation is proposed. If
the encroachment on a vernal pool or its adjacent habitat falls under state
or federal regulation, no activity shall occur until the property owner has
received the appropriate permit from the state and/or federal agency or
has met the requirements of the (VPO District) with respect to vernal pool
mitigation.
§ 225-41.1 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-41.1
202:496
ARTICLE VIII
Specific Performance Standards
§ 225-42. Campgrounds and tenting grounds.
Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under
state licensing procedures and the following (in cases of possible conflict,
the stricter rule shall apply):
A. General.
(1) A campground must be constructed on at least ten (10) acres of
land, and all camping units or structures shall be located at least
two hundred (200) feet from any property line.
(2) Campsites shall be laid out and screened in such a manner that
none are within view from public roads, navigable rivers, existing
residences or approved subdivision lots. Any combination of
evergreen planting, landscaped earthen berms or solid fencing may
be used to achieve this screening standard, when campsites would
otherwise be visible from the locations described above.
(3) No trailers other than recreational vehicles as defined herein shall
be permitted within any campground, temporarily or otherwise. No
camping unit shall be stored or exhibited for sale for commercial
purposes within the park.
(4) Tent sites and sites for recreational vehicles (RV's) shall be laid out
so that the density of each developed acre of land does not exceed
the standards below (in terms of sites per acre of land, excluding
circulation roads):
Nonshoreland Shoreland Area
Tent sites 14 per acre 8 per acre
RV sites 11 per acre 7 per acre
(5) Minimum frontage along any shoreline shall be one hundred (100)
feet. Minimum setback from the shoreline shall be one hundred
(100) feet for all recreational vehicles, tents or other vehicles and
temporary or permanent structures.
B. Parking and circulation.
(1) A minimum of three hundred (300) square feet of off-street parking
plus maneuvering space shall be provided for each recreational
vehicle, tent or shelter site. Recreational vehicles shall be so
parked in spaces that:
(a) There shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet between
vehicles; and
§ 225-42 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-42
202:497
(b) There shall be a minimum of forty-five (45) feet between all
recreational vehicles and tents and public rights-of-way
located inside the boundaries of the campground.
(2) Vehicular access shall be provided onto a hard-surfaced road
adequate for the volume and type of traffic likely to be generated.
Grades and sight distances specified in Chapter 191, Subdivision of
Land, shall be observed in designing all intersections. Roads shall
be constructed of at least twelve (12) inches of bank-run gravel (no
stone larger than four (4) inches), two (2) inches of crushed gravel
(one-half-inch chips) and two (2)applications of liquid asphalt
(gallon per square yard each application). The minimum width of
roadways shall be twelve (12) feet for one-way roads and twentytwo
(22) feet for two-way roads. No vehicle parking shall be
permitted on the roadway.
C. Health and safety.
(1) Each recreational vehicle, tent or shelter site shall be provided with
a picnic table and trash receptacle. The park management shall
dispose of refuse from said containers by transporting the refuse in
a closed truck or in enclosed containers or bags to an approved
disposal area at least once a week.
(2) A campground shall provide water and sewerage systems, sanitary
stations and convenience facilities in accordance with the
regulations of the State Plumbing Code. In no case shall less than
one (1) toilet, lavatory and shower be provided for each sex for
every ten (10) camping and tent sites. All recreational vehicle sites
shall be equipped with water and sewage hookups, connected to
approved distribution or disposal systems.
(3) Fire extinguishers capable of dealing with electrical and wood fires
shall be kept in all service buildings. A suitable ingress and egress
shall be provided so that every campground may be readily
serviced in emergency situations. Twenty-four-hour emergency
communication service (e.g., telephones) shall be provided.
(4) Each campsite shall be provided with a masonry or metal fireplace,
approved in writing by the Fire Chief.
D. Planning and review.
(1) Roads, parking, campsites and required facilities shall be planned
in accordance with the basic principles outlined below, and shall be
shown on the proposed plan which is submitted for review and
approval as a conditional use:
(a) A logical sequence of entry and circulation should be created:
entrance, administration and storage, parking, campsites,
toilets and laundry, playing fields or shoreline.
§ 225-42 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-42
202:498
§ 225-43. Open space subdivision. [Amended 5-16-2012 STM, Art.
11; 5-14-2014 STM, Art. 13]
(b) Campsites should be clustered in groups according to intensity
of use (low density, medium density, etc.) and also related to
common support service areas (laundries, play areas, etc.)
serving a number of campsite clusters. The purpose is to
minimize road length, increase accessibility and preserve open
space.
(c) Footpaths and roads should follow desire lines of pedestrian
and vehicular movement between campsites and all jointly
used facilities. Parking areas may be grassed, reinforced with
open concrete blocks.
(d) Access roads shall be laid out as loops to the greatest extent
that is practicable, although culs-de-sac or dead-ends may be
allowed to serve up to twenty (20) campsites.
(2) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan meeting the
standards of the Sagadahoc County Soil and Water Conservation
District or the Maine Soil and Water Conservation Commission
shall be submitted. In addition to data on soils, slopes and
drainage, a vegetation map showing the following items may be
required:
(a) The major types of vegetation should be identified and
described (as to age, height, openness or density and pattern
either natural or reforested).
(b) New planting should be selected to provide screening and
shelter, to tolerate existing and proposed site conditions and to
blend compatibility with existing natural vegetation.
(c) All vegetative clearing should avoid creating straight line
edges between open land and surviving stands.
(d) Areas of activity and/or traffic should be cited to avoid wildlife
areas (such as thickets for birds and small mammals or deer
yards and trails).
A. Applicability. A residential subdivision in any residential district may be
developed in accordance with the provisions of this section and any
applicable standards for open space subdivisions for the district in
which it is located rather than the dimensional requirements of
§ 225-17 upon approval of the Planning Board.
B. Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to allow open space
residential developments in order to:
(1) Protect environmentally sensitive areas of the development site
with the intent of preserving on a permanent basis connected open
§ 225-42 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-43
202:499
space, natural features, working forests and prime agricultural
lands;
(2) Encourage creative and flexible site design that is sensitive to the
land's natural features and adapts to the natural topography;
(3) Decrease or minimize nonpoint source pollution impacts by
reducing the amount of impervious surfaces created by the
development;
(4) Promote cost savings in infrastructure installation and
maintenance by such techniques as reducing the distance over
which utilities need to be extended or by reducing the width or
length of streets; and
(5) Provide opportunities for social interaction and walking and hiking
in open space areas.
C. Basic requirements for open space developments.
(1) Commitment from a conservation organization. Prior to submitting
preliminary plans for subdivision approval the applicant shall
submit written confirmation from the proposed easement holder/
owner of their intent to accept the rights to conserve the open
space as delineated and described in the proposed open space
subdivision plan.
(2) Conservation plan. The layout of the open space development shall
reflect the site inventory and analysis. To the extent practical, the
proposed open space shall be located to connect to any abutting
open space of at least 10 contiguously undeveloped acres. The
location of the residential units and roads shall be on the portions
of the site that are most appropriate for development. The
proposed open space must contain 3 or more of the following
criteria:
(a) The portions of the site identified as Primary Conservation
area.
(b) The portions of the site identified as Secondary Conservation
areas.
(c) Contains or connects to existing undeveloped land of at least
10 contiguous acres, conservation land or land enrolled in a
current use taxation program (tree growth, farmland, open
space, working waterfront) as defined in Title 36 M.R.S.A.
§ 572, 36 M.R.S.A. § 1102, 36 M.R.S.A. § 1102, 36 M.R.S.A.
§ 1132, respectively.
(d) Connection to existing or planned public recreational trail
system that is mapped and on file in the Topsham Planning
Office.
§ 225-43 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-43
202:500
(e) Recreational water access to the Muddy River, Androscoggin
River, Cathance River, or the Little River.
(3) Development plan. Each lot and building location shall be an
element of an overall plan for site development. The plan for the
development must illustrate the layout of lots and/or the placement
of buildings and the treatment of spaces, paths, roads, driveways,
service and parking and in so doing shall take into consideration all
requirements of this section and of other relevant sections of this
chapter.
(4) Maximum number of units or lots. The total number of lots or
dwelling units permitted as part of the development shall be
determined by dividing the net residential acreage of the site by
seventy-five percent of the minimum lot area requirement for the
zone in which it is located except in the R-3 District which has a
specific density provision for open space developments.
(5) Gross area of the development. The provisions of this section apply
only to the division of a parcel of land meeting the following
minimum gross area requirements:
District Gross Area Requirement
R-1 District 3 acres
R-2 District 5 acres
R-3 District 10 acres
(6) Minimum open space. At least thirty (30) percent of the gross area
of the development must be set aside as permanent open space in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection D except in the R-3
District which has a specific open space requirement.
(7) Dimensional requirements: The creation of lots and the placement
of buildings and structures on lots shall be in accordance with the
following minimum standards rather than the dimensional
requirements of § 225-17 unless more restrictive requirements are
established by the Planning Board in approving the development
plan:
(a) Minimum lot size. There is no minimum lot size for lots that are
part of an open space development except as follows. If a lot
will be served by on-site water supply and sewage disposal, the
lot must have a minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet of area.
(b) Minimum lot frontage or width. Each lot shall have a minimum
of 12 feet of frontage on a public or private street for access to
the lot. The Planning Board may allow for the access and
frontage to be shared with other lots, provided there will be
provisions for shared ownership and long-term maintenance in
a form that is acceptable to the Town. [See § 225-17H(3)(d).]
§ 225-43 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-43
202:501
(c) Minimum front setback. Buildings that front on existing public
streets must meet the front setback requirement of § 225-17
for the district in which it is located. The minimum setback of
buildings and structures from internal streets or private
accessways shall be identified on the approved development
plan. Buildings must be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25)
feet from the edge of the travel way of a street or the back of a
sidewalk if one is provided unless more restrictive
requirements are established by the Planning Board in
approving the development plan. This setback applies whether
or not individual lots are created.
(d) Minimum side and rear setbacks. Buildings and structures that
are located on lots that abut the perimeter of the subdivision
must conform to the minimum setback requirements of the
district in which it located. There is no required minimum side
and rear setbacks from internal property lines. The minimum
setback of buildings and structures from internal property
lines shall be identified on the approved development plan.
Principal buildings on the same or adjacent lots must be
separated by a minimum of 15 feet.
(e) Shore frontage. Shore frontage shall not be reduced below the
minimum normally required for the Shoreland Zone in which
the development is located.
(8) Water supply. The applicant shall demonstrate the availability of
water adequate for domestic purposes as well as for firesafety. The
Planning Board may require the construction of storage ponds and
dry hydrants.
(9) Sewage disposal. Where feasible, an open space residential
development must be connected to the public sewer system. When
on-site, subsurface sewage disposal will be utilized, the location of
subsurface sewage disposal systems must be identified. If the plan
proposes the use of shared or a common subsurface sewage
disposal system, the plan must contain provisions for the ownership
and long-term maintenance of these facilities.
(10) Open space preservation. The portion of the development that will
be preserved as permanent open space shall be based on the
primary and secondary conservation areas identified in the site
inventory and analysis. Priority shall be given to the protection of
the primary conservation areas and the secondary conservation
areas with the highest value as identified in the site inventory and
analysis. The ownership of the open space may include any of the
following (with a preference to the order below):
(a) Ownership by a conservation organization approved by the
Planning Board with permanent restrictions on its future use;
or
§ 225-43 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-43
202:502
§ 225-44. Additional standards for uses involving gasoline sales or
motor vehicle service. [Amended 5-21-1997 STM, Art. 40; 5-17-2000
STM, Art. 15]
All uses involving gasoline sales or motor vehicle service shall conform to
the following standards:
(b) Ownership by the Town with a conservation easement to a
conservation organization approved by the Planning Board.
(c) Ownership by the developer with a conservation easement to
the Town Conservation Commission or a conservation
organization approved by the Planning Board; or
(d) Ownership by a homeowners' association with a conservation
easement to the Town Conservation Commission or a
conservation organization approved by the Planning Board.
D. Dedication and maintenance of open space and facilities.
(1) The open space identified in the development plan shall be
permanently protected upon approval of the project. There shall be
no further subdivision of this land, which shall be used only for
agriculture, forestry, noncommercial recreation or conservation.
However, easements for public utilities, or structures accessory to
noncommercial recreation or conservation, may be permitted in
accordance with the approved development plan.
(2) The open space shall be shown on the development plan and with
appropriate notation on the face thereof to indicate that the open
space shall not be used for future building lots.
(3) If any or all of the open space is to be owned by a homeowners'
association, the bylaws of the proposed homeowners' association
shall specify maintenance responsibilities and shall be approved by
the Planning Board prior to approval of the development plan.
Covenants for mandatory membership in the association setting
forth the owners' rights and interest and privileges in the
association and the open space shall be approved by the Planning
Board and included in the deed for each lot. The provisions shall
require the association to levy annual charges against all property
owners to defray the expenses connected with the maintenance of
the open space and other common and recreational facilities.
(4) The developer shall maintain control of such open space and be
responsible for its maintenance until development sufficient to
support the association has taken place. Such determination shall
be made by the Planning Board upon request of the homeowners'
association or the developer.
§ 225-43 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-44
202:503
A. All structures expressly designed for the purpose of dispensing fuels
and/or repair or maintenance of vehicles, including underground
storage tanks, shall be no less than 50 feet from the property line.
B. No gasoline, kerosene or other fuel shall be permitted above ground.
C. Points of ingress and egress shall be located not less than 25 feet from
the nearest intersecting street sidelines.
D. Underground storage tanks shall be constructed from fiberglass or
similar noncorrodible material, anchored to resist flotation.
E. Service bays and car wash entrances should face away from principal
frontage.
F. Canopies should have pitched roof lines if deemed practicable by the
Planning Board.
G. All gasoline service facilities shall be designed with Stage II vapor
recovery systems. [Added 5-20-2004 STM, Art. 17]
(1) No owner or operator shall transfer, permit the transfer, or provide
equipment for the transfer of gasoline from a stationary storage
tank at a gasoline-dispensing facility into a motor vehicle fuel tank
unless a Stage II vapor recovery system is installed and is
continuously used during the transfer of gasoline.
(2) The owner or operator shall maintain the Stage II vapor recovery
system in proper operating condition as specified by the
manufacturer and free of defects that would impair the
effectiveness of the system.
(3) All Stage II vapor recovery systems and gasoline-dispensing
equipment shall be maintained to have no leaks.
(4) No owner or operator shall tamper with or permit tampering with
any component of the Stage II vapor recovery system.
H. Design and installation standards for new and replacement facilities.
[Added 5-20-2004 STM, Art. 17]
(1) General design requirements:
(a) All new and replacement tanks must be constructed of
fiberglass reinforced plastic (fiberglass), cathodically
protected steel, or other equally noncorrosive material
approved by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection (MeDEP).
(b) Piping and below-ground ancillary equipment in contact with
soil must be constructed of fiberglass, cathodically protected
steel or other corrosion-resistant or noncorrosive materials
approved by the MeDEP.
§ 225-44 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-44
202:504
(2) It is the responsibility of the facility owner to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Codes Enforcement Office that the materials are
noncorrosive or corrosion-resistant and meet or exceed the
performance standards listed below.
(3) All new or replacement facilities must be listed and constructed in
accordance with the standards contained in the Chapter 691,
Section 5-B of the MeDEP Rules for Underground Oil Storage
Facilities.
(4) Leak detection. All new and replacement facilities must be
designed to provide secondary containment for all facility
components routinely containing product, including tanks, product
piping and below-ground ancillary equipment. New and
replacement tanks and product piping must have continuous
interstitial space monitoring. Suction piping designed and installed
in accordance with this regulation are not required to have
secondary containment. Interstitial space monitoring must be able
to detect a loss or gain in the interstitial space from a leak in the
primary or secondary containment structure of 150 gallons or more
within 30 days of a leak or discharge.
(5) Overfill and spill prevention equipment. New and replacement
facilities must include:
(a) A liquid tight spill catchment basin of a minimum capacity of
three (3) gallons for each tank fill, which is sealed around the
fill pipe and will collect any spillage during product delivery.
(b) Overfill prevention equipment that will automatically shut off
flow into the tank when the tank is no more than 95 percent
full; alert the transfer operator when the tank is no more than
90 percent full by restricting flow into the tank or triggering a
high-level audible alarm.
I. Special standards in the MUC Zone. [Added 5-20-2004 STM, Art. 17]
(1) Gasoline service facilities are only allowed as accessory uses to
retail establishments of at least 50,000 square feet.
(2) Gasoline pumps shall be located to the side or rear of the retail
facility and no closer to the road than the front of the retail
building.
(3) Canopy lights shall be recessed into the canopy so that the lens is
not visible from the nearest roadway.
(4) Canopies and pump islands shall maintain all required setbacks for
structures.
(5) Landscaping standards shall apply between gasoline service
facilities and all property lines.
§ 225-44 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-44
202:505
J. Special standards in the MUC-1 Zone. [Added 5-24-2007 STM, Art.
15]
(1) Gasoline service facilities are only allowed as part of a planned
mixed-use development.
(2) Gasoline service facilities may only be located in areas identified
for this use on the approved Master Plan for a planned mixed-use
development. The location of any such facilities shall be chosen to
minimize the potential impact on both the groundwater and on
neighboring residential zones. In no case shall such a facility be
located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a residential zone.
(3) The approved Master Plan for the planned mixed-use development
must identify the activities that will be taken to minimize the
potential for groundwater contamination.
(4) The site must be designed and constructed to prevent the
discharge of contaminated runoff to surface waters, drainage
systems, or the groundwater. Areas for the fueling or servicing of
vehicles or for the storage of fuels must be designed to contain all
spills or contaminated stormwater and to direct runoff from these
areas to separate stormwater systems for appropriate treatment
prior to discharge or conveyance off-site.
(5) The approved Master Plan for the planned mixed-use development
must identify, as part of the Neighborhood Impact Mitigation Plan,
how any gasoline service facilities will be located, designed, and
operated to minimize any adverse impacts on neighboring
residential zones.
(6) Gasoline pumps shall be located to the side or rear of the principal
building and be no closer to the road than the front of the building
unless otherwise specifically allowed as part of the approved
Master Plan.
(7) Canopy lights shall be recessed into the canopy so that the lens is
not visible from the nearest roadway or residential property.
(8) Not more than two (2) facilities for the sale of gasoline are
permitted within the entire MUC-1 Zone. The Planning Board may
not approve any site plan or subdivision plan involving a gasoline
sales use if such approval would allow more than two such uses to
be able to be built in the MUC-1 District. The approval of a site plan
or subdivision plan or portion of a site plan or subdivision plan for a
gasoline sales use shall expire and be invalid after two years from
the date of Planning Board approval if a building permit has not
been issued for the use and substantial construction begun. The
Planning Board may extend the length of approval by not more than
one year upon written request of the applicant based upon a
showing of good cause for failure to commence construction.
§ 225-44 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-45
202:506
§ 225-45. Home occupations. [Amended 5-21-1997 STM, Art. 41;
1-23-2008 STM, Art. 3]
Home occupations and major home occupations must comply with the
following standards:
A. Standards for home occupations. A home occupation shall be permitted
if it complies with all of the requirements of this subsection:
(1) The use of a dwelling unit for a home occupation shall clearly be
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes.
(2) A home occupation shall be carried on by residents of the dwelling
unit.
(3) A home occupation may not alter the residential character of the
structure, neighborhood or change the character of the lot from its
principal use as a residence.
(4) The home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the
principal or accessory structures. The outside storage or display of
materials or products shall be screened from view from the
abutting properties and street.
(5) The performance standards in Article VII of this chapter shall apply.
If additional parking spaces are provided, they shall be located to
the rear or side yard of the principal structure but not within the
yard setbacks.
(6) One nonilluminated sign, no larger than four square feet, may be
erected on the premises. Only one sign will be permitted per
property regardless of the number of permitted home occupations.
(7) The sale of products shall be limited to those which are crafted,
assembled or substantially altered on the premises, to catalog
items ordered off the premises by customers and to items which are
accessory and incidental to a service which is provided on the
premises.
(8) A home occupation shall not involve the use of heavy commercial
vehicles for delivery from or to the premises.
(9) A home occupation shall not create greater traffic than normal for
the area it is located in or generate more than 20 vehicle trips per
day.
B. Standards for major home occupations. A major home occupation shall
be permitted if it complies with all of the requirements of this
subsection:
(1) The use of a dwelling unit for a major home occupation shall clearly
be incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes. A
major home occupation shall not involve motor vehicle or heavy
§ 225-45 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-45
202:507
equipment service or repair. Only one major home occupation may
be operated in conjunction with any dwelling unit.
(2) The primary vehicle access to a major home occupation may not be
from an internal street within a residential subdivision.
(3) A major home occupation shall be carried on by a resident(s) of the
dwelling unit. Not more than two people who do not reside on the
premises may work on the premises where the home occupation is
operated at any time. The major home occupation may have other
employees who do not regularly work on the premises. These
outside employees shall not be on the premises more than two
hours per week and no more than five outside employees may be on
the premises at any time.
(4) A major home occupation may not alter the residential character of
the structure or neighborhood or change the character of the lot
from its principal use as a residence.
(5) The major home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the
principal building or accessory structures. The outside storage or
display of materials or products shall be screened from view from
the abutting properties and street.
(6) The performance standards in Article VII of this chapter shall apply.
(7) If people who do not reside on the premises work in the major home
occupation, off-street parking must be provided for the maximum
number of nonresident workers expected to be on the premises at
any time excluding outside employees who are not regularly on the
premises. If additional parking spaces are provided to serve the
major home occupation, they shall not be located within any
required yard setbacks and must be screened from abutting
residential properties by a landscaped buffer at least 10 feet in
width and/or a solid fence at least four feet high in accordance with
§ 225-29A(1).
(8) One nonilluminated sign may be erected on the premises. The sign
may be no larger than eight square feet except in the MV District
where the maximum size is four square feet.
(9) The sale of products shall be limited to those which are crafted,
assembled or substantially altered on the premises, to catalog/
internet items ordered off the premises by customers, and to items
which are accessory and incidental to a service which is provided
on the premises.
(10) A major home occupation shall not generate more than 25 vehicle
trips per day unless the primary vehicle access for the home
occupation is from a street functionally classified as an arterial or
collector or from a local road with a preexisting traffic volume of
more than 1,000 vehicles per day.
§ 225-45 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-46
202:508
§ 225-46. Hotels/motels and inns. [Amended 5-17-2000 STM, Art.
15; 5-20-2004 STM, Art. 18; 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15]
For traffic safety on and immediately adjoining each motel or hotel and
to assure health, safety and welfare of hotel occupants and of the
neighborhood generally, the following land, space, building, traffic, utility
and service design requirements shall be complied with unless the hotel,
motel or inn is part of a common plan of development approved by the
Planning Board in accordance with § 225-17D or a planned mixed-use
development approved in accordance with § 225-60.7.
A. The minimum lot size for any motel, hotel or inn shall contain not less
than three acres of total area. The lot on which the motel, hotel, or inn
is located must have not less than 200 feet of lot width throughout the
first 200 feet of depth of said lot back from the street. Driveways shall
be separated by a minimum of 100 feet. The curb radius of the
intersection of the driveway to public way shall be no less than 30 feet.
Access and egress drives shall not exceed a slope of 6% for less than 60
feet onto the property.
B. No part of any building on a motel lot shall be closer than 60 feet to the
front lot line, rear lot line or either side line of such lot. A green space,
not less than 20 feet wide, shall be maintained open and green with
grass, bushes, flowers or trees all along each side lot line, the rear lot
line, the front line of such lot, except for entrance and exit driveways.
The green space shall not be used for automobile parking.
C. Buildings on a motel lot shall not cover more than 15% of the area of the
lot.
D. Each motel rental unit shall contain not less than 200 square feet
habitable floor area enclosed by walls and roof, exclusive of any
adjoining portions of roofed or covered walkways. Each motel rental
sleeping room shall not be less than 12 by 15 feet, horizontal
dimensions, exclusive of bath. Each rental unit shall include private
bathroom facilities.
E. On each motel/hotel lot one apartment may be provided for a resident
owner, manager or other responsible staff person.
F. Hotel building construction plans shall be reviewed and approved by
the State Fire Marshal's Office.
G. All motels and hotels shall be connected to the public sewer and water
systems.
H. Occupancy of units in a hotel or motel is limited to short-term transient
guests. No guest may stay at a hotel/motel for more than twenty (20)
days in any thirty (30) day period unless the hotel/motel is specifically
approved by the Planning Board as an “extended stay” facility as part of
the site plan approval in accordance with Chapter 175.
§ 225-46 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-47
202:509
§ 225-47. Kennels and veterinary hospitals.
§ 225-48. Manufactured housing and mobile home parks; standards
for siting.
A. Structures or pens for housing or containing the animals shall be
enclosed.
B. All pens, runs or kennels and other facilities shall be designed,
constructed and located on the site in a manner that will minimize the
adverse effects upon the surrounding properties. Among the factors
that shall be considered are the relationship of the use to the
topography, natural and planted horticultural screening, the direction
and intensity of the prevailing winds, the relationship and location of
residences and public facilities on nearby properties and other similar
factors.
C. The owner or operator of a kennel shall maintain the premises in a
clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times. No garbage, offal,
feces or other waste material shall be allowed to accumulate on the
premises. The premises shall be maintained in a manner that it will not
provide a breeding place for insects, vermin or rodents.
D. Temporary storage containers for any kennel or veterinary wastes
containing or including animal excrement shall be kept tightly covered
at all times, and emptied no less frequently than once every four days.
Such containers shall be made of steel or plastic to facilitate cleaning.
E. If outdoor dog runs are created, they shall be completely fenced in, and
shall be paved with cement, asphalt or a similar material to provide for
cleanliness and ease of maintenance.
F. Any incineration device for burning excrement-soaked waste papers
and/or animal organs or remains shall meet air emissions standards in
Article VII. The applicant shall also provide evidence that he has
obtained approval from the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection for the proposed incinerator, and that it meets state
standards for particulate emissions, flue gas temperature and duration
of required flue temperatures.
G. All other relevant performance standards in Article VII of this chapter
shall also be observed.
A. The placement and use of manufactured housing as dwellings is
governed by the provisions of this section: [Amended 5-22-1991
ATM, Art. 28; 5-19-1999 STM, Art. 29; 5-17-2000 STM, Art. 15;
5-19-2010 STM, Art. 12]
(1) Modular homes or components thereof may be used to construct
two-family or multifamily dwellings in any zone in which those uses
are allowed.
§ 225-47 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-48
202:510
(2) Mobile home parks are permitted only in those areas that are
designated as "Mobile Home Park Overlay Zones." All new or
replacement dwelling units in a mobile home park must be
manufactured housing units as defined herein. The placement of
units on lots in a mobile home park and the connection of the unit
to utilities shall conform to the rules of the State of Maine
Manufactured Housing Board. No mobile home park may be
developed or plan filed or recorded in the Sagadahoc County
Registry of Deeds until such plan has been approved by the
Topsham Planning Board in accordance with all of the
requirements, design standards and construction specifications set
forth in this chapter.
(3) Manufactured housing units may be placed on individual
residential lots in any zoning district where single-family homes are
allowed, except in the Historic District, in accordance with the
following siting standards:
Standards For Siting Manufactured Housing Units on
Individual LotsA
A B C D
Minimum horizontal dimension
20 feet facing street
P P P X
Minimum horizontal dimension
14 feet facing street
X X P X
Minimum horizontal dimension
under 14 feet facing street
X X X X
Single section unit with less
than a 20 foot horizontal
dimension with a T or L addition
X C C X
Appearance and materials:
Minimum roof pitch of 6/12 or
steeper
P P P X
Minimum roof pitch of 3/12 or
steeper
X P P X
Rounded or flat roof X X X X
Exterior walls of traditional sitebuilt
appearance
P P P X
Exterior walls not of traditional
site-built appearance
X X X X
Treatment below unit:
Frost wall or other permanent
foundation meeting the building
code
P P P X
§ 225-48 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-48
202:511
Standards For Siting Manufactured Housing Units on
Individual LotsA
A B C D
Floating slab (with skirting of
durable material made for such
use that is visually compatible
with the exterior appearance of
the unit between the slab and
the bottom of the unit)
P P P X
Grade beam or gravel pad X X X X
Skirting other than that listed
above
X X X X
KEY:
A = R-1 and R-4 Districts and all Village Districts
B = R-2 District
C = R-3 District and all Commercial or Mixed Use Districts in
which single-family dwellings are allowed
D = Historic District
P = Permitted
X = Not permitted
C = Conditioned upon the narrow section being attached to a T
or L shape or having an attached garage, so that the total
width of the attached structures is at least twenty-five (25)
feet as seen from the street.
B. Lots within approved mobile home parks shall meet the minimum size
standards as specified below. Lots within manufactured housing
subdivisions or developments shall meet the minimum lot size as
specified for the zone in which they are located. [Amended 5-20-2004
STM, Art. 18]
(1) Lots within a mobile home park which are served by public sewer
shall be a minimum of 6,500 square feet with a minimum frontage
of 60 feet.
(2) Lots within a mobile home park which are served by individual onsite
subsurface wastewater disposal systems shall be a minimum of
20,000 square feet with a minimum frontage of 100 feet.
(3) Lots within a mobile home park which are served by a central onsite
wastewater disposal system in accordance with § 225-31A of
this chapter shall be a minimum of 12,000 square feet with a
minimum frontage of 80 feet. Mobile home parks utilizing central
on-site wastewater disposal systems shall have a minimum overall
area of one unit per 20,000 square feet of total park area.
§ 225-48 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-48
202:512
C. Minimum setbacks.
(1) Minimum setbacks for structures on all lots which are not adjacent
to public roads shall be as follows:
(a) Front: 20 feet.
(b) Rear: 10 feet.
(c) Side: 15 feet.
(2) All structures on lots adjacent to a public road shall conform to the
setback requirements applicable to other residential developments
for the zone in which the mobile home park is located.
D. The overall density of a mobile home park shall be the combined area of
all mobile home lots shown on the plan of the park plus:
(1) The area required for road rights-of-way in accordance with this
chapter.
(2) The area required for buffer areas in accordance with this chapter.
(3) For those mobile home park areas served by public sewer an
additional open space area equal to 10% of the combined area of
the individual lots.
(a) A minimum of 50% of the required open space shall consist of
land that is suitable for active recreation (playgrounds, ball
fields, jogging trails, etc.) or storage.
(b) Developed open space (those areas in which the natural
landscape is altered) shall be designed and landscaped for the
use and enjoyment of park residents and shall be maintained
for their long-term use. Plans for such areas shall be submitted
by the applicant.
(c) To the maximum extent possible, undeveloped open space
(those areas in which the natural landscape is unaltered) shall
be left in its natural state, notwithstanding improvements for
nature trails, exercise trails and picnic areas.
(d) The applicant shall submit a plan which specifies how
designated open space is to be used and maintained, what
conditions shall apply to its use, and proposed park rules, if
any. The plan shall specify all areas to be dedicated to open
space, recreation and storage.
(e) Such designated open space shall be maintained and used for
the purpose as stated in the plan.
E. All mobile home lots shall be laid out and shown on the mobile home
park plan.
§ 225-48 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-48
202:513
F. All privately owned and maintained roads within a mobile home park
shall be designed by a professional engineer registered in the State of
Maine, and shall be constructed in accordance with standards as
developed by the Manufactured Housing Board (effective January 1,
1990) and other standards as set forth in this chapter.
(1) All roads designated for two-way travel shall have a minimum rightof-
way of 23 feet and a minimum paved surface of 20 feet. On-street
parking shall be prohibited unless an eight-foot parking lane is
provided in which case parking may be permitted on the side of the
road where the parking lane is located.
(2) All roads designated for one-way travel shall have a minimum rightof-
way of 18 feet and a minimum paved surface of 14 feet. On-street
parking shall be prohibited unless an eight-foot parking lane is
provided, in which case parking may be permitted on the side of the
road where the parking lane is located.
(3) Curvilinear streets shall be utilized wherever possible. Street
layout shall reflect the natural terrain and other features. Rights-ofway
shall not be stripped of trees or vegetation except where
grading is absolutely necessary for drainage or safety
requirements. Areas of cut and fill shall be minimized to inhibit
erosion. Drainage shall utilize natural systems where possible.
Culs-de-sac, P-loops, loop streets and T-heads may be utilized,
provided that adequate radii and access is planned for emergency
vehicles and snowplowing.
(4) Intersections shall be at 90°. Fifteen degrees variation may be
considered. Intersections of streets should be a minimum of 200
feet apart. Where the approach to an intersection is on a hill, the
maximum permissible grade within 60 feet of the intersection shall
be 2%.
(5) Street names shall not duplicate or approximate existing streets.
(6) The minimum sight distance at the intersection with a public road
shall be 10 times the posted speed limit on the existing road.
G. All roads within mobile home parks which are to be offered for
acceptance by the Town shall meet the minimum road standards as set
forth in Chapter 191, Subdivision of Land, §§ 191-14 and 191-15.
H. No lot within a mobile home park shall have vehicular access directly
onto any state highway.
I. All mobile home parks containing 35 lots or more shall have a full
second access roadway constructed to applicable standards for private
or public roads.
J. A fifty-foot-wide buffer area shall be provided along all mobile home
park boundaries that abut residential land which has a gross density of
§ 225-48 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-48
202:514
§ 225-49. Manufacturing, laboratories, research facilities and other
industrial uses.
less than one-half (1/2) of that proposed within the park; or abut
residential land that is zoned at a density of less than one-half (1/2) of
that proposed within the park. No structures, streets or utilities may be
placed within a buffer area except that they may cross a buffer area to
provide services to the park.
K. Within 25 feet of any property line and within a buffer area, visual
screening and/or landscaping shall be provided. Such screening may
consist of fences, earthen berms, planted shrubs and trees and/or
existing natural vegetation. The screening shall effectively screen
homes from view from the adjacent property and shall be maintained in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
L. Except as stated above, mobile home parks shall comply with all state
laws and municipal ordinances, and shall meet the requirements of
Chapter 191, Subdivision of Land. No lot in a mobile home park may be
sold or conveyed without the prior approval of the Planning Board. Any
such lot sold or conveyed shall meet the lot size requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located.
A. Accompanying any application for a site plan review, the applicant shall
submit the following information to the Planning Board:
(1) A written description of the industrial operations proposed in
sufficient detail to indicate the effects of these operations in
producing traffic congestion, noise, toxic or noxious matter,
vibration, odor, heat, glare, air pollution, waste and other
objectionable effect.
(2) Engineering and architectural plans for the treatment of and
disposal of sewage and industrial wastes and any on-site disposal of
wastes.
(3) Engineering and architectural plans for handling any traffic
congestion, noise, odor, heat, glare, air pollution, fire hazard or
safety hazard.
(4) Designation of the fuel proposed to be used and any necessary
plans for controlling the emission of smoke or particulate matter.
(5) The proposed number of shifts to be worked and the maximum
number of employees on each shift.
(6) A list of all hazardous materials to be hauled, stored, used,
generated or disposed of on the site, and any pertinent state or
federal permits required.
B. General requirements.
§ 225-48 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-49
202:515
§ 225-50. Apartment buildings and multifamily developments.
[Amended 5-21-1997 STM, Art. 42; 5-19-1999 STM, Art. 13]
(1) All business, service repair, manufacturing, storage, processing or
display on property abutting or facing a residential use or property
in the residential zones shall be conducted wholly within an
enclosed building unless screened from the residential area by a
sight-obscuring fence permanently maintained at least six feet in
height.
(2) Doors, windows, loading docks and other openings in structures
shall be prohibited on sides of the structure adjacent to or across a
street from a residential use or property in the residential zones if
such an opening will cause glare, excessive noise or other adverse
effects on residential properties.
(3) All yards abutting or across a street from a residential use or
property in the residential zones shall be continuously maintained
in lawn or other landscaping unless screened from the residential
use as provided in Subsection B(1) above.
(4) Traffic.
(a) Access points from a public road to industrial operations shall
be so located as to minimize traffic congestion and to avoid
directing traffic onto local access streets of a primarily
residential character.
(b) Such development shall not cause the level of service (LOS) on
collector streets to fall below LOS B for the affected length of
such streets, up to their intersection with a principal arterial.
[Added 11-17-1992 STM, Art. 2]
(c) In order to preserve the traffic capacity of roads and provide
for safe access to developments, the number and spacing of
curb cuts may be restricted. Such restrictions are subject to
variation based on engineering judgment. [Added
11-17-1992 STM, Art. 2]
(5) All materials, including wastes, shall be stored and all grounds
shall be maintained in a manner which will not attract or aid in the
propagation of insects or rodents or create a health hazard.
A. All proposals to construct apartment buildings and multifamily
developments shall be in conformance with the general perofrmance
standards of Article VII, Chapter 191, Subdivision of Land, Chapter
175, Site Plan Review, and the design requirements listed below.
Apartment buildings and multifamily housing, including dwelling units
within a mixed-use building, that are part of a planned mixed-use
development shall be exempt from the requirements of § 225-50,
provided that they are served by public water and public sewerage and
§ 225-49 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-50
202:516
are consistent with the approved master plan for the development.
[Amended 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15; 5-16-2018 STM, Art. 10]
B. Applications for approval shall include a map of the area; dimensions,
boundaries and principal elevations of the land for which approval is
sought; the names of all property owners within 200 feet of the
proposed site, as found on the most recent tax list; building layout and
general construction plans; a site plan of all driveways and parking
areas proposed to be constructed; and other information which
addresses all appropriate performance standards and design
requirements and all appropriate factors to be considered in evaluating
proposals.
C. Design requirements.
(1) Density. The net residential density shall not exceed the density
required for single-family dwellings in the zone or district in which
the apartment buildings or multifamily development is proposed
except that: [Amended 5-17-2000 STM, Art. 6; 11-13-2008
STM, Art. 8; 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15; 5-16-2018 STM, Art.
10]
(a) Any dwelling in the R-1 Zone existing prior to enactment of this
chapter shall require 10,000 square feet for the first unit plus
2,000 square feet for each additional unit.
(b) New multifamily developments built on lots vacated by the
demolition of a single-family dwelling which existed prior to
the enactment of this chapter shall not exceed the density
required for single-family dwellings in the zone, except in the
LV, VC and LI Zones in accordance with § 225-50C(1)(i).
(c) New multifamily dwellings built in the R-1 Zone and connected
to public sewer and water shall require 30,000 square feet of
usable land for each two dwelling units.
(d) New multifamily dwellings built in the R-2 Zone and connected
to public sewer and water shall require 40,000 square feet of
usable land for each two dwelling units.
(e) New multifamily dwellings or apartments built in the Mixed
Use Limited (MUL) Zone and connected to public sewer and
water must have a minimum of 12,500 square feet of lot for
each dwelling unit.
(f) New multifamily dwellings built in the CC, RCU, MUC, LV, MV,
VC, and LI Zones shall be connected to public sewer and water
and shall have a minimum lot area of at least the minimum lot
size for the first unit plus 1/2 of the minimum lot size of usable
land for each additional unit.
(g) (Reserved)76
§ 225-50 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-50
202:517
(h) New multifamily developments located in the R4 Zone shall be
connected to public sewer and water and shall be allowed at
the density specified in the Topsham Annex Reuse Master Plan,
in the areas so identified. In those areas of the R4 not included
in the Topsham Annex Reuse Master Plan, new multifamily
dwellings may be constructed at a density of four (4) units per
acre.
(i) In the LV, VC and LI Zones, the first two dwelling units do not
count towards the maximum density calculations in mixed-use
developments. Each additional unit shall have 1/4 the
minimum lot size for the zone and shall meet all other
applicable dimensional and performance standards.
(2) All apartment buildings and all dwellings in a multifamily
development shall be connected to a Brunswick-Topsham water
supply and distribution system, at no expense to the town, unless
the applicant can demonstrate that a suitable on-site water supply
is available. The applicant shall demonstrate by a signed letter
from an authorized representative of the water district that an
adequate water supply can be provided to the development at an
adequate pressure for fire-fighting purposes.
(3) If the public water supply is to be utilized, fire hydrants shall be
located so that they are not more than 300 feet from any building,
as hose is laid on the street.
(4) All residential buildings shall be connected to a public sewer
system unless the applicant can demonstrate that soils are suitable
for individual subsurface wastewater disposal. If the public sewer
system is to be utilized, the applicant shall submit a letter from the
Superintendent of the Topsham Sewer District to the reviewing
authority indicating that service is available and the sewage from
the development can be adequately treated.
(5) It shall be the responsibility of the owner to provide for rubbish
disposal, snow removal and site maintenance. All outdoor storage
areas for waste collection shall be enclosed by a wooden or
masonry screen at least six feet in height. A fifty-foot landscaped
buffer shall be provided along all property boundaries.
(6) Stormwater management and surface drainage systems shall be
designed in accordance with § 225-34, Stormwater management.
[Amended 5-17-2017 STM, Art. 13]
(7) Access, circulation and parking.
(a) The proposed development shall provide for safe access to and
from public or private roads. Safe access shall be assured by
76.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1)(g), regarding new multifamily developments of
more than eight dwelling units, was repealed 5-16-2018 STM, Art. 10.
§ 225-50 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-50
202:518
§ 225-50.1. Elderly housing. [Added 5-24-2006 STM, Art. 14]
providing an adequate number and location of access points,
with respect to sight distances, intersections, schools and
other traffic generators. All corner lots shall be kept clear
from visual obstructions higher than three feet above ground
level, for a distance of 25 feet, measured along the intersecting
street lines.
(b) The proposed development shall not have an unreasonable
adverse impact on the public road system and shall assure safe
interior circulation within its site by separating pedestrian and
vehicular traffic and by providing adequate parking and
turnaround areas.
(c) All developments containing 15 or more dwelling units may be
required by the Planning Board to have more than one street
access (for emergency and safety purposes). No more than two
accesses shall be allowed on any single street or roadway.
A. Elderly housing shall consist of autonomous housing units providing the
necessary requirements for independent living, including kitchen
facilities, bedroom(s), living room and bathroom(s).
B. Services may or may not be provided, including shared community or
dining facilities, housekeeping, personal care and assistance,
transportation, medical support or therapy.
C. Residents shall be 55 years or older, except in the case of couples, at
least one shall be 55 years or older, except that an on-site manager's
apartment may be included in the project.
D. Facilities shall have public sewer and water services.
E. Density shall be a no more than 1 dwelling unit per 6,000 s.f of lot size.
F. Elderly housing projects shall consist of a minimum of four (4) units.
G. Elderly housing developments shall be exempt from the floor area ratio,
but shall meet landscape area ratios for the specific zone.
H. Elderly housing shall meet the requirements of Chapter 175, Site Plan
Review.
I. Elderly housing shall meet the standards in § 175-11, Commercial
architectural design standards.
J. Density bonuses shall be provided for elderly housing projects, based
upon the following affordability guidelines (Table 1), with appropriate
documentation that affordability levels will be maintained and that
units will be provided to qualified buyers/renters.
§ 225-50 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-50.1
202:519
§ 225-51. Schools, colleges, churches, fraternal organizations and
not-for-profit clubs. [Amended 5-24-2006 STM, Art. 15; 5-18-2011
STM, Art. 13]
Schools, public and private colleges, churches, fraternal organizations and
not-for-profit clubs shall be permitted or require a conditional use permit in
those zoning districts indicated on the Land Use Table in accordance with
Article IX and the provisions below.
Table 1
Units that are affordable based on percentage
of their median income
80-100% of
Median
income
50 - 80% of
Median
Income
Less than 50%
of Median
Income
Bonus Units per
Applicable Unit
.50 unit bonus .75 unit bonus 1.0 unit bonus
1. When located in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts, the following
standards shall apply:
A. A green strip, suitably landscaped, at least 20 feet wide shall be
provided along all property lines, except where driveways enter
and exit.
B. No building shall be closer than 50 feet to a residential property
line.
C. When adjacent to residential properties, parking areas and outdoor
activity areas shall be effectively screened from view by a
continuous vegetative barrier or stockade fence not less than six
feet in height.
D. Not-for-profit clubs shall meet the following standards:
(1) Minimum lot size of 5 acres.
(2) All construction shall be subject to the provisions of § 175-11,
Commercial architectural review standards.
(3) Normal hours of operation (that time in which activities are
taking place on the premises) shall be limited to 7 a.m. to 10
p.m., Sunday through Thursday, and 7 a.m. to midnight on
Fridays and Saturdays.
(4) Shall be located only on a collector or arterial street.
§ 225-50.1 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-52
202:520
§ 225-52. Commercial recreational facility.
Commercial recreation activities may be established as a conditional use in
those zoning districts indicated on the Land Use Table in accordance with
Article IX and the provisions below.
§ 225-53. Professional offices in the residential zone. [Amended
6-1-1993 STM, Art. 21; 5-17-2000 STM, Art. 15]
In the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zones, professional offices may be permitted as
conditional uses in accordance with Article IX and the provisions below.
A. There will be provided adequate off-street parking for the anticipated
maximum attendance at any event.
B. Containers and facilities for rubbish collection and removal will be
provided.
C. Adequate screening, buffer area or landscape provisions will be built,
planted or maintained to protect adjacent residences from adverse
noise, light, dust, smoke and visual impact.
D. The proposed use will not create a traffic hazard. The Topsham Police
Department shall review the location and site plans and provide its
comments to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals, as
appropriate, prior to or at the public hearing.
A. New professional offices shall be located only within buildings which
existed prior to the effective date of this section (May 19, 1993) in order
to retain the essential character of the neighborhood, except as allowed
in Subsection E below.
B. Parking for professional offices shall be located to the side or rear of the
building and shall be screened from view from all streets and abutting
residential properties.
C. All outdoor lighting shall be directed in such a manner as to avoid
overspill onto abutting residential properties or glare into the street.
D. Exterior alterations shall be minimized and shall be similar to the
original architectural style of the building.
E. In special situations where a building is extremely dilapidated and
structurally unsound and where reuse is therefore not practicable or
economically feasible, or where a building is not judged to be a
significant component of the neighborhood's overall architectural and
historic character, the Planning Board may approve plans to replace an
existing residential building with a proposed new professional office
building whose scale and design would be appropriate to the site and to
the neighborhood. The Board shall seek the recommendation of a
recognized architectural authority before granting permission to
demolish.
§ 225-52 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-54
202:521
§ 225-54. Renting rooms and apartments. [Amended 6-1-1993 STM,
Art. 23]
As an accessory use in a single-family dwelling, the renting of rooms or
a single apartment in a dwelling shall be permitted, provided that the
following conditions are all satisfied:
§ 225-55. Restaurants.
A. New external construction shall not exceed 50% of the existing floor
space or 500 square feet, whichever is less.
B. The water and sewage facilities meet all existing laws and codes.
C. The building is owner-occupied.
D. One sign, no larger than two square feet in area, without artificial
lighting may be erected on the premises, only during times when a
vacancy exists.
E. Any apartment created under this section need not meet the
requirements for multifamily housing contained elsewhere in this
chapter.
F. A permit for such use shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement
Officer prior to construction and/or occupancy of such dwelling unit.
A. The application for a permit shall state the maximum seating capacity
of the restaurant. Any expansion or enlargement over the stated
capacity shall require a new permit.
B. Any restaurant located within 500 feet of an existing public sewer line
shall connect with the sewer system at the expense of the owners.
When subsurface sewage disposal is proposed, completed soil
evaluation forms (HHE-200) shall be submitted. All proposed
subsurface disposal systems shall meet the Maine State Plumbing
Code.
C. All parking and loading facilities shall be located to the side or rear of
the building, except in the BP Zone, and shall be screened from
abutting residential lots. Screening shall be comprised of a continuous
landscaped area not less than eight feet in width, containing evergreen
shrubs, trees, fences, walls, berms, or any combination, forming a
visual barrier not less than six feet in height. Restaurants that are part
of a planned mixed-use development are exempt from these
requirements, provided that they are consistent with the approved
master plan for the development in accordance with § 225-60.7.
[Amended 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15]
D. Mobile food service operations pose unique issues based on where they
are located, what space is available for parking, and potential impacts
on traffic flow. Consequently, mobile food service businesses shall
comply with the State of Maine rules relating to eating and lodging
§ 225-54 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-55
202:522
places, as periodically amended, shall require a victualer's permit from
the municipal officers, and shall comply with the following regulations
governing operations and siting. [Added 5-14-2014 STM, Art. 10]
(1) Mobile food service operations, unless permanently connected to
public utilities and approved by the Planning Board, shall not be
left on site or displayed, or left in public view, in the location of
business during nonbusiness hours.
(2) Mobile food service permits shall be issued by the Codes
Enforcement Officer for a period not to exceed one (1) year. The
Codes Officer's review of mobile food service operations shall
ensure, as a minimum, the following:
(a) The placement of the vehicle:
[1] Shall not hinder vehicular traffic or cause traffic
congestion; and
[2] Shall not hinder, or interfere with, pedestrian traffic; and
[3] Shall not block or otherwise hinder access to or from
private property; and
[4] Shall not adversely impact on abutting properties in
regards to:
[a] Noise.
[b] Odor, fumes or smoke.
[c] Light and glare.
(b) The operator shall have written permission from the property
owner to locate the vehicle on said property. If the property is
Town-owned, then permission shall be sought from the Board
of Selectmen.
(c) The operator shall have available, and under written
agreement, at least three off-street parking spaces. In cases
where on-street parking is available immediately in front, the
operator must have one off-street parking space for any vehicle
belonging to an employee working on a given shift.
(d) Adequate provisions for solid waste disposal shall include, at a
minimum:
[1] One fifty-five-gallon covered trash receptacle, or similar
sized container, to hold wastes and debris. No paper, food
or other wastes shall be allowed to accumulate on site.
[2] The waste container shall be emptied at least daily into an
approved commercial dumpster (it being emptied by a
licensed hauler on a regular basis) or other suitable and
§ 225-55 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-55
202:523
§ 225-56. Agricultural land conservation and development
standards.
approved means of transport away from the site. It shall be
the responsibility of the operator to ensure that all wastes
are handled and disposed of properly.
(e) The operator shall ensure that there is an adequate supply of
potable water for cleaning equipment and the preparation of
foods.
(f) The operator shall ensure that there is an adequate and safe
source of electrical power.
(g) The operator shall ensure that all storage of food supplies and
other business material is within the vehicle or other container
secured to the vehicle. No loose material shall be permitted
outside of the vehicle.
(h) There shall be no signs placed on sidewalks or other rights-ofway.
No temporary or mobile signs shall be allowed.
(i) The trailer, or vehicle, being used shall be in good upkeep and
provide a neat appearance.
(j) Exterior seating is only permitted when sufficient off-street
parking is provided, per § 225-27.
A. The purpose of this section is to allow landowners a reasonable return
on their holdings, in such a way that the majority of existing open field
and land pasture may remain unbuilt for use by future generations.
Toward this end, all residential subdivision development proposals
encompassing 10 or more acres of existing open fields or pasture shall
be laid out according to the cluster standards in § 225-43 above, and in
a manner consistent with Chapter 191, Subdivision of Land. If the
parcel which is proposed for development also contains land which is
not either open field or pasture, new dwellings shall be clustered on
such land to the most practical extent, so that the fields and pastures
remain as undeveloped as possible.
B. Dwelling units shall be arranged so that the minimum lot size per
residence is one acre or 1/2 of the minimum lot size for the zone (but
not less than 10,000 square feet), whichever is less, but in no instance
shall individual lots on septic be less than 20,000 square feet.
[Amended 5-17-2000 STM, Art. 15]
C. The above building densities shall be based on the following table,
which shows the percentage of land in various drainage categories
which may be counted as suitable soil for development.
§ 225-55 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-56
202:524
§ 225-57. Extractive industry.
Poorly Drained
Soil
Very Poorly
Drained Soil
Other
On sewer 50% 10% 100%
Not on sewer 25% 0% 100%
D. In order to determine the maximum number of dwelling units permitted
on a tract of land, the total acreage allowed to be included (on the basis
of the above table), less the land needed for roads, is divided by the
minimum lot size required in the district. A high-intensity soil survey by
a registered soil scientist shall be submitted to certify the extent and
location of these soil types.
E. To the fullest extent practicable, all buildings and roads shall be located
away from the soil types which are most suitable for agriculture (based
on the Soil Suitability Guide for Land Use Planning in Maine). This
provision does not apply to the location of on-site septic disposal
facilities, which must be placed on soil meeting standards of the Maine
State Plumbing Code.
F. Applicants for subdivision review under this subsection shall provide
the Planning Board with copies of deed covenants (with prospective
purchasers) or conservation easements (with the Town of Topsham)
describing land management practices (to be followed by the developer
and/or a community association of property owners) which will ensure
that the existing fields or pastures will be plowed or mowed at least
once every year.
G. Agricultural landowners are not required to sell that part of their
property which is to become open space, provided that they convey the
development rights of that open space to the Town of Topsham in a
conservation easement prohibiting future nonagricultural development.
A. Permit required. Soil (including topsoil), peat, loam, clay, rock, sand,
gravel and similar earth and/or inert materials may be removed from or
transferred to locations where permitted under the terms of this
chapter; otherwise a site plan review for such operations is required
from the Planning Board. [Amended 5-20-1992 ATM, Art. 23;
6-1-1993 STM, Art. 20; 5-21-1997 STM, Art. 43]
B. Earthmoving not requiring site plan review. [Amended 5-20-1992
ATM, Art. 23; 5-21-1997 STM, Art. 43]
(1) The following earthmoving shall be allowed without a site plan
review from the Planning Board:
(a) The removal or transfer of less than 50 cubic yards of soil
(including topsoil), peat, loam, clay, rock, sand, gravel and
similar earth and/or inert material from or onto any lot in any
twelve-month period.
§ 225-56 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-57
202:525
(b) The removal or transfer of soil (including topsoil), peat, loam,
clay, rock, sand, gravel and similar earth and/or inert material
incidental to construction, alteration or repair of a building or
in the grading and landscaping incidental thereto.
(c) The removal or transfer of soil (including topsoil), peat, loam,
clay, rock, sand, gravel and similar earth and/or inert material
incidental to construction, alteration or repair of a public or
private way or essential service.
(2) All other earthmoving, processing and storage shall require a site
plan review from the Planning Board.
C. Submission requirements. [Amended 5-20-1992 ATM, Art. 23;
5-21-1997 STM, Art. 43]
(1) Applications to the Planning Board for a site plan review for the
excavation, screening or storage of soil (including topsoil), peat,
loam, clay, sand, gravel, rock and similar earth and/or inert
material or other mineral deposits shall be accompanied by a plan
conforming to performance standards herein and in compliance
with applicable state laws and accompanied by all required state
permits or licenses.
(2) The applicant shall submit plans of the proposed extraction site
showing the property lines and names of abutting owners and
ways, indicating by not greater than five-foot contour intervals,
related to United States Geodetic Survey date, the location and
slope of the grades, existing and as proposed upon completion of
the extraction operation; and detailing proposed fencing, buffer
strips, signs, lighting, parking and loading areas, entrances and
exits; together with a written statement of the proposed method,
regularity, working hours and total proposed rehabilitation and
restoration of the site upon completion of the operation.
(3) The Board may require the additional submission of a
hydrogeologic study to determine the effects of the proposed
activity on groundwater movement and quality within the general
area.
D. Performance standards.
(1) No part of any extraction operation shall be permitted within 300
feet of any property or street line, except that drainageways to
reduce runoff into or from the extraction area may be allowed up to
100 feet of such line. Natural vegetation shall be left and
maintained on the undisturbed land.
(2) If any standing water accumulates, the site must be fenced in a
manner adequate to keep children out. Measures shall be taken to
prevent or halt the breeding of insects.
§ 225-57 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-57
202:526
(3) No slopes steeper than three feet horizontal to one foot vertical,
with the exception of the shoreland zone where no slopes may be
greater than two to one (2:1), shall be permitted at any extraction
site unless a fence at least six feet high is erected to limit access to
such locations. [Amended 5-20-1992 ATM, Art. 23; 6-1-1993
STM, Art. 20]
(4) Before commencing removal of any earth materials, the owner or
operator of the extraction site shall present evidence to the
Planning Board of adequate insurance against liability arising from
the proposed extraction operations, and such insurance shall be
maintained throughout the period of operation.
(5) Any topsoil and subsoil suitable for purposes of revegetation shall,
to the extent required for restoration, be stripped from the location
of extraction operations and stockpiled for use in restoring the
location after extraction operations have ceased. Such stockpiles
shall be protected from erosion, according to the erosion
prevention performance standards of this section.
(6) Sediment shall be trapped by diversions, silting basins, terraces
and other measures designed by a professional engineer.
(7) The sides and bottom of cuts, fills, channels and artificial
watercourses shall be constructed and stabilized to prevent erosion
or failure. Such structures are to be designed and built according
to the Maine Soil and Water Conservation Commission, Technical
Guide, Standards and Specifications.
(8) Lagooning shall be conducted in such a manner as to avoid creation
of fish trap conditions. The applicant shall submit written approval
from the Department of Marine Resources and Department of
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as applicable, prior to consideration
by the Planning Board.
(9) The hours of operation at any extraction site shall be limited as the
Planning Board deems advisable to ensure operational
compatibility with residents of the town.
(10) Where loads may be prone to blowing or spills, loaded vehicles
shall be suitably covered to prevent dust and contents from spilling
or blowing from the load, and all trucking routes and methods shall
be subject to approval by the Director of Public Works.
(11) All access/egress roads leading to/from the extraction site to public
ways shall be treated with suitable materials to reduce dust and
mud for a distance of at least 100 feet from such public ways.
(12)No equipment debris, junk or other material shall be permitted on
an extraction site except those directly related to active extraction
operations, and any temporary shelters or buildings erected for
such operations and equipment used in connection therewith shall
§ 225-57 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-57
202:527
§ 225-58. Groundwater extraction.
be removed within 30 days following completion of active
extraction operations.
(13)Within six (6) months of the completion of extraction operations at
any extraction site or any one (1) or more locations within any
extraction site, ground levels and grades shall be established in
accordance with the approved plans filed with the Planning Board
so that:
(a) All debris, stumps, boulders and similar materials shall be
removed and disposed of in an approved location or, in the case
of inorganic materials, buried and covered with a minimum of
two (2) feet of soil.
(b) The extent and type of fill shall be appropriate to the use
intended. The applicant shall specify the type and amount of fill
to be used.
(c) Storm drainage and watercourses shall leave the location at
the original natural drainage points and in a manner such that
the amount of drainage at any point is not significantly
increased.
(d) At least four (4) inches of topsoil or loam shall be retained or
obtained to cover all disturbed areas, which shall be reseeded
and properly restored to a stable condition adequate to meet
the provisions of the Environmental Quality Handbook, Erosion
and Sediment Control, as amended or revised, published by the
Maine Soil and Water Conservation Commission.
E. Permit approval. All plans and supporting material shall be submitted
for consideration with respect to the effect of the proposed operation
upon existing and foreseeable traffic patterns within the town, upon
existing or approved land uses which may be affected by the operation
and implementation of comprehensive plan policies.
A. Permit required. Groundwater may be extracted and/or bulk stored as
part of a commercial, industrial or extractive operation subject to the
approval of the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall grant
approval if it finds that the proposal, with any reasonable conditions,
will conform to the requirements of this section.
B. Submission requirements. The application together with site plan shall
include the following additional information:
(1) Statement of the quantity of groundwater to be extracted,
expressed as the annual total, the maximum monthly rate by month
and the maximum daily rate.
§ 225-57 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-58
202:528
(2) A letter from the Maine Department of Human Services approving
the facility as proposed where the Department has jurisdiction over
the proposal.
(3) Where appropriate, letters from the Department of Environmental
Protection when the Site Location Law is applicable or a discharge
permit is required.
(4) Applicants shall present a written report of a hydrogeologic
investigation conducted by a certified professional geologist or
registered professional engineer, except for springwater extraction
facilities which met the following conditions: the spring
enhancement will not increase the combined spring's catchment
capacity by removing more than four cubic yards of earth and not
increase this spring's depth by more than four feet, where the
discharge drain is no lower than the existing springwater level,
where gravity alone (without the aid of a siphon) is used to
withdraw the springwater to other facilities on site and where
other improvements do not threaten groundwater levels. This
report shall include the following information:
(a) A map of the aquifer tributary to the spring(s) or well(s) from
which water is to be extracted in sufficient detail to support a
calculation of sustained yield during a drought with a
probability of one (1) in ten (10) years, as well as an estimate of
any potential interaction between this aquifer and adjacent
aquifers.
(b) The results of the investigation shall establish the aquifer
characteristics, the rates of drawdown and rebound, the
sustainable yearly, monthly (by month) and daily extraction
rates, the cone of depression which may develop about the
proposed facility and other impacts on the water table in the
tributary aquifer and such other private or public wells within
one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed extraction facilities
shall be assessed.
(c) Nothing in this procedure and no decision by the Planning
Board shall be deemed to create groundwater rights other than
those rights which the applicant may have under Maine law.
C. Performance standards.
(1) The quantity of water to be taken from groundwater sources will
not substantially lower the groundwater table, cause saltwater
intrusion, cause undesirable changes in groundwater flow patterns
or cause unacceptable ground subsidence, based on the conditions
of a drought with a probability of occurrence of once in ten (10)
years.
§ 225-58 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-58
202:529
§ 225-59. Fairgrounds. [Amended 5-20-1992 ATM, Art. 19;
5-20-1998 STM, Art. 35; 11-30-2011 STM, Art. 5]
Fairgrounds, being a vital and unique feature to the history and economy
of Topsham, shall conform to the minimum requirements as stated under
Maine State licensing procedures, 7 M.R.S.A. § 62 et seq., and the following:
(2) The proposed facility will not cause water pollution or other
diminution of the quality of the aquifer from which the water is to
be extracted.
(3) Safe and healthful conditions will be maintained at all times within
and about the proposed use.
(4) The proposed use will not cause sedimentation or erosion.
(5) The proposed facility is not within the defined aquifer recharge
area of a public water supply, unless notice is given to the operator
thereof and the Board has considered any information supplied by
the operator and find that no adverse affect on a public water
supply will result.
(6) The operator shall make monthly operating records of the quantity
of water extracted, stored and removed from the site available to
the Code Enforcement Officer or a designee.
A. Annual fair activities. All uses commonly and historically associated
with the annual fair shall be allowed to continue as they historically
have for the annual period licensed by the state. These uses shall
conform to the fairgrounds performance standards (below) and all
other performance standards in this chapter as applicable.
(1) Performance standards:
(a) All parking area travel lanes and internal vehicular circulation
routes shall be kept clear at all times to maintain emergency
vehicle access. All fire lanes, as determined by the Fire Chief,
shall be kept clear of vehicles, vendors, awnings, or any other
obstructions at all times.
(b) The owners shall provide an appropriate number of parking
and security staff to assure the safety of those attending any
fairground activities.
(c) It shall be the responsibility of the owners to coordinate all
access to and egress from the fairgrounds for any event with
the local authorities.
(d) The owner shall provide dust control measures that will be
available on an as-needed basis.
(e) The owners shall contact the Fire Chief, EMS Director, Police
Chief and Codes Enforcement Officer (CEO) no later than 30
§ 225-58 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-59
202:530
days prior to the start of the event to schedule any necessary
inspections and to submit emergency action plans. Emergency
action plans shall include arrangements for emergency
response, contact information, schedules of events, emergency
service coverage proposals, and insurance requirements
related to public safety. The applicant shall provide the Fire
Chief any state permits when received.
(f) The Fire Chief and CEO shall be contacted at least 48 hours
prior to the start of the event to conduct inspections for
compliance with the standards in this chapter.
(g) Nothing in this section shall prevent the Fire or Police Chief or
EMS Director from requiring additional measures in order to
meet an anticipated safety issue.
B. Non-fair permitted activities. All uses commonly associated with
fairgrounds, occurring outside the annual fair period, and the following
uses, and those that the CEO determines, in writing, are sufficiently
similar to these following uses, shall be permitted. These non-fair
permitted activities shall conform to the performance standards
(below) as well as those in Subsection A(1) above and all other
performance standards in this chapter as applicable.
Car show Farm and garden show
Dog show Art show
Dog trials School bus driving training
Steer pulling Radio-controlled trials
Flea market Boat show
Public suppers Horse show
Home show Rodeo
Camper show Beano
Firemen's muster training Auction
Chicken barbeque Camporees
Fire and rescue training Haunted house
Indoor vehicle pulls Indoor concerts
Weddings/receptions Private parties
(1) Performance standards:
(a) The standards for the annual fair activities shall apply for nonfair
activities.
(b) All activities shall cease operations no later than 11:00 p.m.
(c) These uses do not require individual permits from the Codes
Enforcement Officer as long as they are operated in
§ 225-59 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-59
202:531
compliance with the approved emergency action plan on file
with the Fire Chief.
C. Special events.
The following uses, when occurring other than during the annual fair
period, and those that the CEO determines, in writing, are sufficiently
similar to these following uses, shall be considered as special events,
and each such special event shall be required to obtain an annual
license from the Board of Selectmen, following a public hearing duly
advertised and noticed to abutters.
Special events previously approved by the Board of Selectmen shall
only require approval from the CEO in subsequent years, upon a
written determination by the CEO that the current application is
substantially the same as what the Selectmen previously approved.
The CEO retains the right to refer any special event application to the
Board of Selectmen for a new permit.
Special events shall conform to the performance standards below,
as well as those in Subsection A(1), unless waived by the Board of
Selectmen, and other applicable standards in this chapter.
(1) Uses requiring a special event license:
(a) Outdoor concerts.
(b) Outdoor motor vehicle racing events.
(c) Overnight activities.
(d) Activities scheduled to last later than 11:00 p.m.
(e) Circuses and carnivals.
(2) Special event performance standards:
(a) All performance standards applicable to the annual fair shall
be applicable to special events.
(b) The Board of Selectmen, or the CEO, has the authority to
attach conditions to any license issued under this section.
(c) Off-site parking cannot be utilized without written approval of
landowners, and any such arrangements must be part of the
license application.
(d) The application for license shall include a full site plan,
illustrating fire lanes, structures, parking areas, areas of use
and types of usage proposed for each area.
(e) All activities shall cease by 11:00 p.m., unless the Board of
Selectmen permits different closing times during its approval
of the annual license.
§ 225-59 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60
202:532
§ 225-60. Additional requirements in Mixed Use Limited (MUL)
Zone. [Added 5-15-1996 STM, Art. 31; amended 5-19-1999 STM,
Art. 13]
§ 225-60.1. Adult entertainment establishments. [Added
11-18-1997 STM, Art. 8A]
A. Mixed Use Limited Zone:
(1) Any dwelling unit that is not connected to the public sewer system
shall have a minimum lot size of 1.5 acres.
(2) Retail, and light manufacturing buildings shall be limited to a
maximum of 10,000 square feet of gross floor area per building.
(3) Multifamily or apartment buildings shall be limited to a maximum
of eight dwelling units per building unless the building is part of a
planned development.
(4) All commercial projects shall conform to the following parking and
driveway requirements:
(a) Drive-through services shall be placed to the side or rear
buildings.
(b) No parking shall be permitted in the required front setback
along public streets.
(5) All commercial projects shall conform to the following open space
requirements:
(a) Within the required front setback along Route 196, 80% of all
trees over a three-inch caliper at a height of 4.5 feet and 50%
of all underbrush shall be saved, except for the area of any
access drive.
(6) All commercial projects shall conform to the following building
requirements:
(a) Flat roofs are not permitted on residential structures. All roofs
must have a minimum pitch of 4/12.
(b) Facades shall be articulated every 50 feet using varied
setbacks, rooflines, materials or heights. [Amended
5-17-2000 STM, Art. 15]
A. No adult entertainment establishment may be located closer than 1,000
feet from any public or private school, religious institution, library,
dwelling unit, day-care center, public park or recreational area or other
adult entertainment establishment.
B. The distance of 1,000 feet shall be measured in a straight line without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the customary
entrance of the adult entertainment establishment to the nearest point
§ 225-60 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.1
202:533
§ 225-60.2. Planned residential developments. [Added 5-19-1999
STM, Art. 13; amended 5-17-2000 STM, Art. 15]
The goals of these provisions for planned residential developments are:
on the boundary of the property occupied by the public or private
school, religious institution, library, dwelling unit, day-care center,
public park or recreational area or other adult entertainment
establishment.
C. There shall be no entrance to an adult entertainment establishment
from any establishment or business in which minors are permitted. In
such circumstances a separate entrance shall be provided.
D. There shall be no individual, enclosed viewing booths permitted at any
adult entertainment establishment. All viewing areas, for all types of
materials, must be well lit and open.
A. To provide flexibility in development standards.
B. To encourage innovative housing types.
C. To construct a pattern of development that reflects the most
appropriate use of the area.
D. To provide a provision for increased amenities.
E. To maintain a traditional residential development.
Planned residential developments shall be allowed in those districts in
which they are permitted or conditional uses in accordance with the
following provisions:
(1) A planned residential development that is located in a Mixed-Use
Limited (MUL) Zone may extend into an adjacent residential zone
for that portion of the planned residential development which is
residential and open space and the entire development be
governed by the provisions of this section even if planned
residential developments are not permitted within that residential
zone.
(2) Notwithstanding the requirements of the underlying zoning
district(s) and the cluster provisions of § 225-43, the planned
residential development and all uses, buildings and structures
associated with it shall be governed by the following dimensional
requirements:
§ 225-60.1 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.2
202:534
Minimum site size. A planned residential development shall
include a minimum of 25 acres.
Minimum net residential acreage per dwelling unit. There shall
be a minimum of 10,000 square feet of net residential acreage
within the overall area of the planned residential development for
each dwelling unit; provided, however, that for any portion of the
development located in an R-3 Zone, the minimum net residential
acreage per dwelling unit shall be 30,000 square feet.
Minimum lot width. Any individual lot within the planned
residential development shall have a minimum lot width of 75 feet.
Maximum lot coverage. The total portion of the gross area of
the planned residential development covered by buildings and
structures shall be not more than 25%.
Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 45 feet.
Minimum building separation. All buildings and structures shall be
separated by a minimum of 10 feet at the closest point unless fire
protection codes require a greater separation.
Minimum setbacks. The setback provisions are designed to allow
smaller, less intense buildings to be located near the perimeter
of the planned residential development while requiring that any
larger or intensely used buildings be more centrally located within
the site. Therefore, the required minimum setback of buildings
and structures shall vary depending on the use and height of the
building.
On the perimeter of the overall site, the following setbacks shall
apply:
No building or part of a building shall be located within 50 feet
of the external perimeter of the overall site of the planned
community. This required setback shall be maintained as a
vegetative buffer strip except for road, utility and similar crossings
where the development abuts a property in residential use at the
time of approval of the subdivision or site plan.
The minimum setback from the external perimeter of the overall
site that buts an adjacent lot shall vary depending on the height
and use of the building as follows:
Building Height and Use Minimum Setback
(feet)
Residential and nonresidential
buildings of not more than 30
feet
50
Residential and nonresidential
buildings of not more than 35
feet
100
§ 225-60.2 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.2
202:535
Building Height and Use Minimum Setback
(feet)
Residential and nonresidential
buildings of not more than 45
feet
150
Within the overall site, the following setbacks shall apply from
internal property lines and public or private streets that are
constructed as part of the planned residential development:
The setback from any internal property line shall be 20 feet or the
height of the building, whichever is greater.
The setback from an internal paved drive shall be 25 feet from the
right-of-way or 20 feet from the edge of pavement if no right-ofway
has been established. [Amended 5-21-2003 STM, Art. 14]
Minimum open space. At least 1/3 of the gross area of the planned
residential development shall be retained as common open space.
Areas designated as resource protection or subject to shoreland
zoning shall be included within the common open space where
feasible. Golf courses or other recreational facilities may be used
for not more than 40% of the required open space with the balance
in natural areas. Within this open space, provisions for passive
recreational use shall be made. Any residential units shall be laid
out so that each unit has a relationship to the common open space.
(3) The planned residential development shall be served by the public
water and public sewerage systems serving the Town of Topsham
and having adequate capacity to service the development. The use
of on-site sewage disposal systems shall be limited to small volume
generators or isolated locations where the Planning Board
determines that the extension of public sewerage is not reasonable.
(4) The design of the planned residential development shall reflect an
overall sense that the entire community is part of a single
development with a pedestrian-friendly scale. As such, the
buildings shall convey a common character but need not be similar
in either design or scale. Common elements, such as signs, lighting
and site furniture and improvements, shall be used where practical
to establish a sense of community. Where appropriate, pedestrian,
bicycle and cart linkages shall be provided to bring the elements of
the planned residential development together and to link the
development with systems on the perimeter of the site. Single- and
two-family dwellings shall be sited to minimize the direct access of
residential driveways onto existing public roads and the principal
roads within the development. Provisions shall be made for
creating landscaped or vegetative buffers at least 20 feet wide
between the various types of uses.
§ 225-60.2 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.2
202:536
§ 225-60.3. Transmission towers. [Added 5-17-2000 STM, Art. 15]
(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 225-17C, the development plan
for a planned residential development shall permit the construction
of more than one principal building on a lot without the buildings
being sited in a manner that would allow the lot to be able to be
divided into conforming lots with one building on each lot. No
future subdivision of a lot containing more than one principal
building shall be permitted that creates individual lots with one
building on each lot unless the lot and the placement of the building
on the lot is in conformance with the dimensional requirements of
the district.
(6) Any recreational facilities included in the planned residential
development shall be available for use by the residents of the
development. Provisions of the long-term maintenance of these
facilities shall be approved by the Planning Board.
A. The purpose of this section is to provide guidelines for the construction
and review of transmission towers within the Town of Topsham. These
regulations are intended to:
(1) Protect and promote public health, safety and welfare.
(2) Protect and preserve rural and historic visual quality in Topsham.
(3) Protect adjacent properties from potential damage from towers.
(4) Encourage a managed development of communication facilities.
(5) Encourage collocation (facility that includes a transmission tower
or building supporting one or more antennas, dishes or similar
devices owned or used by more than one public or private entity) on
existing and future transmission towers and maximize the use of
existing and approved towers and other existing structures such as
utility poles, steeples, water towers and buildings to accommodate
new wireless telecommunication antennas in order to reduce the
number of new towers needed to serve the community.
(6) For new towers, applicants are encouraged to design towers which
will accommodate collocation even if only one user is anticipated at
the time of site plan review. In this case, the maximum height for a
single user tower shall not be higher than allowable for a single
user. Additional height can be added.
B. The following uses are exempt from the regulations in this section:
(1) An antenna not more than 35 feet in height operated by a federally
licensed amateur radio operator as part of the Amateur Radio
Service.
§ 225-60.2 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.3
202:537
(2) Radio or television satellite dish antenna for the sole use of the
resident occupying a residential parcel on which the satellite dish
is located.
(3) A single receive-only antenna not more than 35 feet in height for
the sole use of the occupant of a residential parcel.
(4) A citizen band radio or two-way FM radio antenna not more than 35
feet in height.
(5) A municipal, public safety or public works telecommunication
facility up to 100 feet in height.
C. Zoning district regulations:
(1) Maximum height as measured from the top of the tower or attached
apparatus down to the average finished grade of the ground at the
base of the tower. [Amended 5-16-2001 STM, Art. 26;
5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15; 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15; 11-2-2010
ATM, Art. 3; effective 4-1-2010]
District Regulation
R-2 100 feet single user, 150 feet
collocated
R-3 100 feet single user, 150 feet
collocated
R-4 Integration into existing structures
only
Commercial Corridor Integration into existing structures
only
Commercial Corridor 196 Integration into existing structures
only
Rural Commercial 75 feet single user, 125 feet collocated
Mixed-Use Limited 75 feet single user, 125 feet collocated
Mixed-Use Commercial Integration into existing structures
only
Business Park 75 feet single user, 125 feet collocated
Business Park 2 Integration into existing structures
only
Lower Village Integration into existing structures
only
Middle Village Integration into existing structures
only
Village Center Integration into existing structures
only
§ 225-60.3 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.3
202:538
District Regulation
Industrial 100 feet single user, 150 feet
collocated
Limited Industrial Integration into existing structures
only
(2) The mass of antennas, including required support structures, shall
not exceed 450 cubic feet per user. The mass shall be determined
by the appropriate volumetric calculations using the smallest
regular rectilinear, cuboidal, conical, cylindrical or pyramidal
geometric shapes encompassing the entire perimeters of the array
and all of its parts and attachments.
(3) The lot where a new freestanding tower is located must be
conforming. The lot cannot have grandfathered conditions that do
not meet requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. If the tower is
located on a lot with another use, both uses shall meet the
minimum area requirements for each use. Integration into an
existing grandfathered structure is allowable as long as the
existing structure meets all engineering requirements.
(4) The center of the base of the tower must be set back a minimum of
125% of the tower height, or the required minimum setback of the
zone in which it is located, whichever is greater.
(5) No part of the structure or accessory structures, including
anchoring systems and storage buildings, shall be located in the
setback required for the zone.
(6) If more than one tower is proposed for a lot, they shall be located as
close together as technically possible.
(7) Non-accessory uses located on the same lot as a tower shall be
located a minimum of 125% of the tower height from the base of
the tower.
(8) Setbacks may be reduced by the Planning Board to allow the
integration of a tower into an existing or proposed structure such
as a church steeple, water tank or similar structure.
(9) Existing towers as of the date of the adoption of this section may be
increased in height a maximum of 30 feet to accommodate
collocation only if additional lighting is not required and required
setbacks are maintained.
D. Collocation requirements.
(1) Applicants for site plan review for a new transmission tower must
send written notice by prepaid first class, return receipt United
States mail to all other transmission tower owners and licensed
telecommunication providers in the Town utilizing existing towers,
§ 225-60.3 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.3
202:539
stating their siting needs and/or collocation capabilities in an effort
to encourage tower collocation. Evidence that this notice
requirement has been fulfilled shall be submitted to the Planning
Board and shall include a copy of the notice which was sent, a name
and address list, copies of return receipts and a statement under
oath that the notices were sent.
An application for a new transmission tower must provide proof,
in writing, that existing or previously approved towers cannot
accommodate the technical requirements of the applicant. Such
evidence would be:
(a) Planned necessary equipment would exceed the structural
capacity of existing and approved towers, considering the
planned use of those towers, and existing and approved towers
cannot be reinforced to accommodate planned or equivalent
equipment.
(b) Planned equipment will cause electromagnetic frequency
interference with other existing or planned equipment for that
tower, and the interference cannot be prevented.
(c) Existing or approved towers do not have space on which
planned equipment can be placed so it can function effectively.
(d) Other documented reasons that make it technically or
financially unfeasible to place equipment planned by the
applicant on existing or approved towers.
(2) A proposal to construct a new collocated transmission tower taller
than the maximum height permitted for a single user must include
evidence that the tower can structurally support a minimum of
three antenna arrays for collocation purposes.
The Planning Board shall require evidence of adequate structural
support to accommodate any proposed additional arrays.
E. Additional site plan review requirements.
(1) A report from a registered professional engineer in the State of
Maine that describes the tower, the technical reasons for the tower
design and the capacity of the tower design, including the
number(s), type(s) and volume [as described in § 225-60.3C(2)
above] of antenna(s) that it can accommodate and the basis for the
calculation of capacity.
(2) For building, pole-mounted or tower facilities, certification by a
registered professional engineer in the State of Maine that the
design is adequate to support, without failure, the maximum forces
expected from wind, earthquakes, ice/snow loading when the pole
tower is fully loaded with antennas, transmitter, other equipment
and camouflaging, as described in the submitted plan.
§ 225-60.3 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.3
202:540
(3) Elevation drawings. cross-sectional area or silhouette of the facility,
drawn to scale and showing all measurements, both linear and
volumetric, showing front, sides and rear of the proposed facility,
including all fencing, supporting systems for transmission cables
running between the tower and accessory structures, control
panels, antennas and existing structures and trees. Reference any
design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or
eliminating visual obtrusiveness.
(4) Detail of the tower base or method of attachment to a structure. If
the facility will be attached to an existing building or structure,
provide measurements and elevations of the structure.
(5) Details of all accessory structures, including buildings, parking
areas, utilities, gates, access roads, etc.
(6) Certification from a registered professional engineer in the State of
Maine that this proposal will not interfere with established public
safety telecommunications.
(7) Written approval by all applicable state and federal agencies,
including but not limited to the FAA and FCC, or a statement from
the agency that no approval is required. including a description of
any conditions or criteria for the approval or exemption from
approval.
(8) An inventory of all the provider's existing and approved towers,
antennas or sites within the Town of Topsham and locations in
surrounding communities where wireless telecommunications are
proposed to be utilized in conjunction with the facility proposed in
this application. Service areas maps or network maps of the
applicant's existing and proposed facilities in Cumberland,
Androscoggin and Sagadahoc Counties.
(9) Site photos showing site vegetation, existing and adjacent
structures, views of and from the proposed site. Topography and
land uses on the proposed parcel and on abutting properties.
(10) Landscaping plan reflecting location of proposed screening and
fencing, planting areas, proposed plantings, existing plant
materials to be retained and trees and shrubs to be removed.
(11) Inventory any other telecommunication facilities or transmission
towers existing or proposed on the site.
(12) A visual analysis, which may include photomontage, field mock up
or other techniques, shall be prepared by or on behalf of the
applicant which identifies the potential visual impacts, at design
capacity, of the proposed facility. Consideration shall be given to
views from public areas as well as from private residences and from
archaeological and historic resources, including historic districts,
areas and structures, specifically those listed in the National
§ 225-60.3 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.3
202:541
Register of Historic Places or eligible for inclusion or as
determined by the Topsham Historic District Commission. The
analysis of the impact on historical and archaeological resources
shall meet the requirements of the Maine State Historic
Preservation Officer in his/her review capacity for the FCC. The
overall analysis shall assess the cumulative impacts of the proposed
facility and other existing and foreseeable transmission towers
and telecommunication facilities in the area and shall identify and
include all feasible mitigation measures consistent with the
technological requirements of the proposed telecommunication
service.
(13) A letter of intent that commits the tower owner and successors in
interest to:
(a) Respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request for
information from a potential collocation applicant;
(b) Negotiate in good faith for shared use by other parties that
have received federal licenses.
(14) Evidence that collocation on existing or approved towers is not
possible, per § 225-60.3D above. If the proposed tower cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved tower site, the applicant
must assess whether such tower site could be changed to
accommodate the proposed tower and generally describe the
means and projected cost of shared use of the existing or approved
tower site.
(15) Proof of financial capacity to build, maintain and remove the
proposed tower.
(16) A site restoration bond or other surety, in an amount and form
approved by the Topsham Planning Director to provide for the
removal of the tower and the restoration of the site. An engineer's
estimate of the anticipated removal and restoration costs shall
accompany the bond.
F. Design standards. The following standards will be met by the applicant.
The Planning Board will determine if the applicant has met the
standards during the review process. All transmission towers shall be
designed to blend into the surrounding environment to the greatest
extent feasible. To this end the following measures shall be
implemented.
(1) Towers shall be constructed of metal or other nonflammable
material unless specifically waived by the Planning Board.
(2) Accessory facilities shall be adjacent to the tower base unless an
alternative location will be less visually obtrusive or topographic
considerations require an alternative location.
§ 225-60.3 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.3
202:542
(3) Accessory facilities shall be constructed out of nonreflective
exterior materials and shall be placed underground, if possible.
(4) New accessory facilities shall be no taller than one story in height
and shall be treated to look like a building or facility typically found
in the area.
(5) All buildings, poles, towers, antenna supports, antennas and other
components of each wireless telecommunication facility site shall
be initially painted and thereafter repainted as necessary with a
flat nonreflective paint. The color(s) selected shall be one that the
Planning Board determines will minimize facility visibility to the
greatest extent feasible. To this end, improvements which will be
primarily viewed against soils or trees shall be painted colors
matching this landscape while elements which rise above the
horizon and/or tree line shall be painted a blue gray that matches
the typical sky color at the location unless the Planning Board
determines that an alternative proposal will minimize visibility.
(6) No obstruction painting or any lighting shall be permitted on any
towers.
(7) The Planning Board may require special design of the facilities
where findings of particular sensitivity are made (e.g., proximity to
historic or aesthetically significant structures, views and/or
community features.)
(8) Sufficient anticlimbing measures and other security measures
preventing access to the site shall be incorporated into the facility,
as needed, to reduce the potential for trespass and injury.
(9) Only manually operated or motion-sensing security lighting is
permitted.
(10) Existing vegetation shall be retained as much as feasible,
especially within the required setbacks. Where gaps of vegetation
exist or are created within the setbacks, plantings will be installed
to provide screening for abutting land uses. Infill plantings within
gaps in existing vegetation that adequately screen the facility from
abutting uses will be of similar type as the existing plantings.
Dimensional requirements for plantings along visible frontages
without existing plant screening:
(a) Six-foot to eight-foot evergreen shrubs planted in alternate
pattern, five feet on center and within 15 feet of the site
boundary.
(b) One row of deciduous trees, not less than 2 1/2 inches to 3
inches caliper measured 6 inches above grade and spaced not
more than 20 feet apart and within 25 feet of the site boundary.
§ 225-60.3 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.3
202:543
(c) One row of evergreen trees at least four feet to five feet in
height when planted and spaced not more than 15 feet apart
within 40 feet of the site boundary.
(d) The Planning Board may determine that existing vegetation is
either sufficient or supplemental plantings are needed to
minimize visual impacts. In the case of infill plantings, the
number of required plantings can vary from the above
numbers, but the size and proximity to the site boundary shall
be maintained.
(e) The screening standards established in § 225-60.3F(10) are
also applicable to developments such as gas tanks, water tanks
and other facilities the Planning Board deems applicable.
(f) A registered landscape architect or qualified landscaper shall
prepare the screening planting plan and the Planning Board
may require the applicant to submit a graphic visual impact
analysis prepared by a registered architect, engineer or
landscape architect. The registered professional shall provide
a written report describing the methodology for creating the
visual impact analysis graphics.
G. Location. All transmission towers shall be located so as to minimize
their visibility and to minimize the total number of towers in town. The
following measures shall guide the location:
(1) Transmission towers shall not be sited in areas of high visibility
unless a finding is made that no other location is technically
feasible, and unless the facility is sited below the ridgeline or
designed to minimize its profile by blending with the surrounding
existing natural and man-made environment in such a manner as to
be effectively unnoticeable.
(2) No facility shall be located as to create a significant threat to the
health or survival of rare, threatened or endangered plant or
animal species.
H. Additional standards and criteria. The Planning Board will also utilize
the following criteria in reviewing site plan applications:
(1) Mitigation measures have been utilized to screen antennas and
towers from view from public rights-of-way or scenic vistas, either
via landscaping, fencing or other architectural screening.
(2) Network interconnections from the communications site via land
lines have been proposed rather than the use of microwave link
dishes, in order to minimize visual impact.
(3) Creative measures have been employed to camouflage facilities by
integrating them with existing buildings and among other uses.
§ 225-60.3 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.3
202:544
(4) Other technically feasible sites have been investigated, and, if
available, the proposed facility has been relocated in order to
minimize the effect of the location on visually sensitive areas such
as residential communities, historical areas and open space areas.
(5) Collocation, when technically feasible and visually desirable, on an
existing tower, has been investigated, and, if technically and
financially feasible, the proposed facility is collocated.
(6) Use of an existing community facility site, such as on or adjacent to
water tanks or utility poles, has been investigated as a potential
site for a tower, antennas and other equipment and, if available and
technically feasible and visually desirable, is proposed as the site
for the facility.
I. Amendments. Any change to existing, previously approved and
proposed towers and structures requires site plan approval. This
includes modifications to height and approved attachments such as
antennas and dishes as well as requests for additional attachments.
J. Removal of transmission towers.
(1) If the tower ceases to be used or if the use of the tower is
abandoned for any reason, it shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the facility to notify the Codes Enforcement Officer of the
date of the abandonment or cessation of use. If the owner shall fail
to give the required notice, the CEO shall make a determination of
such date, which determination shall be conclusive as to such date.
(2) In the case of a tower which is abandoned or the use of which
ceases, it shall be removed within one year of its abandonment or
cessation of use. All aboveground structures, equipment,
foundations, guy anchors, utilities and access roads or driveways
specifically constructed to service the tower, structures, equipment
or utilities shall be removed, and the land returned to a condition as
near to the original preconstruction condition as possible.
K. Inspections. The following procedures shall be undertaken by the
owner of the tower:
(1) Inspection of the towers by a registered professional engineer in
the State of Maine shall be performed to ensure structural
integrity. Such inspections shall be performed as follows:
(a) Monopole towers: at least every seven years following
completion of construction. The inspection shall take place
between the sixth and seventh year of the repeat sequence.
(b) Self-supporting towers: at least once every five years following
the completion of construction. The inspection shall take place
between the fourth and fifth year of the repeat sequence.
§ 225-60.3 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.3
202:545
§ 225-60.4. Planned commercial developments. [Added 7-31-2000
STM, Art. 5]
(c) Guyed towers: at least once every three years following
completion of construction. The inspection shall take place
between the second and third year of the repeat sequence.
(2) The inspection report shall be submitted to the Town Engineer
within 30 days of its receipt by the tower owner. Based upon the
results of the inspection, the CEO, upon recommendation by the
Town Engineer, may require repair or demolition of the tower.
(3) The cost of such inspections, reports, repairs or demolition
required under this § 225-60.3K of this chapter shall be borne
entirely by the tower owner. Required repairs shall be completed
within 90 days or less as required by the CEO and agreement by
the Town Engineer for safety reasons.
(4) Failure to provide inspection reports in the required time schedule
shall be deemed primae facie evidence of abandonment.
A. Goals. The goals for these provisions for planned commercial
developments are:
(1) To provide flexibility in development standards.
(2) To encourage a pattern of development that reflects the most
appropriate use of the area.
(3) To encourage developments with an integrated design theme.
B. Where permitted. Planned commercial developments are permitted in
those zones indicated on Table 225-16.
C. Uses allowed. Any use allowed as a permitted use or conditional use in
the zone in which the development is located shall be permitted as part
of the planned commercial development.
D. Overall development plan. The planned commercial development shall
be developed based upon an overall development plan approved by the
Planning Board. The overall development plan shall include the
elements identified in the definition of a planned commercial
development. The plan shall conform to the following requirements.
(1) The design of the planned commercial development shall reflect an
overall sense that the entire project is part of a single development
with a pedestrian-friendly scale. As such, the buildings shall convey
a common character but need not to similar in either design or
scale. Common elements, such as signs, lighting and site furniture
and improvements, shall be used, where practical, to establish a
sense of community. Where appropriate, pedestrian and bicycle
linkages shall be provided to bring the elements of the planned
commercial development together and to link the development
§ 225-60.3 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.4
202:546
with systems on the perimeter of the site. Buildings shall be sited to
minimize the direct access of driveways onto existing public roads
and the principal roads within the development. Provisions shall be
made for creating landscaped or vegetative buffers at least 20 feet
wide between the various types of uses.
(2) The planned commercial development shall be served by the public
water and public sewerage systems serving the Town of Topsham
and having adequate capacity to service the development. The use
of on-site sewage disposal systems shall be limited to small-volume
generators or isolated locations where the Planning Board
determines that the extension of public sewerage is not reasonable.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 225-17C, the development plan
for a planned commercial development shall permit the
construction of more than one principal building on a lot without
the buildings being sited in a manner that would allow the lot to be
able to be divided into conforming lots with one building on each
lot. No future subdivision of a lot containing more than one
principal building shall be permitted that creates individual lots
with one building on each lot unless the lot and the placement of
the building on the lot is in conformance with the dimensional
requirements of the district.
E. Development standards. The Planning Board may approve a planned
commercial development that meets the following standards even if the
development does not comply with the requirements of Table 225-17.
The approval of such a planned commercial development shall not be
considered the granting of a variance.
(1) Minimum lot size within the planned development: The minimum
lot size shall conform to the requirement of the zone in which it is
located.
(2) Minimum lot width (feet): Internal lots that do not front on a public
street shall have no lot width requirement. Lots that front on a
public street shall conform to the requirement of the zone in which
it is located.
(3) Minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks (feet): All setbacks on
the perimeter of the planned development shall conform to the
requirements of the zone in which it is located. Internal setbacks
within the planned development may be reduced to zero.
(4) Minimum building separation (feet): all buildings and structures
shall be separated by the greater of 10 feet or the amount required
by fire protection codes.
(5) Maximum building and structure height: All buildings and
structures shall conform to the height requirements of the zone in
which it is located.
§ 225-60.4 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.4
202:547
§ 225-60.5. Seasonal retail sales. [Added 5-24-2006 STM, Art. 11]
(6) Minimum landscape and maximum floor areas ratios: A planned
development shall conform to the ratios for the zone within which it
is located. However, the ratios may be calculated based upon the
overall development rather than for individual lots or buildings.
A. Purpose. In order to support and promote local agricultural practices,
the Town of Topsham seeks to create an opportunity for local
agricultural producers to sell their products in expanded areas in Town,
from which they are currently restricted, in an expanded "farmer's
market" manner.
B. Seasonal retail sales may be allowed in all listed zones (see § 225-17)
with a license from the Codes Enforcement Officer. The following
standards shall apply to all licenses:
(1) No license shall be issued for more then 90 consecutive days;
(2) Hours of operation shall not begin until 9:00 a.m. and shall not
extend later than 8:00 p.m.;
(3) Operations maybe allowed up to seven (7) days a week;
(4) Each facility shall provide at least ten (10) on-site parking spaces,
plus parking for the maximum number of employees, and shall not
conflict with parking demands for the primary use of the property.
Parking surfaces shall be gravel or paved;
(5) No location shall have a seasonal retail sales license for more then
twenty-six (26) weeks per year;
(6) No seasonal retail sales facility shall have permanent fixtures,
structures, or signs, or any other permanent features;
(7) No seasonal retail license shall be issued for any lot smaller than
30,000 s.f.;
(8) There shall be a minimum of three (3) weeks between the effective
dates of any seasonal retail license;
(9) No seasonal retail sales uses will be allowed in any Historic
Preservation District;
(10) All temporary lighting shall conform to the § 225-26;
(11) The Fire Chief shall be consulted on license applications;
(12) All applications for a seasonal retail license shall include sufficient
information for the Codes Enforcement Officer to determine
compliance with the above standards. In addition, all applications
shall include provisions for site clean up and restoration following
the expiration date of the license.
§ 225-60.4 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.6
202:548
§ 225-60.6. Affordable housing developments. [Added 5-24-2006
STM, Art. 16]
A. Purpose. The Topsham Comprehensive Plan of 2005 discusses the need
for the availability of housing for all income levels. Because housing
costs in the Town of Topsham continue to increase and outpace the area
incomes, it adversely affects the ability of low to moderate-income
families, families that live and work in Topsham, to affordably
accommodate their housing needs. Therefore, the Town of Topsham has
determined that the incentives provided below are justified and
beneficial in order to construct affordable homes.
B. Applicability. The following standards shall apply to all major
subdivisions as defined in Chapter 191 of the Topsham Town Code.
C. Bonus density. The Planning Board shall be given the authority to grant
unit bonuses to the maximum number of allowable units for
subdivisions that provide affordable units as provided for in this
subsection.
(1) Maximum bonus units shall be determined by Table 1.1 and are
dependent on the amount of affordable units in a development and
the income level of the households that are able to rent or buy the
units.
(2) Developments that receive a unit bonus based upon affordability
shall use Table 1.1 to determine total bonus units. Dimensional
standards of § 225-17 shall apply unless otherwise stated in Table
1.2.
Table 1.1
Units that are affordable based on
percentage of their median income
80-100% of
Median
Income
50 - 80% of
Median
Income
Less than 50%
of Median
Income
Bonus Units
per Applicable
Unit
.50 unit bonus .75 unit bonus 1.0 unit bonus
§ 225-60.6 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.6
202:549
Table 1.2
Dimensional standards based on percentage
of affordable units per development
10% or Less
Affordable
Units
11% - 50%
Affordable
Units
50% or More
Affordable
Units
Floor Area
Ratio
10% increase 20% increase 30% increase
Maximum
Building Height
5% increase 10% increase 15% increase
Setback
Reductions
20% reduction 35% reduction 50% reduction
D. Standards.
(1) Qualified homebuyers. Affordable housing lots/units shall be sold to
qualified low and moderate income buyers as defined in § 225-6
Definitions, and any additional criteria adopted by the Town.
(2) Non-segregation. Affordable housing lots/units shall be
geographically dispersed throughout the development where
feasible.
(3) Design. The dwellings on affordable housing lots/units shall be
compatible and comparable with the design of the dwellings on the
remainder of the development in terms of appearance, materials,
finished quality and level of finish. The Planning Board shall review
developments based upon the standards set forth in Chapter 175 of
the Topsham Town Code.
(4) Maintaining affordability. The applicant shall submit for review and
acceptance to the Topsham Housing Authority an agreement,
which preserves the long-term affordability of the lots/units to low
and moderate income households. The agreement shall be either a
third party agreement of graduated equity recapture (i.e., Maine
State Housing Authority), deed restriction administered through
the Topsham Housing Authority, or a combination of the two. The
applicant may use an agreement provided by the Topsham Housing
Authority or may present a comparable instrument for review.
Agreements must include but not be limited to:
(a) A proven method to preserve long-term (15 years) affordability
to low and moderate income buyers;
(b) A formula for accruing limited equity to the buyer which
includes any physical improvements to the property;
§ 225-60.6 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.6
202:550
§ 225-60.7. Planned mixed-use developments. [Added 5-24-2007
STM, Art. 15]
(c) The option to return housing to market rates only if there are
no qualified buyers within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
property being on the market;
(d) An option to the Topsham Housing Authority to purchase the
affordable lots/units if no qualified buyers apply at the
"affordable" price;
(e) The enforceability of the mechanism;
(f) The amount of administrative costs to the Town; and
(g) The supervision of the agreement.
(5) Proportionality. Affordable housing lots/units shall be constructed
and completed at least concurrently with the remainder of the
project. In developments where the applicant or its agents, or its
successors or assigns, shall construct at least fifty percent (50%) of
the units, the approved affordable housing units shall be
constructed in proportion to the market rate units. Proportionality
shall be determined by dividing the total number of units in the
development by the total number of affordable units. No building
permit shall be issued for a market rate unit in excess of the
proportion of affordable housing units for which a certificate of
occupancy has been issued.
E. R4 Zone. Housing developed in the R4 Zone shall achieve a standard of
10% of all units being classified as affordable, with no density bonuses.
Affordable housing units shall meet the development standards in
§ 225-60.6D.(1) through (4), including qualified buyers/renters, nonsegregation,
design, and maintenance of affordability. Housing
developments in the R4 Zone are not eligible for the affordable housing
density bonuses. [Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 8; amended
5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
A. General. Any proposal for a planned mixed-use development must
conform to the requirements of this section. The approval of a planned
mixed-use development involves a three phase process as follows:
(1) The Site Inventory and Analysis Phase involves the preparation and
review of a detailed analysis of the existing conditions on the site,
the opportunities and constraints these conditions create for the
use and development of the site, and the factors that must be
addressed in the development of the Master Plan for the planned
mixed-use development. This phase must be completed before the
Master Plan is submitted to the Town.
(2) The Master Plan Phase involves the preparation and review of a
conceptual master plan for the overall planned mixed-use
§ 225-60.6 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.7
202:551
development and the development standards that will apply to
individual buildings, subdivisions, or phases of the development.
Approval of the Master Plan and development standards must
occur before any application is submitted for site plan review or
subdivision approval.
(3) The Site Plan or Subdivision Review Phase involves the preparation
and review of the detailed development plans for individual
buildings, subdivisions, or phases of the development in
accordance with the Town's Site Plan Review requirements
(Chapter 175) and/or Subdivision of Land requirements (Chapter
191). In addition to conforming to the requirements of those
chapters and the other zoning requirements, a planned mixed-use
development must demonstrate that it is consistent with the
approved Master Plan and its development standards.
B. Where permitted. Planned mixed-use developments are permitted only
in those zones where it is listed as a permitted use in § 225-16.77
C. Uses allowed. Any use that is allowed as a permitted use or conditional
use in the zone in which the development is located or that is listed as
being allowed as part of a planned mixed-use development in that zone
is permitted as part of a planned mixed-use development.
D. Area included. The intention of these requirements is that a planned
mixed-use development includes a substantial area that will allow for
the master planning of a significant development activity. A planned
mixed-use development must include at least twenty-five (25) acres. A
planned mixed-use development may consist of a single large parcel or
a number of parcels. If a parcel with more than twenty-five acres is
proposed as part of a planned mixed-use development, all land that is in
common ownership must be included in the planned mixed-use
development unless specifically permitted by the Planning Board. The
Planning Board may permit land in common ownership to be treated as
more than one planned mixed-use development if it finds that such
treatment will be consistent with the provisions of this section and will
result in a coordinated development approach for the entire holding. If
the Planning Board allows a planned mixed-use development that is less
than the entire holding, the development must include at least twentyfive
(25) acres. In this situation, the Site Inventory and Analysis Phase
and the Conceptual Site Plan and Preliminary Infrastructure Plan of the
Master Plan Phase submitted for the initial planned mixed-use
development must cover the entire area in common ownership.
E. Site Inventory and Analysis Phase. The Site Inventory and Analysis is
intended to provide the applicant, Planning Board, staff, boards and
utility districts, and public with a better understanding of the overall
site and the opportunities and constraints that the natural and built
environment create for the use and development of the site. The
77.Editor's Note: The Table of Use Regulations is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 225-60.7 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.7
202:552
expectation is that the preparation of the inventory and analysis will
result in a Master Plan for the planned mixed-use development that
reflects and is sensitive to the conditions on the site, that preserves
areas that should be protected from development or intensive use, that
utilizes the areas of the site that are most suitable for development
for intensive use and development, and that recognizes and addresses
identified constraints or limitations of the site. The Site Inventory and
Analysis phase must be completed before the Master Plan is submitted.
(1) Procedures.
(a) The applicant shall initiate the review process by delivering the
Site Inventory and Analysis materials to the Planning Office at
least twenty-one (21) days prior to a scheduled Planning Board
meeting together with a request for the Board to initiate the
review.
(b) Upon receipt of a Site Inventory and Analysis submission, the
Town Planner shall review the submitted material and
determine whether the submission is complete, considering
any requests for waivers of the submission requirements
within five (5) working days of its receipt. If the planner
determines that the submission is incomplete, he/she shall
notify the applicant in writing of this finding, shall specify the
additional material required to make the submission complete,
and shall advise the applicant that the item will not be
scheduled for discussion by the Planning Board until the
additional information is submitted. A determination of
incompleteness by the Town Planner may be appealed, in
writing, to the Planning Board. These steps shall be repeated
until the submission is determined to be complete. When the
submission is determined to be complete, the Town Planner
shall place the item on the agenda for discussion by the
Planning Board, and the Planner shall distribute copies of the
submission to the Town Manager, Town Engineer, Public Works
Director, Police Chief, Fire Chief, utility districts, and
Conservation Commission for their review and comment. In
addition, the Town Planner shall notify all abutters and other
property owners on the west side of Interstate 295 within five
hundred (500) feet of the pending request and the date, time,
and place of the meeting at which the Planning Board will
initiate review of the Site Inventory and Analysis.
(c) The Planning Board shall hold a public on-site inspection of the
site to review the existing conditions, field-verify the
information submitted, and investigate the opportunities and
constraints of the site. This inspection shall be a formal
meeting of the Board. The Board may schedule this visit either
before or after the initial board meeting at which the Site
Inventory and Analysis is considered.
§ 225-60.7 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.7
202:553
(d) Prior to preparing its findings, the Planning Board shall
provide the public with the opportunity to comment on the Site
Inventory and Analysis and whether it accurately reflects site
conditions, the opportunities and constraints for the use of the
site, and the issues that need to be addressed in the Master
Plan. This can be a formal public hearing, public workshop, or
other public session that allows for public comment on the
submittal. The board shall provide appropriate public notice of
this opportunity, including written notification of abutters and
other property owners on the west side of Interstate 295 within
five hundred (500) feet, at least seven (7) days in advance.
(e) The Planning Board may request peer review on any aspects of
the submission in accordance with the provisions of § 175-7C,
Consultant fees.
(f) Within forty-two (42) days of the meeting for the initial
consideration of the inventory and analysis, the Planning Board
shall provide the applicant with its findings in writing.
(2) Submission requirements. The Site Inventory and Analysis
submission shall include the appropriate application fee and
twenty-one (21) copies of the following five items plus any
additional information the applicant wishes to submit to enable the
Planning Board to evaluate the site and its development potential:
- A completed application form provided by the Town
- A Site Context or Locus Map
- A Site Inventory Plan
- A Site Analysis Plan
- A Site Analysis Narrative
Each item shall include all of the information set forth below
together with any supplemental information desired by the
applicant. The Planning Board may not waive the submission of
any of the five required items, but may waive the submission of
individual pieces of data or information required for any of the five
required items upon written request of the applicant and a finding,
by formal vote of the Board, that the information is not needed
to understand the conditions of the site and the opportunities and
constraints resulting from these conditions.
(a) The Site Context or Locus Map shall show the location of the
development in the Town and its relationship to adjacent
property. The map shall be drawn at a size adequate to show
the relationship of the proposed development to the adjacent
properties within one thousand (1,000) feet of the site, and to
allow the Board to locate the site within the municipality. The
location map shall show:
§ 225-60.7 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.7
202:554
[1] Existing subdivisions or other development in the
proximity of the site.
[2] Locations and names of existing streets.
[3] Boundaries and designations of zoning districts.
[4] An outline of the land included in the planned mixed-use
development and all land in common ownership.
(b) The Site Inventory Plan shall show the existing natural
features and resources and built environment on and within
five hundred (500) feet of the site. The Plan shall be an
accurate scale plan of the site at a scale of not more than one
hundred (100) feet to the inch. If this scale is not adequate to
show critical details of the inventory, the Planning Board may
require larger scale plans be provided for these portions of the
site. The Plan must show the following as a minimum:
[1] The proposed name of the development, North arrow
(True Meridian), date, and scale.
[2] The boundaries of the parcel based upon a standard
boundary survey prepared by a registered land surveyor
and giving the bearings and distances of all property lines.
[3] Existing restrictions or easements on the site (if none, so
state).
[4] The topography of the site at an appropriate contour
interval depending on the nature of the use and character
of the site as determined by the Town Planner.
[5] The location, extent, and, where appropriate, value or
condition of the natural features of the site and within five
hundred (500) feet of the site, including wetlands, vernal
pools, streams, ponds, floodplains, groundwater aquifers,
significant wildlife habitats, scenic views or areas,
significant geological features, or other important natural
features. Information on adjacent properties may be from
published sources.
[6] The soils on the site through a medium intensity soil
survey. The Planning Board may require the submission of
a high intensity soils survey if it determines that a high
intensity survey is required to evaluate the appropriate
use of the property.
[7] Vegetative cover conditions on the property according to
general cover type, and the identification of any
exceptional specimens, including any trees with a
diameter at breast height of more than twenty-four inches.
§ 225-60.7 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.7
202:555
[8] Watershed and sub-watershed boundaries.
[9] The groundwater hydrology beneath the site, including
any information from test pits, borings, or existing wells.
[10] Existing buildings, structures, or other improvements on
the site, including streets, driveways, stone walls, fences,
trails, and cemeteries (if none, so state).
[11] The approximate locations of all culturally, historically or
archaeologically significant buildings, features, or sites.
[12] The location and size of existing utilities or improvements
servicing the site (if none, so state).
(c) The Site Analysis Plan shall be at the same scale as the
inventory plan [see Subsection E(2)(b) above] and highlight the
opportunities and constraints of the site in a bubble diagram or
annotated format. This plan must enable the Planning Board to
determine: which portions of the site are unsuitable for
development or use; which areas of the site have potential
conservation or open space value that should be addressed in
the Master Plan; which areas of the site may be subject to or
create off-site conflicts or concerns (noise, lighting, visual
intrusion, traffic, etc.); and which areas are well suited for the
proposed use.
(d) The Site Analysis Narrative must describe the existing
conditions of the site, the constraints and opportunities
created by the site, the potential for mitigating any potential
conflicts or concerns, the open space conservation potential of
the site, and the development potential of the site. This
submission should include a narrative description of the
existing road system that will provide access to the project and
any issues related to traffic capacity, safety, sight distances, or
other traffic considerations together with any preliminary
studies done relative to the site, including traffic studies,
market studies, or other information that will help the Board
understand the site and the proposed project.
(3) Planning Board action. The Site Inventory and Analysis phase is
informational and does not result in any formal approval or
disapproval of the project. The Planning Board shall review the
submission to determine if the information provides a clear
understanding of the site and identifies opportunities and
constraints that help determine how it should be used, areas that
are appropriate for conservation, and areas that are appropriate
for development. The Planning Board shall also consider any input
received from members of the staff, other boards and commissions,
utility districts, Conservation Commission, or members of the
public. The Site Inventory and Analysis does not bind either the
applicant or the Board, and statements made by Planning Board
§ 225-60.7 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.7
202:556
members shall not be the basis for disqualifying them or
invalidating any action taken. The outcome of the review process
shall be the identification by the Planning Board of the issues and
constraints that must be addressed in the Master Plan and related
submissions, including proposed development standards.
F. Master Plan Phase. The Master Plan is intended to lay out, in general
terms, how the planned mixed-use development will be developed,
including the proposed use of various parts of the site, the primary road
network, primary utility network, overall approach to stormwater
management, proposed development areas, proposed open space
areas, and proposed buffer areas and the development standards that
will apply to development proposals. The intention of this phase is to
provide the overall development framework for the district into which
specific projects can then be fitted to produce a coordinated mixed-use
development.
(1) Procedures.
(a) The applicant shall initiate the review process by delivering the
Master Plan materials to the Planning Office at least twentyone
(21) days prior to a scheduled Planning Board meeting
together with a request for the Board to initiate the review.
(b) Upon receipt of a Master Plan submission, the Town Planner
shall review the submitted material and determine whether the
submission is complete, considering any requests for waivers
of the submission requirements within five (5) working days of
its receipt. If the Planner determines that the submission is
incomplete, he/she shall notify the applicant in writing of this
finding, shall specify the additional material required to make
the submission complete, and shall advise the applicant that
the item will not be scheduled for discussion by the Board until
the additional information is submitted. A determination of
incompleteness by the Town Planner may be appealed, in
writing, to the Planning Board. These steps shall be repeated
until the submission is determined to be complete. When the
submission is determined to be complete, the Town Planner
shall place the item on the agenda for discussion by the
Planning Board, and the Planner shall distribute copies of the
submission to the Town Manager, Board of Selectmen, Town
Engineer, Public Works Director, Police Chief, Fire Chief, utility
districts, and Conservation Commission for their review and
comment. In addition, the Town Planner shall notify all
abutters and other property owners on the west side of
Interstate 295 within five hundred (500) feet of the pending
request and the date, time, and place of the meeting at which
the Planning Board will initiate review of the Master Plan.
(c) The Planning Board must hold a public on-site inspection of the
site except as provided below. The Board may schedule this
§ 225-60.7 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.7
202:557
visit either before or after the initial meeting at which the
Master Plan is considered. The site inspection is a formal
meeting of the Board. The Board may decide not to hold an onsite
inspection if less than six months have elapsed since the
Board conducted the on-site inspection in conjunction with the
site inventory and analysis.
(d) The Planning Board shall hold at least one public hearing on
the Master Plan. The Board shall publish the time, date, and
place of the public hearing at least two times in a newspaper of
area-wide circulation. The date of the first publication shall be
at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. At least five (5)
days prior to the hearing, the Town Planner shall notify all
property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary
of the site of the public hearing by first class mail.
(e) Within fifty-six (56) days of the meeting for the initial
consideration of the Master Plan, the Planning Board shall
either approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the
Master Plan. The Planning Board's action shall be based upon
written findings of fact relating to the Master Plan's
conformance with the approval criteria. The time for
consideration of the Master Plan may be extended with the
mutual consent of the applicant and the Planning Board. The
Board shall provide the applicant with a written record of its
action and supporting findings within seven (7) days of its
action.
(2) Submission requirements. The Master Plan submission shall
include the appropriate application fee, a fee to assess the
compatibility with the Town's established economic goals and
objective in an amount established by the Board of Selectmen, and
twenty-one (21) copies of the following six items plus any additional
information the applicant wishes to submit to enable the Planning
Board to evaluate the proposed development and the treatment of
the site vis-a-vis the Site Inventory and Analysis:
- A Development Narrative
- A Conceptual Site Plan
- A Preliminary Infrastructure Plan
- A Neighborhood Impact Mitigation Plan
- An Environmental Assessment
- Development and Design Standards
§ 225-60.7 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.7
202:558
Each item shall include all of the information set forth below
together with any supplemental information desired by the
applicant. The Planning Board may not waive the submission of
any of the six required items, but may waive the submission of
individual pieces of data or information required for any of the
six required items upon written request of the applicant and a
finding, by formal vote of the Board, that the information is not
needed to understand how the proposed development relates to
the conditions of the site or the proposed nature of development.
(a) The Development Narrative must describe the overall nature of
the proposed development, the general utilization of the site,
the types and scale of anticipated development, and provisions
to address the constraints and limitations identified in the Site
Inventory and Analysis. The development narrative must
specifically address how the approval criteria set forth in
Subsection E(3) will be met.
(b) The Conceptual Site Plan must be an accurate, scaled plan at
the same scale as the Site Analysis Plan submitted in the Site
Inventory and Analysis Phase and show the proposed layout of
the entire site, the proposed use of various parts of the site, the
primary road network, primary utility network, overall
approach to stormwater management, proposed development
areas, proposed open space areas, and proposed buffer areas.
The conceptual site plan may show proposed uses in a bubble
diagram or similar conceptual format and does not need to
include the location of individual buildings. However, if
buildings are not shown on the conceptual site plan, the
development standards must address the site and architectural
design issues related to the design of individual buildings and
sites.
The Conceptual Site Plan must also address the following
aspects of the approval standard dealing with conformance
with the Town's vision for development within the MUC-1
District:
- the overall treatment of the Exit 31 area as a
"gateway" to Topsham and how development will
be done in a manner that maintains an attractive
entrance to the town. If the master plan does not
include the location and design of buildings, the
Conceptual Site Plan and/or Development Narrative
must provide details for how this element will be
addressed.
§ 225-60.7 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.7
202:559
- the treatment of the portion of the development
along Route 196 to maintain the Route 196 corridor
as an attractive roadway that avoids the appearance
of a "commercial strip." If the master plan does not
include the location and design of buildings in this
area but construction is proposed, the Conceptual
Site Plan and/or Development Narrative must
provide details for how this element of the vision
will be addressed.
(c) The Preliminary Infrastructure Plan must show the layout and
preliminary design of the various infrastructure components
that will serve as the core infrastructure for the site. This
should address off-site infrastructure improvements where
necessary. The Plan should include the proposed primary road
network within the development, including network
improvements identified in the Town's transportation plan as
well as access into and out of the site, the public water and
sewerage systems, the overall approach to stormwater
management, including any mitigation activities to comply
with the requirements of § 225-34, electric, cable, and fiber
optic systems, and any shared or common facilities such as
parking or service areas. [Amended 5-17-2017 STM, Art.
13]
The Preliminary Infrastructure Plan must also address the
following aspects of the approval standard dealing with
conformance with the Town's vision for development within
the MUC-1 District:
- how the design of the road network will contribute
to the improvement of traffic flow and safety in
the larger intersection area as well as providing
for movement into and within the planned
development. The plan must be based on estimates
of PM peak hour traffic at full build-out. In addition,
this plan should provide an analysis of the proposed
access points, level of needed improvements, and
sight distances, the proposed layout of the internal
road network, and typical cross-sections for the
various roads. The plan must also show how it
allows for the possible future establishment of a
connector road from Route 196 to the River Road
and/or a connector to the Topsham Fair Mall area
under I-295 and how they are proposed to be
incorporated into the overall layout of the
development and integrated with the internal road
system.
§ 225-60.7 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.7
202:560
- how the Plan will provide for pedestrian and bicycle
facilities and movement within the development and
for connections to adjacent residential
neighborhoods. The Plan must show the location
and typical design of any proposed district-wide
pedestrian and bicycle facilities together with any
standards for the provision of facilities to serve
individual development parcels or areas of the site.
These facilities should provide for the extension of
the Town's trail system from the Topsham Fair Mall
area to and through the MUC-1 District.
(d) The Neighborhood Impact Mitigation Plan must describe how
the impacts of the proposed development on neighboring
residential areas, including traffic, noise, exterior lighting, and
visual considerations, will be minimized and how the approval
standard relating to the protection of neighborhoods will be
met. The impact mitigation plan must specify the areas that
will be retained as buffers and how those areas will be treated
and protected. The plan must include representative crosssections
showing the relationship of the proposed uses,
adjacent residential areas, and the planned treatment of the
buffer areas. The plan must include any specific standards or
requirements that will be imposed on individual buildings or
projects such as increased setbacks, buffering or landscaping,
and similar measures.
(e) The Environmental Assessment must identify and evaluate the
importance of the natural resources on the site based upon the
Site Inventory and Analysis, detail how the Conceptual Site
Plan has been designed to minimize encroachment on high
value resources identified in the Site Inventory and Analysis,
describe actions that will be taken to reduce adverse impacts
on these resources from the proposed use of the site, and what
mitigation activities will be undertaken to compensate for any
undesirable negative impacts. The Environmental Assessment
must also address how the development will conform, in a
general sense, to federal, state, and local environmental
regulations.
(f) Development and Design Standards that will apply to
individual buildings or projects if the Conceptual Site Plan
does not address site and building design issues. The
standards should assure that the development will conform to
the design elements of the vision for the MUC-1 District and
result in a coordinated, visually-integrated district. These
standards must address, at a minimum, parking layout and
design, landscaping, exterior lighting, signage, pedestrian and
bicycle facilities, noise, and architectural design and details.
The following specific areas must be addressed in the proposed
§ 225-60.7 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.7
202:561
standards if applicable to the development proposed in the
Master Plan. These standards may reference the existing
standards for the MUC-1 District and/or the site plan review
standards where appropriate or establish modified or new
standards.
[1] Site design features.
[a] The location of buildings on lots and the relationship
of buildings to the street.
[b] The location of parking vis-a-vis the building and the
street.
[c] The treatment of areas adjacent to streets both within
the ROW and also within the front setback, including
landscaping and use of this area.
[d] Provisions for vehicular movement within the site,
including access for service and emergency vehicles.
[e] Provisions for vehicle connections between adjacent
lots/buildings.
[f] Provisions for shared/coordinated access to the
internal street network.
[g] Provisions for pedestrians and bicycles, including
pedestrian areas and facilities such as plazas,
gathering places, and major landscape features as
provided for in § 175-12.
[h] Provision of landscaping within parking areas and
around buildings.
[i] Provisions for snow storage and management of
related runoff.
[j] Provisions for the screening/buffering of parking lots.
[k] The location of and provisions for the screening of
service areas, overhead doors, waste disposal areas,
and similar facilities.
[l] The general treatment of outdoor lighting, including
parking lots, security lighting, roadways, and
pedestrian ways.
[m] The location, width, and treatment of buffers.
[n] Provisions for the coordination of signs multiple
tenant/building situations.
§ 225-60.7 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.7
202:562
[o] Standards for the size of signs to be allowed, including
the relationship of amount of signage to size of
building.
[p] Provisions for the coordination of signs for the entire
development.
[q] The location of and provisions for the layout of drivethroughs,
including stacking provisions.
[2] Building design features.
[a] Standards for the shapes of roofs.
[b] Provisions for the height and massing of the buildings,
including provisions for breaking larger buildings up
into smaller pieces, at least visually.
[c] Provisions for the architectural treatment of all
facades, including requirements for windows,
features, towers, and similar design elements.
[d] The location and treatment of entrances, including the
relationship of entrances in buildings with multiple
uses.
[e] Standards for the use of detailing such as trim,
shutters, and similar features.
[f] Standards for the use and design of awnings and
canopies.
[g] Standards for the treatment of "franchise"
architecture.
(3) Approval criteria. The Planning Board shall approve the Master
Plan only if it finds that it complies with all of the following criteria.
The Planning Board may impose conditions on its approval of the
Master Plan if it finds that such conditions are necessary for the
Master Plan to comply with the approval criteria:
(a) The Master Plan is consistent with the Site Inventory and
Analysis and reflects a reasonable utilization of the site given
both environmental and built-environment considerations.
Areas that are proposed to be intensively developed or used
are located in the areas identified for development in the Site
Inventory and Analysis. Areas that were identified as being
unsuitable for development in the Site Inventory and Analysis
are protected and the adverse impacts of development
mitigated. Areas that that were identified as having open space
or conservation and natural resource value in the Site
Inventory and Analysis have been addressed and the resource
value maintained through the utilization of the site, mitigation
§ 225-60.7 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.7
202:563
activities, and/or on or off-site compensatory activities. Other
issues and concerns identified in the Site Inventory and
Analysis have been appropriately addressed in the Master
Plan.
(b) The Master Plan is consistent with the Town's vision for
development of the MUC-1 District. The elements of the vision
are set in boldface in the following sections. Determination of
the Master Plan's conformance with the vision shall be based
on the following:
[1] Technical and design elements of the vision. The Planning
Board must find that the Master Plan conforms to the
following elements of the vision:
Create a visually attractive area with buildings that
are designed in a "New England" style
The design of the site and buildings must provide a
quality of site and building design that is visually
consistent with the visual character of Topsham and is at
least equal to or superior to that which would be achieved
through the application of the lighting, landscaping,
commercial architecture and parking standards of
§§ 175-9 through 175-12 of the Site Plan Review
provisions, including all of the items required in
Subsection E(2)(f)[1] and [2] above.
Recognize that the Exit 31 area is a "gateway" to
Topsham and that development should be done in a
manner that maintains an attractive entrance to the
town
The layout and design of the site must provide an
attractive appearance from both Route 196 and I-295. The
frontage along Route 196 must be treated as set out in
the following vision element dealing with the Route 196
corridor. The facades of any buildings facing Route 196
or I-295 must be treated from an architectural standpoint
similar to the front wall of the building. Service areas,
loading docks, storage areas, and similar facilities must
either be located so they are not visible from Route 196
and I-295 or screened with vegetation and landscaping,
berms and other changes in topography, and/or fencing.
Maintain the Route 196 corridor as an attractive
roadway that avoids the appearance of a
"commercial strip"
§ 225-60.7 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.7
202:564
Any development adjacent to the frontage along Route
196 must be an integral part of the development.
Vehicular access to any buildings or lots must be from
the internal street network rather than Route 196. A
landscaped buffer strip must be maintained along this
frontage that provides a level of landscaping similar to
that required by the site plan requirements for the MUC
District. If any parking, storage, or service areas are
located between Route 196 and the buildings adjacent
to this frontage, they must be screened from Route 196.
Signs other than project identification signs shall be
oriented to the interior street network rather than Route
196. Any building located on a corner lot or location at the
intersection of Route 196 and a principal road within the
development must be a "gateway" building that creates
an attractive entrance into the planned development.
Provide appropriate protection of the quality of life
in adjacent residential neighborhoods
The site must be utilized and developed in a manner that
minimizes the adverse impacts on the property in the
residential districts adjacent to the MUC-1 District. The
Master Plan must conform to the following requirements.
The Planning Board may approve alternative measures
for the required buffer strip under Item 8. as part of
the Neighborhood Impact Mitigation Plan. In approving
alternative measures to meet the buffer strip
requirement, the Planning Board must find that all of
the residential property owners that directly abut the
entire length of a substantially straight section of the
district boundary agree with the width and treatment of
the buffer strip adjacent to their property:
1. If uses that have the potential for generating odors,
fumes, vibrations, or noise are potential or planned
occupants of the development, they must be located
in the areas of the development that have the least
potential for negatively impacting residential
districts.
2. Odors generated by uses within the MUC-1 District
must not be regularly perceptible at the district
boundary with a residential district.
3. Sound pressure levels must comply with the
requirements of § 225-37, except that the allowable
maximum shall be increased by five (5) dB(A) at the
boundary of the district where it does not abut a
residential district.
§ 225-60.7 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.7
202:565
4. Exterior site lighting must not create any spill of
illumination beyond the boundaries of the district
and onto property within a residential district.
5. The light sources or lighting elements for exterior
lighting must be shielded from view and must not be
directly visible from a residential district.
6. Except as provided in 4. and 5., lighting must
conform to § 175-9 and illumination levels shall not
exceed those set forth in § 225-60.8.
7. Service and storage areas must be located,
enclosed, and/or screened so that they are not
visible from adjacent residential properties.
Mechanical equipment such as air conditioning units
must be screened so it cannot be seen from a
residential district.
8. The area within one hundred (100) horizontal feet of
the boundary of the MUC-1 District where it abuts
a residential district must be maintained as a buffer
strip to minimize the impacts of development on
these neighborhoods. The buffer strip may be
reduced to not less than fifty (50) feet in width if
the use in the MUC-1 Zone adjacent to the zone
boundary is a residential use. The buffer
requirement shall not apply to the main access road
into the development from Route 196 for a distance
of not more than two-hundred fifty (250) feet from
the edge of the Route 196 right-of-way. In this
location, a suitable buffer shall be provided along
the boundary, including berms, fencing, and/or
landscaping.
The width of the buffer strip must be increased by
twenty (20) feet for each of the following features
that will be permitted to be located within two
hundred (200) feet of the boundary of a residential
district. The increased width applies to the entire
length of the buffer strip along a substantially
straight section of the district boundary. The
increased width shall be cumulative (two factors
equal a 40 foot increase) based upon the following
causative factor or factors:
- any unenclosed service area, waste storage
area, or loading dock, overhead doors, or
similar outside facilities for storage, service, or
deliveries
- any facility for drive-through service
§ 225-60.7 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.7
202:566
- any use, including accessory parking, that will
normally operate or be open or used after
10:00 p.m. or before 7:00 a.m.
- any discharge to the air from cooking facilities,
material processing facilities, or similar uses
that create odors as a normal part of the
operation
- any use involving the servicing of motor
vehicles, including facilities for the sale of
gasoline or other fuels
- any use that will have outside lighting other
than security lighting (such as parking lot
lighting or display lighting) when the premises
is not open for business
- any use that will utilize outdoor paging systems
or other sound systems with outdoor speakers
- any part of a building is more than thirty-five
feet above the adjacent grade on the side of the
building facing the residential zone
Within the required buffer strip, at least two-thirds of
the minimum required width immediately adjacent to the
residential district boundary must be maintained as a
naturally vegetated area. Within the buffer strip, the
existing contour of the ground surface must be
maintained to the extent possible and no significant
alteration may occur. Natural vegetation must be retained
to the extent feasible and shall be supplemented by
additional plantings as necessary to create a year-round
visual buffer.
Within the balance of the width of the buffer strip,
provisions may be made to reduce the impacts of the
Planned Mixed-Use Development on the adjacent
residential neighborhood. These can include retaining
this area as a natural buffer in accordance with the
requirements above or may be improved with berms,
fences and walls, landscaping, or similar features. The
contour of the ground within this portion of the buffer
strip may be altered to enhance the protection of the
residential district or to screen portions of the
development, provided that the average elevation of the
ground surface is not reduced.
Contribute to the improvement of traffic flow and
safety in the larger intersection area as well as
providing for movement into and within the
development
§ 225-60.7 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.7
202:567
The Master Plan must identify the points of access into
the district from the adjacent road system and
demonstrate that adequate and safe access into and out
of the site can be provided by these accesses while
minimizing the negative impact on adjacent residential
districts.
The Plan must provide for a road network that serves
the entire portion of the district that is planned to be
developed in a manner that provides for safe and efficient
movement.
The Plan must allow for the possible future establishment
of a connector road from Route 196 to the River Road
and/or a connector to the Topsham Fair Mall area under
I-295. This can be accomplished by integrating provisions
for the connectors into the overall road network, or for
providing appropriate rights-of-way for the future
construction of these roads, or a combination of these
such as construction of part of the connectors as part
of the development's road system with provision for the
future extension of them.
Provide for pedestrian and bicycle facilities and
movement within the development and for
connections to adjacent residential neighborhoods
The Master Plan must include provisions for pedestrian
and bicycle movement within the district. At a minimum,
the plan must specify the provisions for pedestrian and
bicycle facilities that will be provided within development
parcels and between any proposed residential uses and
other portions of the district. Appropriate pedestrian and
bicycle connections from the development to adjacent
residential neighborhoods must be provided. These
facilities must connect with planned pedestrian and
bicycle facilities within the development. The Master Plan
should provide for the extension of the Town's trail system
from the Topsham Fair Mall area to and through the
development.
Protect significant natural resources
The Master Plan must provide for the protection of any
significant natural resources identified in the Inventory
and Analysis and that their resource value will be
maintained or appropriate mitigation and compensatory
actions taken to offset any reduction in resource values or
a combination of protection and mitigation/compensatory
actions. The Master Plan must also demonstrate how the
development will be able to comply with state and local
environmental standards and regulations.
§ 225-60.7 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.7
202:568
§ 225-60.8. Additional standards for MUC-1 District. [Added
5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15]
All development in the MUC-1 Zone, including development that is part of a
planned mixed-use development, is subject to the provisions of Standards A,
B, and C in addition to the other requirements of this chapter. In addition,
development that is not part of a planned mixed-use development is also
subject to the provisions of Standard D.
[2] Economic elements of the vision. The Planning Board must
find that the Master Plan advances the following elements
of the vision for the MUC-1 District:
Expand the range of goods and services available in
Topsham
Enhance and diversify the local economy and
maximize the local economic benefit of the
development
Increase the number of good quality, well paying
jobs in the community
The Master Plan will be deemed to conform to these three
elements of the vision if the Planning Board determines
that the Master Plan is consistent with the Town's
economic goals and objectives as adopted by the Town
Meeting or the Board of Selectmen if the Town Meeting
has not adopted such goals and objectives, based upon
the results of the Town's economic study. If the Town has
not formally adopted economic goals and objectives, the
Master Plan must demonstrate that the development will
have a positive economic benefit on the community and a
neutral or positive fiscal impact on the Town of Topsham.
[3] Housing element of the vision. The Planning Board must
find that the Master Plan advances the following element
of the vision for the MUC-1 District:
Encourage a range of housing opportunities within
the development
The Master Plan will be deemed to be consistent with this
element of the vision if it addresses how housing will be
incorporated into the development, including the types of
housing, anticipated occupancy, and costs, and how the
development of this housing will be accomplished. If the
Master Plan does not propose any housing as part of the
development, the Master Plan must document why the
inclusion of housing is not appropriate or feasible and the
actions taken to attempt to incorporate housing into the
development.
§ 225-60.7 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.8
202:569
A. Retail businesses.
(1) Any retail business that is not part of an approved planned mixed
use development may not have more than a total of thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet of floor area.
(2) Any project that is not part of a planned mixed use development
may not have more than a total of ninety thousand (90,000) square
feet of floor area occupied by retail businesses that are part of the
project.
(3) The amount of approved floor area occupied or intended to be
occupied by retail businesses within the MUC-1 Zone may not
exceed fifty-five percent (55%) of the total approved floor area
within the MUC-1 Zone, including both nonresidential and
residential uses. The Planning Board may not approve any
subdivision or site plan that would result in this limit being
exceeded. For the purpose of this section, "approved floor area"
means the gross floor area of buildings that have received site plan
approval by the Planning Board, which approval has not lapsed or
been modified. In determining the percentage of retail floor area,
any non-retail building on an approved plan that has not obtained a
building permit within two years of the date of approval by the
Planning Board shall not be included in the calculation. If an
approved site plan meets this requirement by showing the
construction of non-retail floor area and if building permits have
not been issued for such area and substantial construction begun
within two years, the Town shall not issue any subsequent
approvals or building permits that would result in the retail use
limitation being violated. Any floor area for which the occupancy
upon completion of construction has not been determined at the
point of site plan approval and which is suitable for retail use shall
be counted as retail space unless the applicant agrees to a
condition of approval limiting occupancy to non-retail uses.
(4) Any retail business that is part of an approved planned mixed use
development may have up to a maximum of ninety thousand
(90,000) square feet of total floor area.
(5) The entire MUC-1 Zone shall have not more than two (2) "largescale"
retail uses, each of which has more than seventy-five
thousand (75,000) square feet of total floor area. The Planning
Board may not approve any site plan or subdivision plan involving a
retail business with more than seventy-five thousand (75,000)
square feet of total floor area if such approval would allow more
than two "large-scale" retail uses to be able to be built in the
MUC-1 District. The approval of a site plan or subdivision plan or
portion of a site plan or subdivision plan for a "large-scale" retail
use shall expire and be invalid after two years from the date of
Planning Board approval if a building permit has not been issued
for the "large-scale" retail use and substantial construction begun.
§ 225-60.8 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.8
202:570
The Planning Board may extend the length of approval by not more
than one year upon written request of the applicant based upon a
showing of good cause for failure to commence construction.
B. Exterior lighting standards. Exterior lighting must conform to the
following requirements unless alternative provisions are approved by
the Planning Board as part of the Master Plan for a planned mixed use
development:
(1) The illumination of parking lots, exterior display or storage areas,
and similar spaces shall provide a uniformity ratio of not more than
4:1 (ratio of the average to minimum illuminance) to provide for an
even distribution of light.
(2) The maximum illumination level within parking lots, exterior
storage areas, and similar spaces shall be not more than 6.0
footcandles measured at the ground surface.
(3) The maximum illumination level of vehicle sales areas or other
exterior sales display areas shall be not more than 8.0 footcandles
measured at the ground surface, provided that the uniformity ratio
of maximum to minimum illuminance is not more than 20 to 1.
(4) The illumination of other areas and facilities may be greater than
level established in Subsection B(2) provided that the lighting level
and design are the minimum needed for adequate vision, safety,
and comfort that is consistent with the guidelines of the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA)
recommended practices.
(5) Flood lighting or other directional lighting may be used for
supplemental illumination of vehicle sales areas or other exterior
sales display areas, provided that the flood lights are installed no
higher than twelve (12) feet above ground level, are aimed to avoid
direct brightness being seen from adjacent streets or properties,
are aimed to direct the light downward, and use lamps with an
initial lumen rating not exceeding 39,000 lumens. The town shall
have the right to inspect the completed flood light installation and
require that the flood lights be re-aimed or fitted with face louvers
if necessary to control direct brightness or glare.
(6) Exterior lighting of parking lots, exterior storage and display areas,
and similar spaces, except for lighting necessary for security and
safety, must be turned off or reduced to a maximum illumination
level of not more than 2.0 footcandles between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless the use is open during this period. If the
use is open or in operation between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
exterior lighting does not have to meet this reduced requirement
during the period from one hour before the business opens to one
hour after the business closes.
C. Alteration of the site.
§ 225-60.8 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.8
202:571
(1) Any development in the MUC-1 Zone must be designed to utilize
the natural contours of the land to the extent practical. Cutting and
filling shall be minimized to the extent necessary to fit development
into the natural contour of the land prior to development.
(2) Grading of the site shall be done so that the slope of any area where
the elevation or slope of the ground is changed from pre-existing
conditions is no greater than thirty-three percent (33%) or a slope
of 3 to 1 (horizontal to vertical change). Existing areas with slopes
greater than thirty-three percent (33%) may be retained and left in
their natural state with no change in the grading.
(3) Above elevation 150 as shown on the USGS map for the area, the
use of retaining walls must be minimized. Within this area above
elevation 150, not more than three (3) retaining walls may be used
between the 150 foot elevation and the top of the slope. Any
retaining walls must be generally equally spaced over the length of
the slope and must be horizontally separated by a minimum of
thirty (30) feet.
(4) No retaining wall or other vertical or nearly vertical structure,
including rock cuts, anywhere within the zone may be more than
eight (8) feet in vertical change as measured from the downhill
ground surface adjacent to the base of the wall to the uphill ground
surface behind the top of the wall.
(5) Slopes must be revegetated with native vegetation. The plantings
should be designed to soften the appearance of the slope, to break
up large areas, and to screen retaining walls or other vertical grade
changes. Plantings above elevation 150 should require little or no
maintenance unless they are accessible for maintenance or are part
of the landscaping associated with buildings or other
improvements.
D. Standards for development that is not part of a planned mixed-use
development. The creation of new lots, the construction of any new
building, or the expansion or redevelopment of an existing building in
the MUC-1 District that is not part of a planned mixed-use development
approved in accordance with § 225-60.7 must comply with the following
requirements in addition to any other requirements of this code. Where
these requirements are more stringent or restrictive than other
requirements of this code, these requirements apply:
(1) Residential buffer.
§ 225-60.8 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.8
202:572
The area within one hundred horizontal feet of the boundary
of the MUC-1 District where it abuts a residential district must
be maintained as a buffer strip to minimize the impacts of
development on these neighborhoods if the proposed adjacent
use in the MUC-1 District is not a residential use. If the use
adjacent to the zone boundary is a residential use, the width of
the buffer may be reduced to not less than fifty (50) feet. The
width of the buffer strip must be increased in accordance with
the provisions of § 225-60.7F(3)(b)[1] if any of the factors apply
to the proposed development. The buffer requirement shall not
apply to the main access road into the MUC-1 District from Route
196. This exemption from the buffer requirement shall apply to
the minimum distance from the edge of the Route 196 right-of-way
necessary to accommodate the access road in accordance with
sound road design principles. In this location, a suitable buffer
shall be provided along the boundary, including berms, fencing,
and/or landscaping.
Within the required buffer strip, at least two-thirds of the
minimum required width immediately adjacent to the residential
district boundary must be maintained as a naturally vegetated
area. Within the buffer strip, the existing contour of the ground
surface must be maintained to the greatest extent possible and
no significant alteration may occur. Natural vegetation must be
retained to the extent feasible and shall be supplemented by
additional plantings as necessary to create a year-round visual
buffer.
Within the balance of the width of the buffer strip, provisions shall
be made to reduce the impacts of development on the adjacent
residential neighborhood. These can include retaining this area as
a natural buffer in accordance with the requirements above or the
area may be improved with berms, fences and walls, landscaping,
or similar features. The contour of the ground within this portion
of the buffer strip may be altered to enhance the protection of
the residential district or to screen portions of the development,
provided that the average elevation of the ground surface is not
reduced.
(2) Commercial architecture. All nonresidential buildings and
structures must conform to the commercial architectural design
standards of § 175-11.
(3) Streetscape requirements.
(a) The facades of any buildings facing Route 196 or I-295 must be
treated from an architectural standpoint similar to the front
wall of the building. Service areas, loading docks, drivethrough
facilities, storage areas, and similar facilities must
either be located so they are not visible from either Route 196
§ 225-60.8 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.8
202:573
or I-295 or screened with vegetation and landscaping, berms
and other changes in topography, and/or fencing.
(b) The building or development must conform to the planting
setback requirements of § 175-10E that apply to the Mixed Use
Commercial District.
(4) Vehicular access from Route 196.
(a) Vehicular access to the existing lots that front on Route 196
may continue to be directly from Route 196 to serve the
continued use of the existing buildings. If these lots are
redeveloped or incorporated into a larger development or if the
existing buildings or parking is expanded by more than fifty
percent (50%), the site layout shall provide for the connection
of the lots to an internal road system serving the overall
district to replace the direct accesses to Route 196. If such a
road network is not in place and will not be constructed as part
of the project, the owner must agree as part of the approval of
the site plan to connect the project to the internal road system
within one (1) year of this becoming feasible.
(b) Lots that do not currently have direct vehicular access to Route
196 must be provided with vehicle access through an internal
street or roadway network.
(5) Internal roadway network. The layout of new lots and the
development/re-development of existing and new lots must occur in
a manner that:
(a) Allows for the creation of an internal road network to serve all
of the MUC-1 District in a reasonable manner.
(b) Allows for the possible future establishment of a connector
road from Route 196 to the River Road and/or a connector to
the Topsham Fair Mall area under I-295.
(c) Provides for the vehicular access to all new lots and buildings
(except for the continued use of the existing lots fronting on
Route 196) from the internal road network even if the road
network will not be completed until some future time.
(6) Primary utility network. The layout of new lots and the
development/re-development of existing and new lots must occur in
a manner that:
(a) Allows for the creation of coordinated utility networks,
including public water, public sewerage, and electricity, to
serve all of the MUC-1 District in a reasonable manner.
(b) Provides for the provision of utilities to all new lots and
buildings (except for the continued use of the existing lots
fronting on Route 196) from the coordinated utility networks
§ 225-60.8 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.8
202:574
§ 225-60.9. Additional standards for BP Zone. [Added 5-24-2007
STM, Art. 15]
The creation of new lots, the construction of any new building, or the
expansion or re-development of an existing building in the BP Zone must
comply with the following requirements in addition to any other
requirements of this code. Where these requirements are more stringent or
restrictive than other requirements of this code, these requirements apply:
even if the networks will not be completed until some future
time.
(7) Pedestrian and bicycle facilities. The layout of new lots and the
development/re-development of existing and new lots must provide
for pedestrian and bicycle facilities within development parcels and
between any proposed residential uses and other portions of the
district. Appropriate pedestrian and bicycle connections from the
development to adjacent residential neighborhoods must be
provided. These facilities must connect with planned pedestrian
and bicycle facilities within the development and should provide for
the extension of the Town's trail system from the Topsham Fair Mall
area to and through the MUC-1 District.
A. I-295 buffer.
The area of any lot that is located within seventy-five (75) feet of
the Interstate 295 right-of-way shall be maintained as a naturally
vegetated and/or landscaped buffer. A public utility facility may be
located within this buffer if there is no other reasonable location
outside of the buffer. This buffer shall be designed to minimize the
visibility of the development within the BP Zone from vehicles using
I-295 and to minimize the adverse impacts of the highway on uses
within the BP Zone, including noise.
To the extent consistent with these objectives, natural vegetation
within the buffer shall be maintained. The natural vegetation shall
be supplemented by additional plantings, fencing or walls, noise
attenuation barriers, or berms as necessary to create a year-round
buffer.
B. District boundary/residential use buffer.
§ 225-60.8 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.9
202:575
Where a setback is required to be maintained as open space along the
boundary of the BP Zone or property line of an adjacent residential
use, this area must be a naturally vegetated and/or landscaped buffer.
This buffer shall be designed to minimize the visibility of the
development within the BP Zone from residential property outside of
the BP Zone and to minimize the adverse impacts of uses within the
BP Zone, including noise, light, glare, odors, and similar factors on
adjacent residential properties.
To the extent consistent with these objectives, natural vegetation
within the buffer shall be maintained. The natural vegetation shall
be supplemented by additional plantings, fencing or walls, noise
attenuation barriers, or berms as necessary to create a year-round
buffer.
C. Treatment of the required front yard setbacks. The area of the lot
adjacent to the street that provides access to the lot that is the required
front yard setback must be treated and maintained as a landscaped
green space. No parking, storage, service or similar facilities or
activities shall occur within the required front yard setback. The
treatment of this area must be appropriate for the planned use of the
lot.
D. Internal roadway network. The layout of new lots and the development
of existing and new lots must occur in a manner that:
(1) Allows for the creation of an internal road network to serve all of
the BP Zone in a reasonable manner.
(2) Allows for the possible future establishment of a connector road
from Route 196 to Route 201.
(3) Provides for the vehicular access to all new lots and buildings from
the internal road network even if the road network will not be
completed until some future time.
Any subdivision application involving the creation of new lots
within the BP Zone must demonstrate how these requirements will
be met.
E. Primary utility network. The layout of new lots and the development of
existing and new lots must occur in a manner that:
(1) Allows for the creation of coordinated utility networks, including
public water, public sewerage, and electricity to serve all of the BP
Zone in a reasonable manner.
(2) Provides for the provision of utilities to all new lots and buildings
from the coordinated utility networks even if the networks will not
be completed until some future time.
§ 225-60.9 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.9
202:576
Any subdivision application involving the creation of new lots
within the BP Zone must demonstrate how these requirements will
be met.
F. Pedestrian and bicycle facilities. The design and layout of
developments, including subdivisions, must provide for pedestrian and
bicycle facilities within the development and that link the business park
to adjacent residential neighborhoods and adjacent public streets.
These proposed facilities should connect to and provide for the
extension of the Town's trail system where feasible. Pedestrian facilities
may include sidewalks or trails either within the street right-of-way or
outside of the right-of-way. An appropriate easement shall be provided
for any facilities located outside of the street right-of-way.
G. Outside activities.
All activity must take place entirely within a building or enclosed
structure except for pedestrian facilities, outdoor seating in
conjunction with a restaurant, play areas in conjunction with a day
care facility, and similar pedestrian related activities accessory to an
allowed use.
Exterior storage of materials and equipment is permitted in
conjunction with an allowed use, provided that the storage occurs
within an enclosed or fenced area. The storage area must be visually
screened so that the stored material and/or equipment is not visible
from streets and abutting properties when viewed from five (5) feet
above grade at the property boundary. This may be accomplished
through landscaping, fencing, berms, or a combination thereof of
sufficient height to screen any equipment or material within the
storage area.
H. Design standards. Lots and buildings within the Business Park Zone
must comply with the following requirements:
(1) Service, loading, and storage areas should be located to the side or
rear of the principal building and may not be located between the
front wall of the building and the street. Waste storage must be
within enclosed containers or facilities that are screened from view
from the street and adjacent properties by fencing, landscaping, or
similar provisions.
(2) Overhead doors and loading docks and bays may not be located on
the wall of a building that faces a street or, if the lot is adjacent to
the boundary of the BP Zone, that faces a residential zone.
(3) The front wall of the building facing the street shall be designed as
the front of the building and consist primarily of masonry, wood, or
glass or a combination thereof or products that simulate these
materials. Metal siding is not permitted on the front wall of a
building.
§ 225-60.9 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.9
202:577
§ 225-60.10. Additional standards for CC 196 Zone. [Added
5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15]
The creation of new lots, the construction of any new building, or the
expansion, redevelopment, or change of use of an existing building in the
CC 196 Zone must comply with the following requirements in addition
to any other requirements of this code. Where these requirements are
more stringent or restrictive than other requirements of this code, these
requirements apply:
I. Exterior lighting standards.
(1) The illumination of parking lots, exterior display or storage areas,
and similar spaces shall provide a uniformity ratio of not more than
4:1 (ratio of the average to minimum illuminance) to provide for an
even distribution of light.
(2) The maximum illumination level within parking lots, exterior
display and storage areas, and similar spaces shall be not more
than 6.0 footcandles measured at the ground surface.
(3) The illumination of other areas and facilities may be greater than
the level established in Subsection I(2), provided that the lighting
level and design are the minimum needed for adequate vision,
safety, and comfort that is consistent with the guidelines of the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA)
recommended practices.
(4) Exterior lighting of parking lots, exterior storage and display areas,
and similar spaces, except for lighting necessary for security and
safety, must be turned off or reduced to a maximum illumination
level of not more than 2.0 footcandles between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless the use is open during this period. If the
use is open or in operation between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
exterior lighting does not have to meet this reduced requirement
during the period from one hour before the business opens to one
hour after the business closes.
A. Landscaped planting strip. A nonresidential use shall provide and
maintain a landscaped planting strip adjacent to the right-of-way of any
public street. This shall apply to new buildings, expansions of existing
nonresidential buildings, or the conversion of a residential building to a
nonresidential use. This provision does not apply to existing buildings in
nonresidential use unless and until a change of use occurs from one use
category to a different use category. The landscaped planting strip must
be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in width. The strip must be planted in
accordance with the appropriate requirements of § 175-10E(4).
B. Vehicular access. A lot shall be limited to one two-way access way or a
separate one-way entrance and one-way exit. If two or more existing
lots are being combined into a single development parcel, this
§ 225-60.9 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.10
202:578
requirement shall apply to the development parcel. The number of
access points to Route 196 must be minimized. Access to adjacent
developments must be combined or shared where feasible. Where
access is available to the lot from Route 196 and another public or
private street, the access shall not be located on Route 196 unless the
Planning Board, as part of the site plan review conducted in accordance
with Chapter 175, determines that such a location will be safer and
have less impact on traffic movement on Route 196. Off street parking
lots and/or services areas for nonresidential uses on adjoining lots
must be interconnected where feasible to allow vehicle and pedestrian
movement between uses.
C. Use of the required front yard setback. No parking, storage, service or
similar facilities or activities shall occur within the required front yard
setback of any nonresidential use.
D. Pedestrian and bicycle facilities. Developments must provide for
pedestrian and bicycle facilities that link with existing or planned Town
facilities where feasible.
E. Outside activities.
All nonresidential activity must take place entirely within a building
or enclosed structure except for activities involving auto sales and
pedestrian facilities, outdoor seating in conjunction with a restaurant,
play areas in conjunction with a day care facility, and similar
pedestrian related activities accessory to an allowed use.
Motor vehicles that remain on a lot overnight in conjunction with a
nonresidential use other than auto sales must be parked to the side
or rear of the building within a designated area. This area must be
visually screened so that the vehicles are not visible from properties
in residential use when viewed from five (5) feet above grade at the
property boundary.
Boats may be stored outside in conjunction with an allowed
nonresidential use, provided that the storage occurs within a
designated area of the site. No storage may occur within required
yard setbacks or within twenty-five (25) feet of a property line that
abuts a residential use. The area between boat storage and residential
property line shall be maintained as a residential buffer in accordance
with Subsection F.
Exterior storage of materials and equipment other than motor vehicles
is permitted in conjunction with an allowed use, provided that the
storage occurs within an enclosed or fenced area. The storage area
must be visually screened so that the stored material and/or equipment
is not visible from streets and abutting properties when viewed from
five (5) feet above grade at the property boundary. This may be
accomplished through landscaping, fencing, berms, or a combination
thereof of sufficient height to screen any equipment or material within
the storage area.
§ 225-60.10 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.10
202:579
F. Residential buffer. A landscaped buffer strip must be provided and
maintained along any property boundary between a nonresidential use
and a residential use. This shall apply to new buildings, expansions of
existing nonresidential buildings, or the conversion of a residential
building to a nonresidential use. This provision does not apply to
existing buildings in nonresidential use unless and until a change of use
occurs from one use category to a different use category. The
landscaped buffer strip must include landscaping or landscaping
combined with fencing to visually screen the nonresidential use from
the adjacent residential parcel. The buffer strip must be:
(1) A minimum of ten (10) feet in width for the reuse of an existing
residential property for nonresidential use; or
(2) A minimum of ten (10) feet in width for the change in the
nonresidential use of an existing nonresidential property; or
(3) A minimum of twenty-five (25) feet in width for a new or expanded
nonresidential building with one story; or
(4) A minimum of forty (40) feet in width for a new or expanded
nonresidential building with more than one story.
G. Design standards. Lots and buildings within the Commercial Corridor
196 Zone must comply with the following requirements:
(1) Service, loading, and storage areas should be located to the side or
rear of the principal building and may not be located between the
front wall of the building and the street. Waste storage must be
within enclosed containers or facilities that are screened from view
from any street and adjacent properties by fencing, landscaping, or
similar provisions.
(2) Overhead doors and loading docks and bays may not be located on
the wall of a building that faces Route 196 or that faces a
residential use.
(3) The front wall of the building facing the street shall be designed as
the front of the building and consist primarily of masonry, wood, or
glass or a combination thereof or products that simulate these
materials. Metal siding is not permitted on the front wall of a
building.
H. Exterior lighting standards.
(1) The illumination of parking lots, exterior display or storage areas,
and similar spaces shall provide a uniformity ratio of not more than
4:1 (ratio of the average to minimum illuminance) to provide for an
even distribution of light.
(2) The maximum illumination level within parking lots, storage areas,
and similar spaces shall be not more than 6.0 footcandles measured
at the ground surface.
§ 225-60.10 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.10
202:580
§ 225-60.11. Rural entrepreneurial activities. [Added 1-23-2008
STM, Art. 3]
Rural entrepreneurial activities must comply with the following standards:
(3) The maximum illumination level within display or outside sales
areas shall be not more than 8.0 footcandles measured at the
ground surface.
(4) The illumination of other areas and facilities may be greater than
the level established in Subsection H(2) provided that the lighting
level and design are the minimum needed for adequate vision,
safety, and comfort that is consistent with the guidelines of the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA)
recommended practices.
(5) Exterior lighting of parking lots, exterior storage, display and sales
areas, and similar spaces, except for lighting necessary for security
and safety, must be turned off or reduced to a maximum
illumination level of not more than 2.0 footcandles between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless the use is open during this
period. If the use is open or in operation between 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m., exterior lighting does not have to meet this reduced
requirement during the period from one hour before the business
opens to one hour after the business closes.
A. The rural entrepreneurial activity is limited to low-impact
nonresidential activities such as, but not limited to, lab/research
facilities, light manufacturing, professional offices, service businesses,
wholesale businesses, and warehousing, storage, and distribution and
shall not involve the retail sale of goods except as accessory to another
principal use.
B. Notwithstanding the minimum lot size requirement of § 225-17, a rural
entrepreneurial activity is permitted only on a lot with an area of at
least two acres. If the lot contains another principal use(s), the lot must
have at least two acres for the rural entrepreneurial activity in addition
to the area required for the other principal use(s).
C. The total gross floor area for all buildings and structures used as part of
the rural entrepreneurial activity, but not including any part of a
basement that is used only for storage or mechanical uses, shall be not
more than 2% of the area of the lot on which it is located if it is in the
R-2 District or not more than 4% of the area of the lot on which it is
located in any other zoning district, or 5,000 square feet, whichever is
less.
D. A nonresidential building that existed as of April 1, 2006, that does not
conform to the lot size requirement of Subsection B; may be used for a
rural entrepreneurial use, provided that it meets the building area to lot
§ 225-60.10 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.11
202:581
§ 225-60.12. Reuse of an existing agricultural building for
nonresidential use. [Added 1-23-2008 STM, Art. 3]
The reuse of an existing agricultural building for nonresidential use must
comply with the following standards:
area ratio requirement of Subsection C and all of the other
requirements of this section.
E. The primary vehicular access to the lot on which the use is located shall
be from a public street that is functionally classified as an arterial or
collector street or from a local street that is not an internal street within
a residential subdivision.
F. The total number of peak hour trip ends generated by the use based
upon the ITE Trip Generation Manual shall not exceed one trip end per
200 square feet of gross floor area occupied by the nonresidential use
unless the primary vehicle access is from an arterial or collector street.
G. The primary nonresidential activity shall occur within the building. Any
outside storage of materials, equipment, or products must not be
located within required yard setbacks and must be screened from
abutting streets and residential properties by landscaping, fencing,
and/or berms in accordance with § 225-29A(1).
H. Parking associated with the use shall not be located in any required
setback. If the building is located within 50 feet of the front lot line, no
parking shall be permitted between the front lot line and the front wall
of the building extending the full width of the lot. Parking must be
screened from public streets or abutting properties in residential use
through landscaping, fencing, or topography in accordance with
§ 225-29.
I. The use shall comply with the performance standards of Article VII. In
addition, the use shall not produce sustained noise, odors, fumes,
vibrations, or electrical interference at the boundaries of the parcel
that significantly exceed the levels produced by typical single-family
residential uses even if those levels are lower than those established by
the performance standards of Article VII.
J. The hours of operation of the use must be compatible with surrounding
uses and may be limited by the Planning Board as part of the approval
of the site plan to assure compatibility.
A. The reuse of the agricultural building is limited to low-impact
nonresidential activities, such as, but not limited to, lab/research
facilities, light manufacturing, professional offices, service businesses,
wholesale businesses, and warehousing, storage, and distribution and
shall not involve the retail sale of goods except as accessory to another
principal use.
§ 225-60.11 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.12
202:582
§ 225-60.13. Additional standards for LI Zone and that portion of
the CC that fronts on Route 201. [Added 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
B. The reuse of an agricultural building must maintain the regional
vernacular architectural character of the existing building, and changes
to the exterior of the structure shall be limited to minor changes and/or
additions needed to provide access or light or to comply with code
requirements.
C. Notwithstanding the minimum lot size requirement of § 225-17, the
reuse of an existing agricultural building is permitted only on a lot with
an area of at least two acres. If the lot contains another principal use(s),
the lot must have at least two acres for the agricultural building in
addition to the area required for the other principal use(s).
D. The total number of peak hour trip ends generated by the use based
upon the ITE Trip Generation Manual shall not exceed one trip end per
200 square feet of gross floor area occupied by the nonresidential use
unless the primary vehicle access is from an arterial or collector street.
E. The primary nonresidential activity shall occur within the building. Any
outside storage of materials, equipment, or products must not be
located within required yard setbacks and must be screened from
abutting streets and residential properties by landscaping, fencing,
and/or berms in accordance with § 225-29A(1).
F. Parking associated with the reuse of the building shall not be located in
any required setback. If the building is located within 50 feet of the
front lot line, no parking shall be permitted between the front lot line
and the front wall of the building extending the full width of the lot.
Parking must be screened from public streets or abutting properties in
residential use through landscaping, fencing, or topography in
accordance with § 225-29.
G. The use shall comply with the performance standards of Article VII. In
addition, the use shall not produce sustained noise, odors, fumes,
vibrations, or electrical interference at the boundaries of the parcel
that significantly exceed the levels produced by typical single-family
residential uses even if those levels are lower than those established by
the performance standards of Article VII.
H. The hours of operation of the use must be compatible with surrounding
uses and may be limited by the Planning Board as part of the approval
of the site plan to assure compatibility.
A. The exterior display or storage of materials or products for sale shall
not be in the front, side or rear setbacks.
B. Finished items for sale may be located within a building and visible
from the street or placed to the side or rear of buildings. The storage of
raw materials shall be placed behind the building and screened from
view in accordance with § 225-32.
§ 225-60.12 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.13
202:583
C. Parking shall be to the side or rear of buildings except in accordance
with the standards in Subsection G below. Where allowed, on-street
parking may be utilized in the LI Zone.
D. Freestanding buildings directly fronting Rt. 201 shall not exceed 30,000
square feet.
E. Batch plant silos and operations shall be setback a minimum of 100 feet
from property lines.
F. Buildings, parking and storage shall be located on the lot as follow:
(1) Near-field buildings up to 15,000 square feet shall be setback at
least 10 feet from the Rt. 201 right-of-way, and no more than 25
feet. The setback shall be landscaped in accordance with § 175-10,
with the exception of one 26 foot wide driveway.
(2) Near-field buildings between 15,000 square feet and 30,000 square
feet shall be setback at least 25 feet, and no more than 35 feet from
the Rt. 201 right-of-way. The setback shall be landscaped in
accordance with § 175-10, or shall include a streetscape design
approved by the Planning Board either in the front setback, the
right-of-way or both.
(3) Buildings in excess of 30,000 square feet shall be setback at least
150 feet from the Rt. 201 right-of-way.
(4) Storage of raw materials shall be setback at least as far as the back
edge of the near-field building, and at least 25 feet. Where no nearfield
building is present, then the storage areas shall be setback at
least 25 feet, and buffered at 150% of the standards in § 175-10.
(5) Parking, display of finished product and vehicles for sale shall be
setback at least as far as the front edge of the near-field building.
Buffering between the display areas and the Rt. 201 right-of-way
shall be landscaped in accordance with § 175-10. If there is no
near-field building, then all parking and display areas shall be
setback at least 25 feet and landscaped in accordance with
§ 175-10.
(6) All lots with frontage on Rt. 201 may be served by a single 26 feet
wide driveway from Rt. 201.
(7) Near-field buildings shall meet the design standards in Subsections
A, B, C, D and E of this section and other applicable standards in
§ 175-11.
(8) Freestanding buildings built behind a near-field building, shall be
setback from the property line at least 150 feet (150'), but parking
and storage will be permitted between the two buildings, and no
closer to Rt. 201 than the front edge of the near-field building.
§ 225-60.13 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.14
202:584
§ 225-60.14. Small wind energy conversion systems. [Added
11-13-2008 STM, Art. 6]
1. Purpose and intent. The small wind energy conversion provisions set
forth in this section are intended to protect the public health and safety,
promote the general welfare of the community and conservation of the
environment, wildlife habitat, fisheries and unique natural areas; and to
fit small wind energy conversion systems (SWECS) harmoniously into
the fabric of the community.
2. Authority.
The Topsham Code Enforcement Officer is vested with the authority
to review and approve or reject or send to the Planning Board any
application for a single SWECS 60 feet or less in height.
The Topsham Planning Board is vested with the authority to review and
approve, conditionally approve or reject any application for a SWECS
taller than 60 feet. A public hearing is required.
3. Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to small wind
energy conversion systems proposed, operated, modified or
constructed after the date of adoption of this section.
4. Conflicts with other ordinances. Whenever a specific provision within
this section conflicts with or is inconsistent with another specific
provision within this section or a specific provision of any other
ordinance, regulation or statute, the more restrictive specific provision
shall control.
5. Severability. Should any section or provision of this section be declared
by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other
section or provision of the section.
6. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
HABITABLE BUILDING (OR STRUCTURE) — Places likely to be
occupied on a continuous or temporary basis. This includes, but is
not limited to, dwellings, commercial businesses, places of worship,
nursing homes, schools or other places used for education, day-care
centers, motels, hotels, correctional institutions or barns.
LINE OF SIGHT — The direct view of the object from selected locations.
NEGATIVE VISUAL IMPACT — A change in the appearance of the
landscape as a result of a small wind energy conversion system
development that is both out-of-character with a significant designated
resource and which significantly diminishes the scenic value of the
significant resource. Mere visibility of a small wind energy conversion
system does not in and of itself constitute a negative visual impact.
SIGNIFICANT DESIGNATED RESOURCE — A specific location, view or
corridor identified as a scenic resource in the Topsham Comprehensive
§ 225-60.14 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.14
202:585
Plan or by a state or federal agency. Significant designated resources
include, but are not limited to, National Register of Historic Places
buildings, locales or views of same. This includes the five designated
Topsham Historic Districts.
SITE — The parcel of land where a small wind energy conversion
system is to be placed. The site can be publicly or privately owned and
is a single lot.
SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM — A wind energy
conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, footings,
electrical infrastructure, fence and any other associated equipment or
structures. Any single small wind energy conversion system, herein
defined, shall have a rated capacity of not more than 100 kilowatts and
is a legal use wherever cited in the Zoning Ordinance.
TOTAL HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from a point on the
ground at the original grade to the highest point of the wind turbine
blade (or other component) when the tip is at full vertical.
VIEWSHED MAP — A map that shows the geographic area from which
a small wind energy conversion system may be seen.
WIND GENERATOR — See "small wind conversion system" above.
7. Preapplication and application procedures.
A. General preapplication: The applicant shall complete and submit to
the Planning and Codes Office a wind generator application. The
project should be reviewed informally with the Codes Enforcement
Officer and Planner to determine if it generally conforms to
applicable ordinance requirements. If the project appears to
conform to applicable ordinance requirements, the applicant shall
complete a building permit application, provide supporting
documents and pay only the wind generator application fee and
submit it with the wind generator ordinance application.
To be placed on the Planning Board agenda for preapplication
sketch plan review, the applicant shall contact the Town Office at
least 21 days prior to a meeting. If the agenda for said meeting
is full, the Planning Director shall place the project on the agenda
of the next available meeting. Refer to preapplication procedures
below for required documents. To submit an application for
review, 18 copies of a completed application and supporting
documents and plans (each in a bound, stapled or otherwise
attached report), along with the wind generator fee, must be
submitted to the Town Office no later than 21 business days prior
to the next regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting. If the
agenda for said meeting is full, the project shall be placed on the
agenda of the next available meeting.
§ 225-60.14 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.14
202:586
B. Preapplication procedures. The following procedures and
requirements shall apply to all applications for wind generator
reviews:
(1) Prior to submitting an application for approval of the proposed
project, the applicant may meet informally with the Board at a
regular meeting to present a sketch plan and generally discuss
the proposal and to obtain guidance in development of the
plan. The sketch plan shall include:
(a) The outline of the tract or parcel with estimated
dimensions, road rights-of-way and existing easements.
(b) North arrow.
(c) The proposed layout of the wind generator equipment,
related features of the project and existing or planned
building(s), identification of general areas of steep slopes,
wetlands, streams, and floodplains.
(d) Other information pertinent to the project.
(2) Upon written request by the applicant, the Board, at its
discretion, may waive certain submission requirements
specified in Subsection 7E due to the nature or size of the
project.
(3) The Board shall indicate any additional studies and other
approvals from local and regional and state agencies that may
be required. Letters from these agencies shall be included as a
part of the application and/or review.
(4) The Board may, at its discretion, make an inspection of the site
prior to submission of the application.
(5) Within 30 days from submission of a preapplication and sketch
plan and following an on-site inspection, if applicable, the
Board shall submit in writing to the applicant a checklist of the
specific information which shall be included in the formal
application to the Board.
C. Application procedures. All applications for wind generator review
shall be made in writing to the Board on the forms provided for this
purpose. The application shall be made by the owner of the
property or his agent, as designated in writing by the owner; and
shall be accompanied by the payment of an application fee to cover
the administrative costs of processing the application which will
include notification of a newspaper of general circulation in the
community. The Planner shall review all applications for
completeness and other permitting requirements prior to giving
them to the Board.
§ 225-60.14 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.14
202:587
D. Submission requirements. The application shall include 18 copies
of all of the following:
(1) A fully executed and signed copy of the application for wind
generator review.
(2) Evidence of right, title or interest in the property, such as deed,
option to purchase, lease, or agreement.
(3) A site plan drawn at a scale sufficient to allow review of the
items listed under the preceding general standards but not at
more than 50 feet to the inch for that portion of the total tract
of land being proposed for development, and showing the
following:
(a) Names and addresses of all abutters within 250 feet on the
plan and names and addresses of all abutters on a separate
listing.
(b) Sketch map showing general location of the site within the
Town.
(c) Boundaries of all contiguous property under the control of
the owner or applicant regardless of whether all or part is
being developed at this time.
(d) The bearings and distances of all property lines and the
source of this information. The Board may waive the
requirement of a formal boundary survey when sufficient
information is available to clearly establish, on the ground,
all property boundaries.
(e) Classification(s) of the property and the location of zoning
district boundaries as applicable.
(f) The location of all existing and proposed buildings,
easements. Copies of any proposed or existing easements,
covenants, deed restrictions or other legal matters related
to the deed.
(4) Structural assessment.
(a) Evidence that the applicant's roof-mounted wind
generator meets the manufacturer's standards and is
certified by a structural engineer that the applicant's roof
is sufficiently sturdy to hold a roof-mounted wind
generator in winds below 100 miles an hour for at least
one hour.
(5) The Planning Board will require a scenic assessment consisting
of one or more of the following:
§ 225-60.14 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.14
202:588
(a) A visual analysis composed of elevation drawings of the
proposed wind power generator and any other proposed
structures, showing height above ground level. The
analysis may include a computerized photographic
simulation demonstrating the visual impacts from nearby
strategic vantage points and also indicate the color
treatment of the system's components and any visual
screening incorporated into the site that is intended to
lessen the system's visual prominence.
(b) A landscaping plan indicating the proposed placement of
the facility on the site; location of existing trees and other
significant site features; the type and location of plants
proposed in the screening plan for the facility and the
method of fencing, if any.
(c) Photo simulations of the proposed facility may include
those taken from perspectives determined by the Board, or
its designee, during the preapplication conference. Each
photo must be labeled with the line of sight, elevation, and
with the date taken imprinted on the photograph. The
photos must show the color of the facility and method of
screening.
(d) A brief narrative discussing the extent to which the
proposed facility would be visible from or within a
designated scenic resource or scenic viewshed, the tree
line elevation of vegetation within 100 feet of the facility,
and the distance to the proposed facility from the
designated scenic resources noted viewpoints.
(6) A signed statement that the owner of the wind generator
facility and his or other successors and assigns agree to pay for
the costs of removing the facility if it is abandoned.
E. Notification and hearing requirements. The applicant shall notify
all abutting property owners by certified mail, return receipt
requested, for all requests for a wind generator. If two or more
abutters, or 5 residents of the Town, object in writing and such
objection is received by the Board or postmarked within 15 days
after a public notice of the request for a wind generator, the Board
shall schedule a public hearing on the proposal. Such hearing shall
be scheduled within 30 days of acceptance of an application as
complete.
F. Board review.
(1) Within 45 days of the acceptance of a complete application, the
Board shall act upon the application. This period may be
extended by mutual written agreement.
§ 225-60.14 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.14
202:589
(2) The Board shall inform the applicant in writing of its decision
within seven (7) days of its action.
(3) One copy of the approved wind generator application shall be
retained in the Town Office and one copy shall be given to the
Code Enforcement Officer.
(4) The Board may attach reasonable conditions to approvals to
ensure conformity with the purposes and provisions of this
section.
(5) If the application concerns property which in whole or part is
within any Shoreland Zone, the criteria included in the
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance78 shall be reviewed concurrently
with the wind generator application.
(6) All approvals shall expire within one year of the date of
issuance unless work thereunder is substantially commenced
within one year from the date of approval. If work is not
substantially completed within two years from the date of
issue, a new application may be required by the Board.
8. Location of small wind conversion systems. Small wind conversion
systems are either permitted or conditionally permitted in all land use
districts. Where wind generators meet all the other requirements of this
section, they may be placed on a lot if they do not individually exceed
the following capacities:
District
Capacity
(kilowatts)
Urban Residential (R1) District 2.5
Suburban Residential (R2)
District
2.5
Lower Village (LV) 2.5
Middle Village (MV) 2.5
Commercial Corridor (CC and CC
196)
10
Mixed use Commercial (MUC and
MUC1)
10
Business Park (BP) 100
Rural Commercial Use (RCU) 100
Rural Residential (R3) District 100
Industrial (I) 100
9. Dimensional requirements.
78.Editor's Note: See § 225-19, Shoreland Overlay District.
§ 225-60.14 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.14
202:590
A. Setbacks. All small wind energy conversion systems shall be set
back a minimum horizontal distance of 110% of the total height of
the system or per manufacturer specifications, whichever is
greater, from property lines, public rights-of-way, easements and
habitable buildings. New habitable buildings shall not be
constructed within the setback area after a small wind energy
conversion system has been constructed and is operating.
B. The minimum distance between the ground and any part of the
rotor blade system shall be thirty feet.
C. Height. The total height shall not exceed the following
requirements for either freestanding or roof-mounted wind
conversions systems. The allowable height shall be reduced if
necessary to comply with Federal Aviation Administration
requirements.
(1) Vertical top of blade or other component: 75 feet.
Urban Residential (R1) District:
Lower Village (LV):
Middle Village (MV):
Mixed use Commercial (MUC and MUC1)
Commercial Corridor (CC and CC 196):
(2) Vertical top of blade or other component: 150 feet.
Business Park (BP)
Rural Commercial Use (RCU)
Rural Residential (R3)
Industrial (I)
10. Development standards. If a project includes construction other than a
wind generator project, it may also need to comply with other
applicable Topsham ordinances.
A. The system's tower and blades shall be a nonreflective color that
blends the system and its components into the surrounding
landscape to the greatest extent possible and incorporates
nonreflective surfaces to minimize any visual disruption.
B. The system shall be designed and located in such a manner to
minimize negative visual impacts on significant designated
resources. The application shall include a visual impact analysis of
the small wind energy conversion system(s) as installed. See
Subsection 7D(5).
C. Exterior lighting on any tower or turbine associated with the small
wind energy conversion system shall not be allowed except that
§ 225-60.14 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.14
202:591
which is specifically required by the Federal Aviation
Administration.
D. All on-site electrical wires associated with the systems shall be
installed underground except for tie-ins to a public utility company
transmission poles, towers and lines. This standard may be
modified by the Planning Board if the project terrain is determined
to be unsuitable due to the reasons of need for excessive grading or
similar factors.
E. The system shall be operated and located such that no disruptive
electromagnetic interference with signal transmission or reception
is caused beyond the site. If it has been demonstrated that the
system is causing disruptive interference beyond the site, the
system operator shall promptly eliminate the disruptive
interference or cease operation of the system.
F. Towers (but not applying to pole-mounted wind generators) shall be
constructed to provide one of the following means of access control
or another appropriate method of access control as approved by
the Planning Board:
(1) Tower climbing apparatus located no closer than twelve (12)
feet from the ground.
(2) A locked anti-climb device installed on the tower.
(3) A locked, protective fence at least six (6) feet in height that
encloses the tower.
G. Anchor points for any guy wires for a system tower shall be located
within the site. No guy wires or other system components shall be
located so as to block access by emergency vehicles. The Fire
Department shall be afforded the ability to cut electricity going into
the house or other habitable building.
H. All small wind energy conversion systems shall comply with
applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) rules and
regulations. The applicant shall present proof of compliance with
FAA rules and regulations prior to the Planning Board's final
decision.
I. No small wind energy conversion system shall be installed or
operated in a manner that causes interference with the operation of
any aviation facility including helicopter pads.
J. The conformance of rotor and over-speed control design and
fabrication with good engineering practices shall be certified by
the manufacturer.
K. Noise.
§ 225-60.14 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.14
202:592
(1) Except during short-term events including utility outages and
severe wind storms, the audible noise due to wind generator
operations shall not be created which causes the noise level at
the property boundary line of the proposed site to exceed the
following: forty-five (45) dBA at the lot line abutting residential
properties; or to exceed fifty-five (55) dBA at the lot line
abutting commercial lots. Certification shall be provided
before construction demonstrating compliance with this
requirement.
(2) Where the abutting property is undeveloped, the sound level
shall be equal to or less than the most restrictive other
abutting use. Where there are no uses on abutting properties,
the sound level at the property line shall be equal to or less
than the least stringent use allowed in the zoning district.
11. Abandonment of use. A small wind energy conversion system which is
not generating electricity for eighteen (18) consecutive months shall be
deemed abandoned and shall be dismantled and removed from the
property at the expense of the property owner.
12. Administration and waivers or modifications.
A. The Planning Board is authorized to review and act on all wind
generator applications over 60 feet in height. In considering wind
generator plans under this section, the Board may act to approve,
disapprove or approve with conditions as authorized by these
provisions. No municipal permit shall be issued nor construction
work begun on any wind generator project until the wind generator
plan has been approved by the Board. All work shall be carried out
in accord with the documentation submitted and approved by the
Board.
B. The Board may attach reasonable conditions to approvals to ensure
conformity with the purposes and provisions of this section. The
Board may condition final approval on receipt of copies of all state
or federal permits required by the project, including, but not
limited to, the Topsham Floodplain Management Ordinance or the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) permits.
C. If the application concerns property which in whole or in part is
within any Shoreland Zone, the criteria included in the Shoreland
Zoning Ordinance shall be reviewed concurrently with wind
generator review.
D. All approvals shall expire within one year of the date of issuance
unless work thereunder is substantially commenced within one
year from the date of approval. If work is not substantially
completed within two years from the date of issue, a new
application may be required by the Board.
§ 225-60.14 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.14
202:593
§ 225-60.15. Development transfer program. [Added 5-19-2010
STM, Art. 11]
The development transfer program allows residential development to occur
in designated locations at a higher density than is otherwise allowed
through the purchase of development transfer credits from the Town. The
fees collected from the purchase of development transfer credits are then
used to purchase land or development rights/conservation easements in
areas of the community where the objective of the Town is to minimize
residential development. This section sets out the mechanics for the
operation of the development transfer program.
E. The owner of a wind generator tower is responsible for recording
the fall zone of the tower on her/his deed, site plan or subdivision
plan at the Sagadahoc County Registry of Deeds (SCRD). The
recorded plan must be certified by a registered Maine surveyor.
A. Development transfer credits. The development transfer program
operates through the purchase of development transfer credits from
the Town by property owners or developers. These credits can then be
used to develop residential uses in designated locations at a higher
density than is allowed by the Town's normal zoning requirements.
B. Obtaining development transfer credits.
A property owner or developer may obtain a development transfer
credit(s) (or fractional credit) from the Town by paying a per credit fee
to the Planning Department.
The total number of development transfer credits needed for a
residential subdivision or other residential project shall be determined
by the Planning Board at the time of subdivision or site plan approval.
The number of required credits for the entire project shall be divided
by the total number of approved dwelling units in the subdivision
or project to determine the required development transfer credit (or
fraction of a credit) for each dwelling unit.
§ 225-60.14 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.15
202:594
The developer/subdivider shall be responsible for obtaining the
development transfer credits needed for the subdivision or residential
project. This requirement shall apply to the entire project or to each
phase of a project if the Planning Board approved a phased
development. If a project is a phased development, the developer must
obtain the required development transfer credits for a phase before
beginning construction of a subsequent phase. The developer must
either: 1) obtain the required development transfer credits for the
entire project or phase prior to starting construction of the project or
phase, or 2) post a financial guarantee with the Town in an amount
adequate to cover the cost of obtaining the required development
transfer credits for the project or phase. If the developer posts a
financial guarantee, the amount, form, and term of the guarantee must
be approved by the Planning Department. This guarantee may then be
drawn against to obtain the required credits on a unit-by-unit basis as
the building permit is issued for each unit. In this situation, the cost of
the credit shall be the current cost at the time the building permit is
issued.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall not issue a building permit for the
construction of a dwelling unit in any subdivision or other residential
development that was approved in accordance with the DTO provisions
until the required development transfer credits (or portion thereof)
have been obtained for that unit.
C. Amount of the fee for a development transfer credit. The fee for one
development transfer credit is $12,000. If a property owner or
developer desires to obtain a fraction of a development transfer credit,
the fee shall be the appropriate proportion of the fee for a full credit
(i.e., one-half of a credit equals 50% of the fee). This fee shall be
reviewed at least once every two years by the Board of Selectmen. The
Board of Selectmen may adjust the fee by formal vote following a public
hearing if the Board finds that the value of rural land has changed since
the fee was adopted or last revised.
D. Use of development transfer credits. A property owner or developer can
use development transfer credits to develop more dwelling units on a
parcel than are otherwise allowed by the applicable zoning
requirements. To utilize the credits, the property must:
(1) Be located in the Development Transfer Overlay Zone and the
development and use of the credits must conform to provisions of
§ 225-20.1; or
(2) Be located in a zoning district that allows increased density
through the use of development transfer credits and the activity
conforms to the specific requirements of that zone.
E. Use of the fees by the Town.
§ 225-60.15 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.15
202:595
Fees for development transfer credits collected by the Town shall be
deposited into a separate account and must be used only for acquiring
the fee in or conservation easements on potentially developable land
outside of the Grow Area designated in the adopted Comprehensive
Plan. The fees may be used for administrative costs associated with
such acquisitions, including legal and appraisal costs, transfer taxes,
closing costs, and similar costs related directly to the purchase of land
or conservation easements.
Any land acquired with development transfer fees must be
permanently restricted from development and may only be used for
conservation, passive recreation, and/or open space purposes.
Development transfer fee revenue may be used in conjunction with
other Town funds, impact fee revenue, or other private or government
funding to acquire land or easements, provided that the intent of this
section is met. The Board of Selectmen, upon the recommendation of
the Conservation Commission, may also use accumulated development
transfer fee revenue as interim financing for other projects that will
acquire recreational land or open space, provided that the funds will
be repaid to the development transfer fee account within a defined
time period that shall not exceed five (5) years.
The Conservation Commission shall be responsible for making
recommendations to the Board of Selectmen and the Town Meeting on
the use of these funds. The Commission shall develop a list of priorities
for the use of the funds. In the preparation of the priorities, the
Commission shall be guided by the recommendations of the Natural
Areas Plan or other open space plan if and when such a plan is adopted
by Town Meeting. If a Natural Areas Plan or similar plan has not
been adopted by Town Meeting, the Conservation Commission shall be
guided by the Town's adopted Comprehensive Plan, as amended, and
the following priorities in recommending the acquisition of land and/
or development rights/conservation easements with the fees paid for
development transfer credits.
• Land that is adjacent to Town-owned recreational facilities, open
space, or other conservation land that is consistent with that use.
• Land that is currently in agricultural or silvacultural use and will
remain in that use.
• Land that is adjacent to land that is in agricultural or silvacultural
use that is permanently protected from development.
• Land with significant historical or archeological value.
• Land in the designated rural area that has significant natural
resource value but that is potentially developable.
• Land adjacent to or visible from arterial and rural collector roads in
areas that are zoned R3.
• Land in the designated rural area that maintains the integrity of
unfragmented habitat blocks.
§ 225-60.15 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.15
202:596
§ 225-60.16. Additional standards for neighborhood grocery stores.
[Added 5-19-2010 STM, Art. 15]
Any new or expanded neighborhood grocery store must comply with the
following standards:
• Other land that is identified as potential open space or conservation
land in the Town's Comprehensive Plan or by a state or federal agency,
conservation organization, land trust, or regional entity.
The Conservation Commission shall make its recommendations on the
use of the funds to the Board of Selectmen. The Board of Selectmen
shall place any recommendation of the Commission relative to the use
of the funds on a Town Meeting warrant within six months of receiving
the recommendation together with the Commission's recommendation.
No funds shall be expended from this account without the approval of
the Town Meeting.
A. If an existing neighborhood grocery store is being expanded, or if a new
building is being constructed or if an existing building is being
converted to a neighborhood grocery store, a landscaped buffer strip
must be established and maintained in accordance with § 225-29, and
the neighborhood grocery store exterior design shall be compatible
with the architectural characteristics of the neighborhood.
B. If any fuel-dispensing facilities are located in a yard that abuts a
residential use, the landscaped buffer strip must be a minimum of
twenty (20) feet in width and must include a solid fence or other barrier
at least eight (8) feet in height.
C. The sale of motor vehicle fuels is allowed only if the lot on which the
neighborhood grocery store is located is in an R-2 or R-3 District within
the Town's designated growth area as shown on the Future Land Use
Plan in the Town's adopted Comprehensive Plan and the lot has its
primary vehicular access from Route 196, Route 201, or Route 24.
D. The sale of fuels, including motor vehicle fuels such as gasoline, must
be an accessory use and conform to the following requirements:
(1) The facility must conform to the requirements of Subsections B, D,
F, G, and H of § 225-44.
(2) Any facilities for the dispensing of fuel must be located to the side
or rear of the principal building unless the Planning Board finds
that such a location is not practical given the size, shape, and
characteristics of the lot and/or the location of the existing
improvements on the parcel, or that such a location will have a
significant adverse impact on one or more neighbors.
(3) The dispensing of fuels shall be limited to not more than (2) pumps
or dispensing stations each with a maximum of two (2) fueling
hoses located on not more than one (1) pump island.
§ 225-60.15 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-60.16
202:597
§ 225-60.17. (Reserved)79
§ 225-60.18. Standards for addiction treatment facilities. [Added
2-16-2011 STM, Art. 5]
(4) Exterior lighting, including canopy lighting, shall be discontinued
no later than 10:00 p.m.
(5) The site shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of
§ 225-34, Stormwater management, including facilities, such that
all stormwater is directed to a management system on site that is
designed to separate any fuels or vehicular liquids from the
stormwater prior to discharge off the site. [Amended 5-17-2017
STM, Art. 13]
A. Addiction treatment facilities shall conform to the following standards:
(1) Any such facility shall be licensed by the State of Maine for the
specific treatment programs offered, and for the number of
customers served.
(2) No addiction treatment facility shall be located where the patient
entrance to the treatment facility would be closer than 500 feet,
measured in a straight line without regard to intervening
structures or objects, to the nearest boundary of any property
which is occupied by a residence, school, playground, park, church,
day care center or nursery school.
(3) No addiction treatment facility shall be located where the patient
entrance to the treatment facility would be closer than 500 feet,
measured in a straight line without regard to intervening
structures or objects, to the nearest boundary of any property
which is located in a residential zone.
(4) No addiction treatment facility shall be located where the patient
entrance to the treatment facility would be closer than 1,500 feet,
measured in a straight line without regard to intervening
structures or objects, to the nearest point on any property which is
occupied by an addiction treatment facility.
(5) The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with all state or
federal laws, rules or regulations regarding its opioid treatment
program.
(6) The applicant, and the proposed property, is in compliance with
Town codes and ordinances.
(7) Any such facility shall open no earlier than 8:00 a.m., and shall
remain open no later than 8:00 p.m.
79.Editor's Note: Former § 225-60.17, Medical marijuana dispensaries, was repealed
5-15-2019 STM, Arts. 21 and 22.
§ 225-60.16 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-60.18
202:598
ARTICLE IX
Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
§ 225-61. Activities exempt from building permit requirements.
The following activities shall not require a building permit: repairs,
replacement and/or normal maintenance not requiring structural elements,
decorative changes in existing structures or buildings, provided that the
activity is in conformance with federal, state or local laws and does not
involve any physical modifications or changes requiring a permit under this
chapter.
§ 225-62. Permit application.
A. Every applicant for a permit shall submit a written application which
shall include, for structures to be erected, structures to be moved and
exterior additions to existing structures:
(1) The shape, size and location of the lot for which application is
made.
(2) The shape, size and location on the lot of the proposed structure
and of any proposed additions to existing structures with reference
to the distance from all lot lines.
(3) The shape, size and location of any other existing structures on the
lot with reference to the distance from all lot lines.
(4) The location of adjacent structures on adjacent lots with reference
to the distance from the lot line.
B. The above requirements shall not apply to alterations wholly within an
existing structure.
C. All applications shall also include:
(1) The name and address of the property owner.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the person, firm or
firms involved in the construction on the property.
(3) The value of the proposed construction.
(4) A statement of the proposed use for any new or moved structure or
altered portion of an existing structure.
(5) Any other information the applicant wishes to furnish.
(6) Any other information requested by the Code Enforcement Officer
to make the application intelligible and to determine whether the
proposed construction will conform to this chapter, other local
ordinances and state law. If the property is not served by a public
sewer, a valid plumbing permit or a completed application for a
§ 225-61 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-62
202:599
plumbing permit, including the site evaluation approved by the
Plumbing Inspector, shall be submitted.
(7) A certification that the information in the application is complete
and correct to the best of the applicant's knowledge and belief.
D. All applications shall be signed by the person or firm to do the work
and/or by the owner of the property or other person authorizing the
work.
E. All applications shall be dated, and the Code Enforcement Officer shall
note upon each application the date and time of its receipt at his office.
F. Upon receipt of a permit application the Code Enforcement Officer
shall:
(1) Decide whether the information in the application is sufficient for
him to determine whether, under this chapter, the permit should be
issued or if the application is otherwise inadequate. If he feels the
application is insufficient or inadequate, he shall at once notify the
applicant in writing, indicating what the necessary information
required to correct the application is. If the application is not so
corrected, he shall deny it.
(2) When an application conforms to the provisions of this chapter and
other codes and ordinances of the town, upon payment of the
required fee, he shall within 10 days of its receipt issue the permit.
He shall notify the Tax Assessor and keep a copy of the application/
permit in a permanent file in his office.
(3) If the application does not conform, he shall, within 10 days, deny
the permit in writing, stating therein his reasons for such denial. In
the event that the proposed building or structure is so constructed
or is of such usage as to require a review of the application by other
authorities or boards, as determined by reference to the land use
regulation file, the Code Enforcement Officer shall refer the
applicant to the appropriate authority or board for review, approval
or denial. Upon his receipt of the decision of the reviewing
authority or board, in writing, and if such decision is an approval,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue the permit with any
conditions prescribed by the reviewing authority or board. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall not issue any building permit if he
has knowledge that a particular structure would be located in an
unapproved subdivision, and/or if he has knowledge that the
structure would be in violation of a particular state law or local
ordinance. In denying any permit under these circumstances, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall state in writing the reasons for the
denial.
(4) If he shall fail, for any reason, within 10 days either to issue a
permit or deny an application in writing, such failure shall be
§ 225-62 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-62
202:600
§ 225-63. Certificate of occupancy.
§ 225-64. Code Enforcement Officer.
deemed a denial so that the applicant may appeal to the Board of
Appeals if he so wishes.
G. Following the issuance of a building permit, if no substantial start is
made on the construction within six months of the date of the permit, it
shall lapse and become void. Thereafter no further work on such
construction can be made until a new application has been made and
approved as aforesaid. The fee for such permit shall be charged as a
renewal fee.
H. Any permit issued which is not in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter confers no rights and is void. Any structure completed prior to
the enactment of this chapter shall be deemed to meet the setback
requirements of this chapter if a building permit was issued prior to
commencement of construction of the structure.
A. A certificate of occupancy issued by the Code Enforcement Officer is
required in advance of the use or occupancy of:
(1) Any lot, or change of the use thereof.
(2) A structure hereafter erected or a change in the use of an existing
structure or as the building code requires.80
B. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the lot or building or
structure complies with all the provisions of this chapter and other local
and state laws. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on
file in the office of the Building Inspector, and a copy shall be furnished,
on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in
the structure or land involved. A duplicate copy shall be filed in the
office of the Tax Assessor and the certificate of occupancy shall state
specifically the uses which it permits.
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. If the Code Enforcement Officer shall find
that any provision of this chapter is being violated, he shall notify, in
writing, the person responsible for such violations, indicating the
nature of the violations and ordering the action necessary to correct it.
He shall order the removal of illegal buildings, structures, additions or
work being done or shall take any other action authorized by this
chapter to ensure compliance with, or to prevent violation of, its
provisions.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer should maintain a current file of all
pertinent federal, state and local statutes, ordinance regulations, codes
80.Editor's Note: See Ch. 91, Building Construction.
§ 225-62 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-64
202:601
§ 225-65. Legal action. [Amended 5-20-1992 ATM, Art. 23; 6-1-1993
STM, Art. 20]
When any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be found to exist,
the Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and directed to institute
any and all actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, that may be
appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter in the
name of the town, in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
§ 225-66. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-20-1992 ATM, Art.
23; 6-1-1993 STM, Art. 20]
Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, his agent or a
contractor who violates a provision of this chapter shall be liable for
penalties set forth in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Fines shall be payable to the
town.
§ 225-67. Conditional use permits. [Amended 5-22-1991 ATM, Art.
28; 6-1-1993 STM, Art. 24]
and plans relating to land use regulation, including local subdivision
plans.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct on-site inspection to
ensure compliance with all applicable laws and conditions attached to
approval. The Code Enforcement Officer may enter any property at
reasonable hours and enter any structure with the consent of the
property owner, occupant or agent to inspect the property or structure
for compliance with the law or ordinances set forth in this section. If
consent is denied, he should obtain an administrative warrant before
entering the property. The Code Enforcement Officer may revoke a
permit if it was issued in error or if based on erroneous information.
A. Authorization. The Board of Appeals and the Planning Board are hereby
authorized to hear and decide upon applications for conditional use
permits in accordance with state law and the provisions of this chapter.
The Planning Board shall hear and decide upon all applications for
conditional use permits for those uses which also require site plan
review. The appropriate Board shall approve, approve with
modifications or conditions or disapprove an application for a
conditional use permit. No conditional use permit shall be authorized
unless specific provision for such conditional use is made in this
chapter.
B. Existing conditional use or structure.
(1) A conditional use which existed prior to the effective date of this
chapter may not be changed to another conditional use nor
substantially expanded or altered except in conformity with all
regulations of this chapter pertaining to conditional uses.
"Substantial expansion" shall be defined as:
§ 225-64 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-67
202:602
(a) Floor space or lot area use increase of 25% or 1,000 square
feet, whichever is less; or
(b) New materials or processes not normally associated with the
existing use.
(2) No changes shall be made in any approved conditional use without
approval of the change by the board which granted the initial
conditional use approval.
C. Application procedure. A person informed by the Code Enforcement
Officer that he requires a conditional use permit or special event permit
shall file an application with the appropriate board on forms provided
for the purpose. The applicant shall be responsible for filing a fee and
deposit as indicated in Chapter 109 of the Town Code. The following
information must be present on all applications: [Amended 5-20-1998
STM, Art. 35; 5-20-2004 STM, Art. 16]
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Location of property.
(3) Evidence of applicant's right, title or interest in the property and
any encumbrances on the property.
(4) Total floor area, ground coverage and location of each proposed
building, structure or addition. Location of all utilities, lighting,
roads, drainage and parking areas.
(5) State exact nature of conditional use requested.
(6) Applicant will provide a list of all property within 200 feet of the
boundaries of the property involved.
D. Public hearing. Following the filing of an application, and before taking
action on any application, the appropriate board shall hold a public
hearing on the application within 45 days in accordance with the
procedures as set forth in § 225-72B and C. [Amended 5-20-1998
STM, Art. 35]
E. Decision. Any decision of the Board of Appeals or the Planning Board
will be in accordance with Article X.
F. Standards for a conditional use permit. An applicant who seeks a
conditional use permit shall submit to the appropriate board adequate
evidence, which will become part of the record, illustrating the proof
required by this section. The board shall review the application in
concert with all of the evidence submitted by the applicant, and shall
make specific factual findings that the following are met:
(1) The use is compatible with and similar to the general categories of
uses of neighboring properties.
§ 225-67 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-67
202:603
(2) The use is compatible with the Comprehensive Plan and the
anticipated future development of the neighborhood.
(3) The anticipated traffic for the proposed development will not cause
an adverse negative impact on the neighborhood surrounding the
proposed development.
(4) There will be no noise, dust, odor, vibration or smoke generated by
the use that will adversely affect neighboring properties or the
Town in general.
(5) The physical characteristics of the site, including location, slope,
soils, drainage and vegetative cover, are suitable for the proposed
use.
(6) The use will not constitute a public or private nuisance.
(7) Any other requirements and applicable provisions of this Code, as
deemed necessary, are met.
G. Conditions attached to conditional uses.
(1) Upon consideration of the factors listed above, the Board of
Appeals or Planning Board may attach such conditions, in addition
to those required in this chapter, that it finds necessary to further
the purposes of this chapter. Violation of any of these conditions
shall be a violation of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but
are not limited to, specification for: type of vegetation; included
setbacks and yards; specified sewage disposal and water supply
facilities; landscaping and planting screens; period of operation;
operations controls; professional inspection and maintenance;
sureties; deed restrictions, restrictive covenants; locations of piers,
docks, parking and signs; type of construction; or any other
conditions necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter.
(2) In evaluating each application, the Board may request the
assistance of the County Soil and Water Conservation District state
or federal agency or consultant which can provide technical
assistance.
H. Appeals. [Added 5-15-2013 STM, Art. 10]
(1) All decisions of the Planning Board shall be provided to the
applicant, and any others requesting notification, in writing within
seven (7) days of the Planning Board’s decision. Any aggrieved
party may appeal such decision of the Planning Board within thirty
(30) days of the date of the decision to the Topsham Board of
Appeals, in accordance with § 225-72.
(2) An applicant shall not be prevented from reapplying to the
Planning Board for a project that has been denied, so long as the
application is determined to be substantially different from the
original application, by the Planning Board.
§ 225-67 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-67
202:604
ARTICLE X
Board of Appeals
§ 225-68. Establishment; membership; terms of office;
appointment; vacancies; officers.
A Board of Appeals is hereby established which shall consist of five
members and two associate members. The term of office of a member
or associate is five years serving staggered terms. A municipal officer or
his spouse may not be a member or associate member of the Board of
Appeals. When a regular member of the Board is unable to act because
of interest, physical incapacity or absence, an associate member shall act
in his stead. Members of the Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the
municipal officers. When there is a permanent vacancy, the municipal office
shall appoint a new member to serve for the remainder of the unexpired
term. Members of the Board of Appeals may be removed from office by the
municipal officers for cause upon written charges and after public hearing.
The Board of Appeals shall elect a Chairman and Secretary from its own
membership.
§ 225-69. Rules; meetings; records; quorum.
The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its
affairs, in keeping with the provisions of this chapter and 30 M.R.S.A.
§ 2411.81 Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such
other times as the Board may determine. The Chairman, or in his absence,
the acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. The Board of Appeals
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member
upon each question or of absence or failure to vote, and shall keep records
of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public
record and be filed in the Town offices. A quorum shall consist of three
members.
§ 225-70. Powers and duties.
The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
A. Administrative appeals: To hear and decide administrative appeals, on
an appellate basis, where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that there
is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made
by, or failure to act by, the Planning Board on a conditional use
application or Historic District Commission; and to hear and decide
administrative appeals on a de novo basis where it is alleged by an
aggrieved party that there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code
Enforcement Officer in his or her review of and action on a permit
application under this chapter. Any order, requirement, decision or
81.Editor's Note: 30 M.R.S.A. § 2411 was repealed by Chapter 737 of the Laws of 1987. See
now 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691.
§ 225-68 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-70
202:605
§ 225-71. Variances. [Amended 5-20-1993 ATM, Art. 23; 5-18-1995
STM, Art. 24; 5-15-1996 STM, Art. 29; 5-21-1997 STM, Art. 44;
5-21-1997 STM, Art. 45; 5-15-2002 STM, Art. 21; 1-23-2008 STM,
Art. 2; 5-15-2019 STM, Art. 15]
Variances may be permitted only under the following conditions:
determination made, or failure to act, in the enforcement of this chapter
is advisory only and not appealable to the Board of Appeals. [Amended
5-15-2019 STM, Art. 15]
When the Board of Appeals reviews a decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer, the Board of Appeals shall hold a de novo
hearing. At this time the Board may receive and consider new
evidence and testimony, be it oral or written. When acting in a de
novo capacity, the Board of Appeals shall hear and decide the matter
afresh, undertaking its own independent analysis of evidence and the
law, and reaching its own decision.
When the Board of Appeals hears a decision of the Planning Board or
Historic District Commission, it shall hold an appellate hearing, and
may reverse the decision of the Planning Board or Historic District
Commission only upon finding that the decision was contrary to
specific provisions of the ordinance or contrary to the facts presented
to the Planning Board or Historic District Commission. The Board of
Appeals may only review the record of the proceedings before the
Planning Board or Historic District Commission. The Board of Appeals
shall not receive or consider any evidence which was not presented to
the Planning Board or Historic District Commission, but the Board of
Appeals may receive and consider written or oral arguments. If the
Board of Appeals determines that the record of the Planning Board or
Historic District Commission proceedings are inadequate, the Board
of Appeals may remand the matter to the Planning Board or Historic
District Commission for additional fact finding.
B. Variances. To authorize variances upon appeal in specific cases, but
only within the limitations set forth in this chapter.
C. Interpretations of this chapter.
D. The Board of Appeals shall not have jurisdiction or authority to hear
appeals from site plan or subdivision decisions made by either the
Planning Board or the Town Planner. [Amended 5-15-2019 STM, Art.
15]
A. Variances may be granted by the Board of Appeals for dimensional
standards such as lot area, lot coverage, frontage and setback
requirements as allowed by M.R.S.A. 30-A § 4353.
B. The Board of Appeals may grant a disability variance, if the following
criteria are met:
§ 225-70 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-71
202:606
(1) A disability variance may be granted to a property owner of a
single-family dwelling, which dwelling is the primary year-round
residence of the petitioner, for the purpose of making that property
accessible to a person with a disability who is living on the
property. The Board shall restrict such variances solely to the
installation of equipment or the construction of structures
necessary for access to or egress from the property by the person
with the disability.
(2) The Board may impose conditions on a disability variance,
including limiting the variance to the duration of the disability or to
the time that the person with the disability lives on the property.
(3) For the purpose of this subsection, a disability has the same
meaning as a physical or mental handicap under 5 M.R.S.A. § 4553,
and the term "structures necessary for access to or egress from the
property" is defined to include railing, wall or roof systems
necessary for the safety or effectiveness of the structure.
(4) Granting of a disability variance shall not cause the area of a
dwelling to exceed the maximum permissible lot coverage allowed
under this chapter.
C. (Reserved)82
D. The Board shall not grant a variance (applies to all but disability
variances) unless it finds that all the following criteria are met:
(1) The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a
variance is granted;
(2) The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the
property and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
(3) The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of
the locality; and
(4) The hardship is not the result of action by the applicant nor a prior
owner.
E. The Board shall not grant a disability variance unless it finds that all of
the following criteria are met:
(1) The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the
property and not to the general conditions of the neighborhood;
(2) The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of
the locality;
(3) The hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a
prior owner;
82.
§ 225-71 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-71
202:607
§ 225-72. Appeals.
(4) The granting of the variance will not substantially reduce or impair
the use of abutting property; and
(5) The granting of a variance is based upon demonstrated need, not
convenience, and no other feasible alternative is available.
F. (Reserved)83
G. The Board shall limit any variances granted as strictly as possible in
order to preserve the terms of this chapter as much as possible, and it
may impose such conditions to a variance as it deems necessary, to this
end.
H. If the Board grants a variance, a certificate indicating the name of the
current property owner, identifying the property by reference to the
last recorded deed in its chain of title and indicating the fact that a
variance, including any conditions on the variance, had been granted
and the date of the granting shall be prepared in recordable form. This
certificate must be recorded in the Sagadahoc County Registry of
Deeds within 90 days of the final written approval of the variance or the
variance is void. The variance is not valid until recorded. For the
purposes of this chapter the date of the final written approval shall be
the date stated on the written approval.
A. Making an appeal. [Amended 5-22-1991 ATM, Art. 28; 5-20-1992
ATM, Art. 23; 5-15-2013 STM, Art. 10]
(1) An appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an aggrieved
party from any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer, the
Historic District Commission, or the Planning Board on a
conditional use application. [Amended 5-15-2019 STM, Art. 15]
(2) Such appeals shall be taken within (30) days of the decision
appealed from, and not otherwise, except that the Board, upon a
showing of good cause, may waive the thirty-day requirement.
(3) Such appeal shall be made by filing with the Board of Appeals a
written notice of appeal specifying the grounds for such appeal. For
a variance appeal the applicant shall submit:
(a) A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of existing
building and other physical features pertinent to the variance
request.
(b) A concise written statement stating what variance is
requested.
(4) Upon being notified of an appeal, the Board of Appeals shall be
provided all the papers specifying the record of the decision
83.
§ 225-71 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-72
202:608
appealed from. Each appeal shall be accompanied by a fee as
described in Chapter 109. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public
hearing on the appeal within 45 days.
(5) A copy of each variance request within the shoreland zone,
including the application and all supporting information supplied
by the applicant, shall be forwarded by the municipal officials to the
Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection at
least 20 days prior to action by the Board of Appeals. Any
comments received from the Commissioner prior to action by the
Board of Appeals shall be made part of the record and shall be
taken into consideration by the Board of Appeals.
B. Procedure on appeal.
(1) At least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing on such appeal, the
Board shall cause to be published in one issue in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Town a notice which includes:
(a) The name of the person appealing.
(b) A brief description of the property involved.
(c) A brief description of the decision appealed from or the nature
of a variance appeal.
(d) The time and place of the Board's hearing.
(2) At least 10 days prior to the date set for hearing, the Board shall
give similar written notice to:
(a) All property owners of record whose properties lie within 200
feet of the affected property;
(b) The person making the appeal; and
(c) The Planning Board and any other parties of record.
(3) The notice will be sent by United States Mail, postage prepaid to
those persons as listed on the Town's tax records.
C. Hearings.
(1) In a de novo hearing on an appeal of a decision by the Code
Enforcement Officer, the Board may receive any oral or
documentary evidence but shall provide as a matter of policy for
the exclusion of irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious
evidence. Every party shall have the right to present his case or
defense by oral or documentary evidence, to submit rebuttal
evidence and to conduct such cross-examinations as may be
required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. [Amended
5-15-2019 STM, Art. 15]
§ 225-72 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-72
202:609
§ 225-73. Decisions.
(2) In an appellate hearing on an appeal of a Planning Board decision
on a conditional use application or a decision of the Historic
District Commission, the Board may receive oral arguments, but
may only review the record of the proceedings before the Planning
Board or Historic District Commission. [Added 5-15-2019 STM,
Art. 1584]
(3) The appellant's case shall be heard first. To maintain orderly
procedure, each side shall proceed without interruption. Questions
may be asked through the Chair. All persons at the hearing shall
abide by the order of the Chairman.
(4) At any hearing, a party may be represented by agent or attorney.
Hearing shall not be continued to other times except for good
cause.
(5) If a party does not attend a hearing and is not otherwise
represented, its case will be deemed to have been withdrawn
without prejudice to refile the appeal. The filing fee of $50 will not
be refunded to any applicant whose appeal is withdrawn in this
manner.
(6) The Code Enforcement Officer or his designated assistant shall
attend all hearings and may present to the Board of Appeals all
plans, photographs or other material he deems appropriate for an
understanding of the appeal.
(7) The transcript of testimony, if any, and exhibits, together with all
papers and requests filed in the proceedings, shall constitute the
record.
A. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination
of the Code Enforcement Officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant
on any matter on which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to
affect any variation in the application of this chapter.
B. The Board shall decide all appeals within 30 days after hearing and
shall issue a written decision on all appeals.
C. All decisions shall become a part of the record and shall include a
statement of findings and conclusions as well as the reasons or basis
therefore, upon all the material issues of fact, law or discretion
presented and the appropriate order, relief or denial thereof. Notice of
any decision shall be mailed or hand delivered to the petitioner, his
representative or agent, the Planning Board, agency or office and the
municipal officers within seven days of the decision date.
84.Editor's Note: This article also redesignated former Subsection C(2) through (6) as
Subsection C(3) through (7), respectively.
§ 225-72 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-73
202:610
§ 225-74. Stay of proceedings.
An appeal stays all legal proceedings in a furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board
after the notice of appeal has been filed with him that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril
to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom
the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
D. Upon notification of the granting of an appeal by the Board of Appeals,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall immediately issue a permit in
accordance with the conditions of the approval, unless the applicant
needs a conditional use permit.
E. A conditional use permit or variance secured under the provisions of
this chapter by vote of the Board of Appeals shall expire if the work or
change involved is not completed within two years of the date on which
the conditional use or variance is authorized. [Amended 5-20-1992
ATM, Art. 23; 5-21-1997 STM, Art. 46; 5-15-2019 STM, Art. 15]
F. Appeals may be taken as permitted by law from any decision of the
Board of Appeals to Superior Court.
G. The Chairman of the Board of Appeals shall notify the Department of
Environmental Protection of variances granted in the shoreland zone
within 14 days of the decision. [Amended 5-20-1992 ATM, Art. 23]
§ 225-73 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-74
202:611

ARTICLE XI
(Reserved)85
§ 225-75. through § 225-77. (Reserved)
85.Editor’s Note: Former Art. XI, Historic District Commission, was repealed 5-16-2012 STM,
Art. 9. See now Ch. 24, Historic Commission.
§ 225-75 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-75
202:613

ARTICLE XII
Amendments
§ 225-78. Authority.
The legislative body of the Town of Topsham may from time to time amend
the boundaries of the zones established on the Official Zoning Map or the
regulations set forth in this chapter.
§ 225-79. Procedure. [Amended 10-3-1994 STM, Art. 10; 5-20-1998
STM, Art. 36; 5-20-2004 STM, Art. 6; 5-21-2008 ATM, Art. 11]
A. Proposed amendment by municipal officers, Planning Board or upon
petition. If either the municipal officers or the Planning Board desires to
propose any changes to this chapter, or if a citizen petition as set forth
herein is brought, the following procedure shall be followed:
(1) If the proposal is initiated by the municipal officers, they shall
formally request the Planning Board to hold a public hearing as set
forth below and to carry out the other procedural requirements of
this section.
(2) If the proposal is initiated by the Planning Board, it shall be by
majority vote of the Board.
(3) If a petition requesting amendment of this chapter, signed by at
least 5% of the registered voters of the Town, is filed with the
Planning Board, the Board shall promptly request the Registrar to
verify the signatures, and, if the Board verifies that the signatures
are valid, the Planning Board shall then carry out the other
procedural requirements of this section.
(4) As soon as the amendment procedure is initiated by any of the
above methods, the Board shall give public notice of a public
hearing on the proposed changes. The notice shall contain the time,
date and place of hearing and sufficient detail about the proposed
changes as to give adequate notice of their content. If the proposed
changes are extensive, a brief summary of the changes, together
with an indication that a full text is available at the Town Clerk's
office, shall be adequate notice.
(5) The public hearing shall be held by the Planning Board. The public
notice requirements are as specified:
(a) The Planning Board shall:
[1] Give written notice, with sufficient information to identify
the property, including a copy of a map indicating the
property be rezoned, the zone change requested and the
applicant to all property owners of record (as evidenced by
the Town tax files) within 200 feet to the subject property.
This notice shall be sent by regular United States Mail,
§ 225-78 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-79
202:615
first class, postage prepaid, at least 14 days prior to the
schedule hearing. Failure of any actual property owner to
receive such notice, for any reason, shall not invalidate the
amendment proceedings.
[2] Publish a copy of such notice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town, at least twice in such paper, with
the first publication at least 14 days prior to the scheduled
date of the hearing and the date of the second publication
must be at least seven days before the hearing. The notice
must be written in plain English, understandable by the
average citizen.
[3] Post notice of such hearing in the Town offices at least 14
days before the date of the hearing.
(b) All notices, whether posted, published or mailed must contain
a copy of the map indicating the property to be rezoned.
§ 225-79 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-79
202:616
ARTICLE XIII
Legal Status Provisions
§ 225-80. Conflict with other laws.
When the provisions of this chapter specify more restrictive standards than
required by any other statute or ordinance, the requirements of this chapter
shall govern.
§ 225-81. Severability.
Should any section or part of a section or any provision of this chapter be
declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration
shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof
other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 225-82. Repealer.
All prior zoning ordinances are repealed, including Chapter 7.86
§ 225-83. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect and be in force from the date of its adoption.
86.Editor's Note: "Chapter 7" refers to former Chapter 7, Mobile Park Ordinance, of the
Topsham Code.
§ 225-80 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-83
202:617

ARTICLE XIV
Zone Descriptions87
§ 225-84. Commercial Corridor Zones. [Amended 11-17-1992 STM,
Art. 5; 10-3-1994 STM, Art. 11; 5-15-1996 STM, Art. 30; 5-17-2000
STM, Art. 15; 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15; 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
Tax Map Description
R-5B Commercial Corridor Zone CC shall include an area beginning
at a point which is located at the centerline of I-295, parallel
with the boundary between Lots 9B and 11, then along the
boundary between Lot 9B and 11 to a point at the
southwesterly corner of Lot 10, then along the boundary
between Lot 10 and 11 approximately 175' to a point at the
westerly corner of Lot 12, then southeasterly approximately
350' along the southwesterly boundary of Lot 12, across the
Topsham Fair Mall Road to a point along the westerly
boundary of Lot 1, then southwesterly along the westerly
boundary of Lot 1 to the boundary between Lot 1 and 3,
then southeasterly approximately 255' along the northeasterly
boundary of Lot 3, then through
R-5 Lot 21C to a point at the northerly corner of Lot 21D-1 at the
vacated NET & T buried cable easement, then northeasterly
along the vacated NET & T buried cable easement to a point
along the easement offset 500' from Route 196, then
southeasterly parallel to and offset 500' to Route 196 to the
western boundary of
U-21 Lot 64, then northerly along the western boundary of Lot 64
to the northwesterly corner of Lot 64, then easterly along
the northerly boundary of Lot 64 to the northeasterly corner
of Lot 64, then diagonally across Mallet Drive to the
northwesterly corner of Lot 61, then easterly along the
northerly boundary of Lot 61 to the northeasterly corner of
Lot 61, then southerly along the easterly boundary of Lot 61
to the southeasterly corner of Lot 61 to the westerly boundary
of
87.Editor's Note: All references to streets, roads, interstates, Central Maine Railroad tracks,
Central Maine Power transmission lines and New England Telephone and Telegram buried
cables shall mean the center line of the street right-of-way or utility right-of-way or
easements as is appropriate.
§ 225-84 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-84
202:619
Tax Map Description
R-5 Lot 16-3, then southerly along the westerly boundary of Lot
16-3 to the southwesterly corner of Lot 16-3, then
southeasterly along the southerly boundary of Lots 16-3 and
16-4 to the southwesterly corner of Lot 16-4, then
northeasterly along the easterly boundary of Lot 16-4, across
Monument Place then along the boundary line between Lots
16-6 and 11-A, across Rt. 196, then along the boundary
between Map U5 L46 and Map R5 L17 to the center line of
the CMP ROW, Lot 92. From that point, northwesterly along
the center line of the CMP ROW to the easterly boundary of
Lot 23, then easterly across the CMP ROW to the boundary
between Lot 23 and Map R5A Lot 2 to the easterly point of Lot
2, then southerly to the southwesterly corner of Map R5A Lot
13, then easterly along the boundary of the NT & T easement,
then northerly along then NT & T easement to the center line
of Rt. 201; thence along the center line of Rt. 201 northerly
to the center line of the I-295 ROW, thence westerly along the
I-295 ROW to the point of beginning.
§ 225-84 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-85
202:620
§ 225-85. Industrial Zone. [Amended 5-17-2000 STM, Art. 15;
5-20-2015 STM, Art. 14]
Tax Map Description
R-2 Beginning at a point which is the intersection of the eastern
boundary of Lot 5 and the Androscoggin River; then northerly
along said boundary to the southern boundary of Lot 96;
thence easterly along said boundary to its intersection with
the western boundary of the right-of-way of River Road;
thence northerly along said boundary to the northern
boundary of Lot 96; thence westerly along said boundary a
distance of 200' to a point; thence northwesterly 420'± to
a point which is 200' southerly of the southern boundary of
Lot 10; thence westerly, parallel to the southern boundary of
Lot 10 to a point which is 200' west of the western boundary
of Lot 7; thence northerly, parallel to the western boundary
of Lot 7, a distance of 650'± to a point; thence westerly a
distance of 100'± to a point; thence northerly along a line
which is parallel to and 200' west of the western boundary of
Lot 16A a distance of 625'± to a point; thence westerly along
a line which is parallel to and 200' south of the southern
boundary of Lot 24, a distance of 475'± to a point; thence
northerly along a line which is parallel to and 200' west
of the western boundary of Lots 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29,
30, 31, 32 and 33, a distance of 1,225'± to a point; thence
easterly along a line which is parallel to and 200' north of
the northern boundary of Lot 33, to a point; thence northerly
at a right angle to the last mentioned boundary a distance
of 225'± to a point on the northern boundary of the railroad
right-of-way, Lot 98; thence westerly along said boundary
to its intersection with the western boundary of Lot 57A;
thence northerly along the western boundary of Lot 57A
to its intersection with the southern boundary of Lot 66A;
thence westerly along said boundary to its intersection with
the eastern boundary of Lot 66; thence westerly along said
boundary to its intersection with the western boundary of Lot
66B; thence northerly along said boundary to its intersection
with the western boundary of Lot 68; thence northwesterly
along a line which is parallel to and 300' west of the western
right-of-way boundary of Old Lisbon Road and Route 196 a
distance of 690'+/- to the westerly border of Lot 74; thence
northerly along this border to the right-of-way of Old Lisbon
Road; thence northerly along the border of Route 196 to a
point that intersects Lot 74A and Lot 77; thence westerly
along the southern border of Lot 77A; thence
R-3 4,875'± to its intersection with the southern boundary of Lot
4B; thence easterly along said boundary to a point which is
the southwest corner of Lot 4B; thence westerly a distance of
1,000' to the Androscoggin River;
§ 225-85 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-85
202:621
Tax Map Description
R-3 Thence southerly along the eastern shore of the
Androscoggin River to the point of beginning.
§ 225-86. Urban Residential and Suburban Residential [Amended
10-3-1994 STM, Art. 11]
Tax Map Description
U-8 Boundary dividing the R-1 and R-2 Zones on the eastern
side is east of Main Street, the MCRR tracks from the
Androscoggin River, across Middlesex Road to the stream
approximately 830' northeast of...
R-4 Middlesex Road, along the stream in a northwesterly manner
to a point approximately 970' north of the intersection of
Main and Pleasant Streets and offset 1,000' to the east of
Main Street.
R-1 Boundary dividing the R-1 and R-2 zones on the western side
of Main Street is the vacated NET & T buried...
R-5 Underground cable easement from Merrill Island north to
the intersection of the eastern boundary of Lot 7, then
northwesterly to the northwest corner of Lot 7, then easterly
along the north boundary of Lot 7 to the northeast corner of
Lot 7, then south along the east boundary of Lot 7 to Winter
Street, then easterly along Winter Street to the southwest
corner of Lot 6, then north along the western boundary of
Lots 5 and 6 a distance of 3,320'± to a point which is the
intersection of the vacated NET & T easement, then northerly
along said vacated easement a distance of 600'± to a point,
then southeasterly parallel and offset 500' from the
centerline of Rt. 196 a distance of 2,750'± to a point, then
easterly to the point of beginning.
§ 225-87. Suburban Residential and Rural Residential.
Tax Map Description
R-8 The eastern R-2 Zone shall start at the Androscoggin River,
from there go northwesterly along Lovers Lane Road and in a
straight line beyond to the MCRR track then southwest along
the railroad track to the Androscoggin River.
R-2 The boundary separating the western R-2 Zone from the R-3
Zone shall start at the intersection of the MCRR tracks and
River Road just north of Mill Road and extends northwesterly
along the railroad tracks to the eastern boundary line of the
Industrial Zone.
§ 225-85 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-88
202:622
§ 225-88. Urban Residential. [Amended 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
Tax Map Description
R-5A An area starting at the southeast corner of Lot 4 and
extending westerly along the northern boundary line of Lots
3 to the northwesterly corner of Lot 3, thence southerly along
the westerly boundary of Lots 3, 3A and 1
R5 To the center line of the CMP right-of-way, thence westerly
along the center line of the CMP right-of-way to the boundary
of Lot 23, then easterly along the boundary of Lot 23, across
the CMP right-of-way to the boundary of
R5A Lot 2, thence westerly along the boundary of Lot 2 to its point
of intersection with the westerly boundary of the NET & T
Co. easement, thence northerly to its intersection with the
west boundary of Rt. 201, thence southerly along the western
boundary of Rt. 201 to the point of beginning.
§ 225-88 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-89
202:623
§ 225-89. Mobile Home Park Overlay Zone. [Amended 10-3-1994
STM, Art. 11; 5-19-2010 STM, Art. 12]
§ 225-89 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-89
202:624
Tax Map Description
R-3 Beginning at a point on the northerly sideline of the Lewiston
Road at the intersection of the easterly property line of Lot
12 with the Lewiston Road, thence northwesterly along the
northerly sideline of Lewiston Road to a point at the property
line between Lots 16 and 17, thence northerly along the
property line between Lots 16 and 17 and continuing
northerly and westerly along the property lines of Lots 19,
20, and 21, thence southerly along the boundary between
Lots 21 and 22 to the northerly sideline of Lewiston Road,
thence westerly along the sideline of the Lewiston Road to
the westerly property line of Lot 22, thence northerly along
the boundary between Lots 22 and 22A and Lot 24 to a point
250 feet east of the Little River (the boundary of the Resource
Protection District), thence along a line parallel to and 250
feet east of the Little River (the boundary of the Resource
Protection District) until it meets the boundary between Lots
22A and 24, thence northerly along the boundary of Lots
22A and 24 to a point 250 feet south of the Little River (the
boundary of the Resource Protection District), then easterly
along a line parallel to and 250 feet south of the Little River
(the boundary of the Resource Protection District) to the
easterly property line of Lot 12, thence southerly along the
boundary between Lots 12 and 9A to the northerly property
line of Lot 9C, thence easterly along the northerly boundary
of Lot 9C to the property line of Lot 37 thence southerly along
the easterly boundary of Lots 9C, 9, and 9B extended to the
property line of Lot 8 but excluding the Resource Protection
District adjacent to a wetland, thence westerly along the
northern boundary of Lots 8 and 8B to the property line of
Lot 12, thence southerly along the eastern boundary of Lot
12 to the point of beginning.
R3 Beginning at a point on the southerly sideline of the Lewiston
Road at the easterly property line of Lot 13, thence southerly
along the boundary between Lots 10 and 13 to a boundary of
the Resource Protection District adjacent to the shoreline of
the Androscoggin River, thence westerly along the boundary
of the Resource Protection District to the southern boundary
of Lot 13, thence westerly along the southern boundary of
Lots 13 and 18 to a point 250 feet north of the shoreline
of the Androscoggin River (the boundary of the Resource
Protection District), thence northerly along a line parallel to
and 250 feet north and east of the river (the boundary of
the Resource Protection District) to the westerly boundary of
Lot 18, thence northerly along the boundary between Lots 18
and 26 to the southerly sideline of the Lewiston Road, thence
easterly along the Lewiston Road to the point of beginning.
§ 225-89 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-89
202:625
Tax Map Description
R5 Beginning at a point on the westerly sideline of Leanne Street
at the intersection with the property line of Lot 49E, thence
southwesterly along the boundary between Lot 49E and Lots
49J, 49K, and 49F to the easterly sideline of Brian Street,
thence northwesterly along the sideline of Brian Street
extended to the northerly side line of Maynard Drive, thence
southwesterly along the northerly sideline of Maynard Drive
and the boundary between Lots 49E and Lots 53A and 54 to
the property line of Lot 56-2, thence northwesterly along the
boundary of Lot 49E to the property line of Lot 34, thence
northeasterly along the boundary between Lots 34 and 49E
to the property line of Lot 47-3, thence southeasterly along
the boundary of Lot 49E to the property line of Lot 49A,
thence southwesterly along the boundary between Lots 49A
and 49E to the easterly sideline of Leanne Street, and thence
diagonally across Leanne Street to the point of beginning.
R4 Beginning at a point on the westerly sideline of Canam Drive
that is 150 feet north of the sideline of Main Street, thence
northwesterly along a line parallel to and 150 feet east of the
sideline of Main Street as extended to the easterly sideline
of the Old Augusta Road, thence northerly along the easterly
side line of Old Augusta Road to the northerly property line
of Lot 63, thence north and east along the northerly property
line of Lot 63 to the boundary of Lot 64 on Tax Map R9,
thence southeasterly along the boundary between Lots 63
and 64 to a point 75 feet southeast of the stream that runs
easterly through Map R9 Lot 64 (the boundary of the Stream
Protection District), thence easterly along a line parallel to
and 75 feet south of the stream (the boundary of the Stream
Protection District) to the property line of Lot 64A on Map
R9, thence southerly along the boundary between Lots 64
and 64A on Map 9A to the property line of Lot 63 on Map R4,
thence easterly along the boundary between Lot 63 and 64A,
thence southerly along the boundary of Lot 63 to the property
line of Lot 17A-G-3, thence westerly along the southern
boundary of Lot 63 to the property line with Lot 44A, thence
southerly along the boundary between Lots 44A and 40C
to the westerly sideline of Canam Drive, thence southerly
along the westerly sideline of Canam Drive to the point of
beginning.
§ 225-89 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-89
202:626
Tax Map Description
U10 and U8 Beginning at a point on the westerly side of Tedford Road at
the property line between Lots 9 and 10B, thence westerly
and southerly along the boundary between Lots 9 and 10B,
thence southerly along the eastern property lines of Lots 10C,
10D, 10E, 10F, 10G, and 10H to the property line of Tax Map
U8 Lot 8, thence westerly along the southerly property line
of Lot 10H to Map U8 Lot 3A, thence southerly, westerly,
and northerly around Map U8 Lot 3A to the westerly sideline
of Bunny Lane, thence northerly along the westerly property
lines of Lots 10K, 10L, 10M and 10B to the property line
of Lot 10A, thence easterly along the boundary between Lot
10B and Lots 10A and 10 the westerly sideline of Tedford
Road, thence southerly along Tedford Road to the point of
beginning.
§ 225-90. Rural Commercial Use Zones.88 [Added 5-17-2000 STM,
Art. 15; amended 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15]
Tax Map Description
R-5 Rural Commercial Use Zone RCU shall start at a point where
Route 196 intersects the boundary line separating Lots 56-3
and 58 and extend northwest along Route 196
R1/R2 196 to the CMP transmission line just south of the
intersection of Route 196 and the Whitehouse Crossing Road,
west along the transmission line to the MCRR tracks, along
the tracks to the River Road, then north along the River Road
across Route 196 and north on the Old Lisbon Road and east
on the Branch Road
R-6/5 To the CMP transmission line, southeast along the
transmission line to the intersection of the transmission line
and the northeast boundary line of Lot 60, then along the
northeast boundary line of Lots 60 and 58 to the starting
point on Route 196.
R-5 and shall include an area beginning at the center of the
intersection of Route 201 and Interstate 295 and continuing
north along the centerline of Route...
R-9 201 to the CMP transmission line eastward along the center
line of the CMP transmission line to the center line of
Interstate 295...
R-5 Thence south along the center line of Interstate 295 to point
of beginning.
88.Editor's Note: Former § 225-90, Mixed Use Commercial, added 5-15-1996 STM, Art. 31,
was repealed 5-19-1999 STM, Art. 13.
§ 225-89 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-91
202:627
§ 225-91. Mixed Use Limited. [Added 5-15-1996 STM, Art. 31;
amended 5-19-1999 STM, Art. 13; 5-17-2000 STM, Art. 17]
Tax Map Description
R-4 Beginning at a point where the center line of the Central
Maine Power Co. transmission line intersects the center line
of the Maine Central Rail Road tracks; thence southwest along
the center line of the M.C.R.R. tracks a distance of ±3,275'
to a point that is ±800' north of the intersection of Elm
Street and the M.C.R.R. tracks, which is the intersection of the
southeast corner of the stream, Lot 1 and the center line of the
M.C.R.R. tracks; thence in a general northwesterly direction
along the stream to a point
U-7 Intersecting with the western boundary of lot 16 and 4A,
thence northwest along the stream
R4 To a point where the western boundary of lot 26 intersects
the stream; thence continuing northwest along the stream to a
point that is ±1000' east of Main Street; thence northerly and
1000' parallel to Main Street to a point that intersects with
the center line of the C.M.P. transmission line; thence easterly
along the center line of the C.M.P. transmission line a distance
of ±800' to a point that is the intersection of the center line
of the transmission line and lot 24; thence northerly along the
eastern boundary of lot 24 a distance of ±2250' to a point that
intersects with lot 40; thence in a general northerly direction
along the eastern boundary of lot 40
R9 and lot 63 a distance of ±2750' to a point
§ 225-91 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-91
202:628
Tax Map Description
R4 Thence in a general easterly direction a distance of ±1000' to
a point that is ±1800' from the intersection of lots 14 and 17A;
thence southeast to a point that is the intersection of lots 14
and 17A; thence continuing in a southeasterly direction of a
distance of ±1000' along the boundary of lots 14 and 17A to
a point where the boundary curves to the southwest; thence
along the boundary of lots 14 and 17A to a point that is the
intersection of lots 14, 17A and 13; thence southwest along
the boundary of lots 13 and 17A a distance of ±875' to a point,
thence northwest to a point that is the northwest corner of lot
13 and intersecting with lot 12; thence northwest along the
boundary of lots 12 and 17A to a point; thence southwest a
distance of ±800' along the boundary of lots 12, 16 and 17A to
a point that is the northwest corner of lot 16; thence along the
boundary of lots 7 and 17A to a point that is the intersection
of lots 7, 17 and 17A; thence easterly a distance of ±100' to a
point that is the northeast corner of lot 17; thence southerly
a distance of ±800' along the eastern boundary of lot 17 to
a point; thence southeasterly a distance of ±800' to a point
that intersects the center line of the Central Maine Power
Co. transmission line; thence easterly along the center line
of the transmission line a distance of ±1825' to the point of
beginning.
§ 225-92. Mixed-Use Commercial Zones. [Added 5-17-2000 STM,
Art. 15; amended 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15]
Tax Map Description
R-5 The Mixed-Use Commercial MUC District shall include an
area starting at the intersection of the boundary between
Lots 7A and 6 and the right-of-way of Winter Street, then
westerly along Winter Street to the intersection of the
eastern boundary of Lot 7, then northerly to a point which
is the northwest corner of Lot 7, then westerly along the
northern boundary of Lot 7 to the intersection of the MCRR
tracks, then;
R-1 Extending northwest along the MCRR tracks to the
intersection of the MCRR tracks and Interstate 295, then
northwesterly along I-295
R-5 To a point which is the boundary line between Interstate 295,
§ 225-91 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-92
202:629
Tax Map Description
R-5B Lots 9B and 11, then along the boundary between Lot 9B and
11 to a point at the northwesterly corner of Lot 10, then along
the boundary between Lot 10 and 11 approximately 175' to
a point at the westerly corner of Lot 12, then southeasterly
approximately 350' along the southwesterly boundary of Lot
12, across the Topsham Fair Mall Road to a point along the
westerly boundary of Lot 1, then southwesterly along the
westerly boundary of Lot 1 to the boundary between Lot
1 and 3, then southeasterly approximately 255' along the
northeasterly boundary of Lot 3, then through
R-5 Lot 21C to a point at the northerly corner of Lot 21D-1,
then southerly along the easterly boundary of Lots 21D-1,
21D-2, 21D-3, 21D-4 and 21D to the point of beginning at the
northerly sideline of Winter Street.
R-1 The Mixed-Use Commercial MUC-1 District shall include an
area starting at the intersection of the MCRR tracks and
Interstate I-295, then;
R-1 Extending northwest along the MCRR tracks to the boundary
line between Lots 15 and 18, northerly along that line past
the CMP
R-5 Transmission line to the southern boundary lines of Lot 50,
then easterly along the north boundary line of Lot 15 to the
boundary line between Lots 50-17 and 37, then north along
the western boundary of Lots 37, 35 and 46 to Route 196,
east along Route 196 to the center of Interstate 295, then
southeasterly along the interstate to the point of beginning.
§ 225-92 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-93
202:630
§ 225-93. Lower Village Zones. [Added 5-17-2000 STM, Art. 15]
Tax Map Description
U-2 Lower Village Zone LV shall include all land on Great Mill
Island and; an area starting at the Androscoggin River, offset
300' to the west and running parallel to Main Street to a
point at the centerline of Winter Street; thence, continuing
easterly along the centerline of Winter Street to a point at the
intersection of the centerline of Elm Street Extension; thence,
northeasterly along the centerline of Elm Street Extension to
a point at the centerline of Main Street; thence.
U-6 continuing northeasterly across Main Street along the
centerline of Elm Street for ±45' to a point parallel with the
northeasterly lot line of Map U-6 Lot 37; thence, southeasterly
along the northeasterly lot line of Lot 37 a distance of ±40';
thence, turning 90° to the right a distance of ±2' to a point;
thence, turning 90° to the left a distance of ±3' to a point;
thence, along the boundary line between Lots 37 and 29 for a
distance of ±128' to a point; thence, along the boundary line
between Lots 37 and 28 for a distance of ±115' to a point:
thence, turning westerly along the boundary between Lots 37
and 28 for a distance of ±20' to a point; thence a distance
of ±35' along the westerly lot line of Lot 27 to a point at the
centerline of Thompson Lane; thence, southeasterly along the
center line of Thompson Lane a distance of ±112' to a point
being the centerline of Green Street; thence, southwesterly
along the centerline of Green Street a distance of ±25' to a
point parallel with the northwest corner of Map U-6 Lot 22;
thence, southeasterly distance of ±123' along the northerly
lot line of Lot 22 to a point; thence, southeasterly distance of
±236 along the easterly lot line of Lot 22 to a point along the
edge of the Androscoggin River: thence, westerly along the
Androscoggin
U-6 to the starting point 300' west of Main Street.
§ 225-93 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-94
202:631
§ 225-94. Middle Village Zones. [Added 5-17-2000 STM, Art. 15;
amended 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
Tax Map Description
U-4 Middle Village Zone MV shall include an area starting at
a point which is the intersection of the northwesterly most
corner of Lot 34 and the rear line of Lot 52; thence
southwesterly along the westerly boundary of Lots 34 and 35
to the southwesterly corner of Lot 35; thence easterly along
the southerly line of Lot 35 to the northwesterly corner of Lot
38C, then southwesterly along the westerly boundary of Lot
38 to the northerly boundary of Lot 38B, then southeasterly
along the boundary of Lots 38 and 38B to the intersection of
U-3 Lot 45, thence southwesterly along the westerly boundary of
Lot 45 to the boundary of Lot 44, thence westerly to the
northeast corner of Lot 30 then southerly along the most
easterly boundary of Lot 30 to the boundary of Lot 42, then
westerly ±100' to the northwesterly corner of Lot 42, then
southerly along the easterly boundary of Lots 30, 30A, 31
and 32A to the southwesterly corner of Lot 38, thence
northeasterly ±363' along the southerly boundary of Lot 38 to
the northeasterly corner of Lot 36, thence southeasterly ±121'
along the easterly boundary of Lot 36 to the northerly sideline
of Wilson Street, thence southeasterly to the northwesterly
corner of Lot 3, thence southerly along the westerly boundary
of Lot 3 and Lot 2 to the northwesterly corner of
U-2 Lot 132 then
U-3 along the southern boundaries of Lot 2 easterly 160',
southeasterly ±166', southwesterly ±73', then southeasterly
in a straight line along the boundary of Lot 1 to the centerline
of Elm Street Extension, then northeasterly along the
centerline of Elm Street Extension to the centerline of
U-6 Elm Street, thence northeasterly along the centerline of Elm
Street a distance of ±315' to a point perpendicular to the
boundary between Lots 50 and 51, thence northwesterly a
distance of ±125' to the northwesterly corner of Lot 51,
thence northeasterly to the southwesterly corner of Lot 53,
thence northerly along the easterly boundaries of Lots 49,
49A, 48 and 47 to the centerline of Melcher Place, thence
easterly along the centerline of Melcher Place to the
centerline of Pleasant Street, thence northerly along the
centerline of Pleasant Street a distance of ±245' to a point
parallel to the northeasterly corner of Lot 59, thence
northwesterly along the northerly boundary of Lot 59 to the
southeasterly corner of Lot 58, thence northerly along the
easterly boundaries of Lots 58, 57, 56.
§ 225-94 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-94
202:632
Tax Map Description
U-4 22B, 22 to the northwesterly corner of Lot 22C, thence
easterly +\-10' along the northerly boundary of Lot 22C to
the southwesterly corner of Lot 22D, thence northerly along
the easterly boundary of Lot 22 to the northeasterly corner
of Lot 22, thence westerly +\-60' to the southwesterly corner
of Lot 21, thence northerly along the easterly boundaries of
Lots 23, 24, 25, 26, 28 to the centerline of Pleasant Street,
thence easterly to a point parallel to the southeasterly corner
of Lot 15, thence northerly along the easterly line of Lot 15
to the northeasterly corner of Lot 15, thence westerly +/- 102'
along the northerly line of Lot 15 to the southeasterly corner
of Lot 30 thence northeasterly along the eastern boundary of
Lot 30 +\-108', then easterly along the southerly line of Lot 31
+\-48' to the southeasterly corner of Lot 31, thence northerly
along the easterly line of Lot 31, to the intersection of Lot 31
and 31A, thence westerly in a straight line along the boundary
between Lots 31 and 31A to the centerline of Main Street,
then southerly to a point parallel to the southeasterly corner
of Lot 33A, thence westerly along the northerly boundary of
Lot 34 to the point of beginning.
§ 225-95. Village Center. [Added 5-17-2000 STM, Art. 15; amended
5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
Tax Map Description
R5 Village Center Zone VC includes the area beginning on the
centerline of Monument Place, at a point parallel with the
westerly corner of Lot 11A, then westerly to the northerly
corner of Lot 11A-1, then southerly along the westerly
boundary of Lot 11A-1 with Map U2A, Lots 72, 55, 54, 53, 52,
51, across First Street and following the westerly boundary
of Lots 36 and 35, then southeasterly and diagonally across
Cross Street to the southwesterly corner of Lot 4 on the
easterly sideline of Cross Street, then northeasterly along
the westerly boundary of Lot 4, then southeasterly along the
northerly boundary of Lot 4 to the most westerly corner of
U-5 Lot 1, then along the southwesterly boundary of Lot 1 to the
northwest corner of
§ 225-94 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-95
202:633
Tax Map Description
U4 Lot 65A, then southeasterly along the Hanson Drive right-ofway
to the northwesterly corner of Lot 33A, then along the
Hanson Drive right-of-way to the northwesterly corner of Lot
51, then easterly along the northerly boundary of Lot 51 to
the northeasterly corner of Lot 51, then southerly along the
easterly boundary of Lot 51 to the northwesterly corner of Lot
34, the easterly along the boundary of Lot 34 to the centerline
of Main Street, then northerly along the centerline of Main
Street to a point parallel with the boundary between Lots 31
and 31A, then along the northerly boundary of Lot 31 and
continuing in a straight line easterly to the centerline of the
stream, then northerly along the centerline of stream to the
centerline of Rt. 196.
R4 Then, easterly along the centerline of Rt. 196, +/- 150' to a
point, then northerly perpendicular to the centerline of Rt.
196 to the southerly property line of Lot 24, then, westerly
along the southern boundary of Lot 24 and Lot 22 to the
southeasterly corner of Lot 30, then northerly along the
easterly boundary of Lot 30, to the northeasterly corner of Lot
30, then westerly along the northern boundary of Lot 30 to the
southeasterly corner of Lot 33, thence northwesterly along
the easterly boundary of Lot 33 to the northeasterly corner of
Lot 33, then westerly along the northern boundary of Lot 33
to the centerline of Rt. 201.
R5A Then northerly along the centerline of Rt. 201 to a point
parallel with the northeasterly corner of Lot 3, then westerly
along the northerly boundary of Lot 3 to the northwesterly
corner of Lot 3, thence southerly along the boundary of Lots
3, 3A and 1 to a point at the centerline of the CMP right-ofway.
U5 Then along the centerline of the CMP right-of-way to a point
parallel with the northwesterly corner of Lot 47, then along
the boundary of Lots 47 and 46, across the Rt. 196 right-ofway.
R5 Along the boundary between Lots 11A and 16-6, to the point
of beginning on the Monument Place centerline.
§ 225-95 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-96
202:634
§ 225-96. Business Park Zone. [Added 5-24-2007 STM, Art. 15]
Tax
Map
Description
R5 Business Park Zone BP includes the area beginning at the
intersection of the I-295 right-of-way, the Central Maine Power
Company Transmission Line right-of-way, and Lot 76, thence
westerly along the southern edge of the transmission line rightof-
way to the intersecting transmission line right-of-way at the
northwesterly corner of Lot 34C, thence southwesterly along the
transmission line right-of-way to the northerly corner of Lot 60,
thence easterly along the boundary between Lots 60 and Lots 57
and 56-4 to the southwesterly corner of Lot 56-4, thence easterly
along the boundry of lot 56-4 to the point of intersection with Lot
49E, thence northwesterly along the boundary between Lots 56-4
and 49E, to the northwesterly corner of Lot 49E at the intersection
with Lot 34, thence northeasterly along boundary of Lot 34 to Agway
Drive, thence southeasterly along westerly line of agway drive to
the center of Route 196, thence easterly along Route 196 to I-295,
thence northwesterly along I-295 to the point of beginning.
§ 225-97. Commercial Corridor Route 196 Zone. [Added 5-24-2007
STM, Art. 15]
Tax
Map
Description
R5 Commercial Corridor 196 Zone CC 196 includes the area beginning
at the intersection of Agway Drive and Route 196, thence southwest
along Route 196 to the intersection of the boundary line between
Lots 58 and 56-3 with Route 196, thence northwest along Lot 56-3 to
the intersection of the boundary between Lots 56-3 and 56-4, thence
northeast along the southerly boundary of Lot 56-4 to the boundary
of Lot 49E, thence northwest along the boundary of Lot 49E to
the intersection with Lot 34, thence northeast along the northerly
boundary of Lots 49E, 47-3, 47-1, and 47-2 to Agway Drive, thence
southeast along Agway Drive to the point of beginning at Route 196.
§ 225-96 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-98
202:635
§ 225-98. Main Street Residential R4. [Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art.
8; amended 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
Tax
Map
Description
R4 Main Street Residential Zone R4 includes the area beginning at
a point on the centerline of Can Am Drive, parallel to the
southwesterly corner of Lot 40, then proceeding northerly along
the westerly boundary of Lot 40C, to the northwesterly corner of
Lot 40C, then easterly along the northerly boundary of Lots 40C
and 40D-1, to the southeasterly corner of Map R9, Lot 63, thence
northerly along the westerly boundary of Lot 40E, to the
northwesterly point of 40E, then easterly along the northerly
boundary of Lot 40E to the northeasterly corner of Lot 40E, thence
southerly along the easterly boundaries of Lots 40E and 24 to the
southeasterly corner of Lot 24, then westerly along the southern
boundary of Lot 24 and 22 to the southwesterly corner of Lot
22, then northerly along the westerly boundary of Lot 22 to its
intersection with the southerly boundary of Lot 40, thence westerly
along the southerly boundary of Lot 40 to the point of beginning.
§ 225-99. Business Park 2 Zone. [Added 11-13-2008 STM, Art. 8]
Tax
Map
Description
R4 The Business Park 2 Zone, BP2, consists of the parcel shown on
the Town of Topsham Tax maps, as Map R4, Lot 40, as of the date
of adoption, and consisting of lands owned by the United States
Government, associated with the Naval Air Station Brunswick,
Topsham Annex, bounded by Can Am Drive, Republic Ave, and
accessed via Dominion Drive.
§ 225-100. Development Transfer Overlay (DTO) Zone. [Added
5-19-2010 STM, Art. 11]
The Development Transfer Overlay Zone includes all of the following:
A. All of the Urban Residential (R-1) Zone and the Suburban Residential
(R-2) Zone as described in § 225-86, § 225-87, and § 225-88;
B. All of the Mixed-Use Limited (MUL) Zone as described in § 225-91;
C. The portion of the Rural Residential (R-3) Zone west of Interstate 295
that is south and west of the Growth Boundary as depicted in the Town's
adopted Comprehensive Plan as amended and further described as
follows:
§ 225-98 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-100
202:636
Tax
Map Description
R3 Beginning at the Town line with the Town of Bowdoin at the
property line between Lots 40 and 43, thence southwesterly
along this property line between Lots 40 and 43 and continuing
southwest along the property line of Lots 36A and 36 to the
corner of Lots 36 and 41, thence southeasterly along the
property line between Lots 36 and 41 and continuing along the
property line of Lot 38 to the property line of Lot 64, thence in a
continuation of this line across Lot 64 to a point at the northwest
corner of Lot 64A, thence along the southwesterly property line
of Lot 64A to the intersection of this line with Lots 61 and 59,
thence southeasterly along the property line between Lots 61
and 59 and continuing along the property line between Lot 72
and Lot 63 on Map R2;
R2 And thence southeasterly along the property line between Lots
63 and 93 and continuing across Lot 63 to the southwest corner
of Lot 90, thence continuing southeasterly along the property
line between Lot 90 and Lots 63 and 85, and thence along
the property line between Lot 85 and Lot 88 and continuing
northeasterly along the property line of Lot 88 to the south side
of Lot 94, and thence southeasterly along the property line of Lot
94 to Meadow Cross Road;
R6 And thence continuing across Meadow Cross Road and along the
southwest property line of Lot 46 to the intersection with Lot 45,
and thence easterly along the northern property line of Lot 45 to
Meadow Road;
R5 And thence southeasterly along the Meadow Road to the
intersection with the Augusta Road (US Route 201), and thence
southerly along the Augusta Road to I-295; and
D. The portion of the Rural Residential (R-3) Zone east of Interstate 295
that is south and west of the Growth Boundary as depicted in the Town's
adopted Comprehensive Plan as amended and further described as
follows:
§ 225-100 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-100
202:637
Tax
Map Description
R9 Beginning on the east side of Interstate 295 at the intersection
with the Cathance River and going easterly along the river to the
property line between Lots 63 and 64, and thence easterly along
the property line of Lot 63 to the northeast corner of Lot 63;
R4 And thence along the property line between Lots 17A-14 and
17A-8, and continuing across Evergreen Circle and along the
property line between Lots 17A-9 and 17A-11A to Lot 65 on Map
9, and thence along the northerly property line of Lot 65 on Map
9 to the property line between Lots 17A-13 and 17A-G-6, thence
easterly along the property line between 17A-13 and 17A-G-6
and continuing across Evergreen Circle and Lot 17A-G-7 to the
southwest corner of Lot 17A-17, and thence along the property
line between Lot 17A-17 and Lot 14 to the northwest corner of
Lot 14, and thence southeasterly along the property line of Lot
14 to the right-of-way (Lot 67 on Map R9);
R9 and thence northeasterly along the east side of the right-of-way
(Lot 67) to the corner of Lots 19-8 and 3, thence along the
property line between Lots 19-3 and 3, and thence southeasterly
along the property line of Lot 3 to the corner of Lots 4-2-9
and 3A, thence northeasterly along the property line between
Lots 4-2-9 and 3A, thence southeasterly along the northeastern
property line of Lot 3A to the Middlesex Road;
R8 and thence across the Middlesex Road to the corner of Lots 47
and 63, thence southeasterly along the property line between
Lots 47 and 63 and Lots 47 and 46 to the southeast corner of
Lot 46, and continuing across Lot 47 to the corner of Lots 50 and
44, and thence along the property line between Lots 50 and 44
to the corner of Lots 50 and 41, and thence southeasterly along
the southwesterly property line of Lot 41 to Foreside Road, and
thence across Foreside Road continuing southeasterly along the
property line between Lot 39B and Lots 42A and 42A-1 to the
Androscoggin River.
§ 225-100 TOPSHAM CODE § 225-101
202:638
§ 225-101. Limited Industrial Zone. [Added 5-20-2009 STM, Art. 15]
Tax
Map
Description
R4 Limited Industrial Zone LI, includes the area beginning at a point
on the centerline of Rt. 201 parallel with the northwesterly corner
of Lot 33, then along the centerline of Rt. 201 to the centerline of
I-295, thence northeasterly along the centerline of I-295 to where
Cathance River crosses under I-295, then
R9 Along the centerline of Cathance River in an easterly direction to
the point where the northeasterly most point of Lot 63 intersects
with Cathance River, then along the northerly boundary of Lot 63
to its northeasterly corner, then southwesterly along its easterly
boundary, then westerly along its southern boundary, then southerly
along the eastern boundary of Lot 63 to its southeasterly corner,
then westerly along its southerly boundary to the easterly boundary
of
R4 Lot 44, then southerly along the easterly boundary of Lot 44 to
the centerline of Can Am Drive, then easterly along the northern
boundary of Lot 40A-1 to its northeasterly corner, then southerly
along the easterly boundary of Lots 40A-1, 39A and 34, to the
southeasterly corner of Lot 34, then westerly along the southern
boundary of Lot 34 to the southeasterly corner of Lot 33, then
northwesterly along the easterly boundary of Lot 33 to its
northeasterly corner, then along the northerly boundary of Lot 33 to
the point of beginning.
§ 225-102. Residential 2 Business Zone. [Added 5-20-2015 STM,
Art. 12]
Tax
Map
Description
R4 The Residential 2 Business Zone, R2B, consists of the parcel shown
on the Town of Topsham Tax Maps, as Map R01-1, Lot 30A, as of
the date of adoption, and consisting of the following parcels, all of
which have frontage on the Route 196 Right-of-Way: Lot 30C; Lot
30D; Lot 30E; Lot 30B; Lot 55A; Lot 55; Lot 54; Lot 53; Lot 52;
Lot 51; Map R02, Lot 96; Lot 35; Lot 36; Lot 96; and ending at the
eastern boundary of Whitehouse Crossing Road right-of-way.
§ 225-101 UNSECURED LOADS § 225-102
202:639