




TOWN OF VASSALBORO
ADULT-ONLY BUSINESSES ORDINANCE
Table of Contents
Section Title Page
Section I Findings…………………………………………… 2
Section II Purpose…………………………………………….. 2
Section III Definitions………………………………………..... 2
Section IV License Required and License Renewal.................... 3
Section V Application; Investigation and Issuance of License.. 3
Section VI Standards of Denial…………………………………5
Section VII Standards for Suspension; Revocation……………. 6
Section VIII Age Restriction……………………………………. 6
Section IX Prominent Display of License;
Price Charges and Names of Owners or Officers…. 6
Section X Prohibited Sites; Site Requirements……………….. 6
Section XI Signs and Exterior Layout of Sexually Oriented
Businesses…………………………………………..7
Section XII Prohibited Activities……………………………… 7
Section XIII Enforcement……………………………………… 8
Section XIV Penalties…………………………………………….8
Section XV Severability…………………………………………8
Section XVI Conflict with Other Ordinances…………………… 8
Section XVII Appeals…………………………………………….. 8
Section XVIII Effective Date………………………………………8
1
TOWN OF VASSALBORO
ADULT-ONLY BUSINESSES ORDINANCE
Section I. Findings
The Citizens of the Town of Vassalboro believe that sexually oriented businesses, because of their
very nature, have negative secondary effects on surrounding areas. They have observed that in
many communities throughout this country the presence of sexually oriented businesses is
consistently and strongly associated with perceived decreases in value of both residential and
commercial properties and the facilitation of illicit and undesirable activities. This evidence is
relevant to issues facing the Town. It is recognized that sexually oriented businesses can adversely
affect the character and quality of life of a town and can be incompatible with surrounding uses,
particularly when the sexually oriented businesses are located in proximity to residences, day care
centers, Schools, houses of worship, public parks or recreational areas. An ordinance is a proper and
reasonable means of controlling the negative secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses.
Section II. Purpose
The regulations of this Ordinance are not directed at the content of speech but are directed at the
negative secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses. The purpose of this Ordinance is to
regulate the place and manner of operation of sexually oriented businesses. It is intended to regulate
and to annually license sexually oriented businesses, and to prevent their location in proximity to
residences, day care centers, Schools, houses of worship, public parks or recreational areas.
Regulation of these uses is necessary to insure that the negative secondary effects will not
contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding areas of the Town at large. The
purpose of this Ordinance is not to prohibit sexually oriented businesses from operating in the
Town, but to regulate their location and manner of operation, while providing a reasonable
opportunity for such businesses to exist.
Section III. Definitions
The following terms as used in this Ordinance and for the purpose of the Ordinance have the
meanings to them below:
A. "Adult amusement store" means an establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of
its sales or stock in trade, erotic material, or an establishment with a portion of the premises
devoted to the sale or display of such material, or an establishment that holds itself out to the
public as a purveyor of such materials based on its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales,
presence of video preview or coin-operated booths, the exclusion of minors from the
establishment's premises, or any other factors showing that the establishment's purpose is to
purvey such material.
B. "Adult motion picture theater," means an enclosed building used regularly and routinely for
presenting motion picture or video material having as a dominant theme material distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on erotic material for observation by patrons therein.
C. "Adult entertainment cabaret," means a public or private establishment which features
entertainers who by reason of their appearance or conduct perform in a manner which is
designed primarily to appeal to the prurient interests of the patron.
2
D. "Adult spa," means an establishment or place primarily in the business of providing services of
an erotic nature.
E. "Sexually oriented business," means Adult amusement stores, Adult movie theaters, Adult
entertainment cabarets, or Adult spas, as defined herein, or any business where erotic materials
and activities are displayed, depicted, described or simulated as a regular and substantial part of
its operation.
F. "Residence," means any structure, which is principally used as a dwelling including, without
limitation, a single family or multi-family house, an apartment, a condominium, or a mobile
home.
G. "Specified criminal activity," means a criminal conviction for any of the following offenses:
prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution, or display
of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; or any similar sex-related
offenses to those described above under the Maine Criminal Code or statutes of other states, the
United States or any other nation or province, and for which:
(1) less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release
from confinement or probation imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if
the conviction is for an offense punishable by a maximum term of imprisonment of less
than one year;
(2) less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release
from confinement or probation imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if
the conviction is for an offense punishable by a maximum term of imprisonment of one
year or more;
(3) less than (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release
from confinement or probation imposed for the last conviction, whichever is the later
date, if the convictions are for two or more offenses or combination of offenses
occurring within any twenty-four (24) hour period, and all such offenses are punishable
by maximum term of imprisonment of less than one year.
Section IV. License Required
A person or persons wishing to operate a sexually oriented business shall obtain an annual
license (a) prior to opening the person's establishment, and (b) prior to expiration of the current
annual license. A license issued under this Ordinance does not eliminate the requirements of
any other Ordinance in Vassalboro including the Site Review Ordinance.
Section V. Application; Investigation and Issuance of License
1. Application. An applicant for sexually oriented business license shall:
A. Complete and file an application prescribed by the Planning Board;
B. Deposit a license fee and a processing fee in advance with the Town Clerk or the Code
Officer. The amount of which fees are to be set by the Board of Selectmen and amended
from time to time.
3
C. Submit the completed application to the Planning Board through the Code Enforcement
Officer, together with attested copies of the articles of incorporation and bylaws, if the
applicant is a corporation, evidence of partnership, if a partnership, or articles of
association and bylaws, if the applicant is an association, as well as a list of all officers
and directors;
D. File a sworn affidavit, which states the names of all owners, officers, managers or
partners of the applicant, and their places of residence at the time of the application and
for the immediately preceding three (3) years;
E. File the release authorized by 16 M.R.S.A, Section 620(6) (Criminal History Record,
Information Act) with the application, for the applicant and each officer, owner, manager
or partner of the applicant;
F. Submit evidence of right, title or interest in the premises in which the sexually oriented
business will be sited, along with the written consent of the owner of the premises for
such use if applicant is not the owner;
G. State the date of initiation of the sexually oriented business and the nature of the business
with a description of the nature of all products and services offered to customers.
H. Submit evidence of compliance with Section X of this Ordinance and evidence that there
is no basis for denial of a license to applicant under the standards listed in Section VI of
this Ordinance.
2. Investigation of applicant, officers. Upon receipt of an application or notice of a change of the
owners, officers, managers or partners of the applicant:
A. The Code Officer, upon receipt of a completed application, shall immediately send a
copy of the complete application to the Town Manager, and the Planning Board. The
Code Officer shall also immediately consult with the Chairman of the Planning Board
and arrange for public notice of a public hearing on the application in a newspaper of
general circulation and by mail to owners of lots within 1000 feet of the proposed
location of the structure, at least 10 days prior to the public hearing before the Planning
Board. The costs of publication, certified mail postage, and other expenses related to the
hearing shall be paid from the processing fee. After receipt of required reports from the
Town officials, the Code Officer shall forward the application and other documents to the
Planning Board for public hearing and final decision. The hearing shall be held within
thirty (30) days after receipt of a complete application by the Code Officer and a decision
shall be made within fifteen (15) business days thereafter.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer; within fifteen days of receipt of the application, shall
inspect the location or proposed location and construction drawings to determine whether
the applicant’s proposed plan satisfies the setback and construction requirements of this
ordinance and then report findings in writing to the Planning Board. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall enforce the provisions of all the applicable Town Ordinances
and State Laws as indicated in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. 4452.
4
C. The Code Enforcement Officer with the help of the Town Police Chief, shall investigate
the applicant, including the criminal history record information required under Section V
(1) (E), and then report findings in writing to the Planning Board, and
D. The Code Enforcement Officer, within fifteen days of receipt of the application, shall
verify that the proposed premises of the establishment will comply with Section X and
with all other applicable State and Town laws and land use codes of the Town and then
report findings in writing to the Planning Board. The Code Officer will also verify
whether or not other permitting under local Ordinances and state laws is required in
addition to verification for compliance.
3. Issuance of license. The Planning Board, after notice and public hearing, shall determine whether
the application and documents submitted comply with all of the requirements of this Ordinance.
The license shall be issued upon determination by the Planning Board, based upon the record,
including evidence and testimony at the public hearing, that the applicant meets the requirements
of this Ordinance. The license may not be transferred or assigned.
Section VI. Standards of Denial
An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be denied in the following
circumstances:
A. The applicant is a corporation or other legal entity that is not authorized to do business in
the State of Maine;
B. The applicant is an individual who is less than 18 years of age;
C. The applicant has submitted an incomplete application, knowingly made an incorrect
statement of a material nature, or failed to supply additional information required that is
reasonably necessary to determine whether the license can be issued;
D. The applicant, if an individual, or any person having an ownership or management
interest, if a corporation or other legal entity, has been denied a sexually oriented
business license for knowingly making an incorrect statement of a material nature within
the immediately preceding five years;
E. The applicant, if an individual, or any person having an ownership or management
interest, if a corporation or other legal entity, has had a license granted pursuant to this
Ordinance or a similar ordinance provision in any other municipality revoked for any
reason during the immediately preceding five years;
F. The applicant, if an individual, or any person having an ownership or management
interest, if a corporation or other legal entity, has committed any Specified Criminal
Activity as defined herein;
G. The site on which the sexually oriented business is proposed is a prohibited site under
Section X, or
H. The application in any other way fails to meet the requirements of this Ordinance.
5
Section VII. Standards for Suspension; Revocation
A sexually oriented business license may be suspended or revoked by the Planning Board after
notice and hearing upon a finding that the licensee has violated any provision of this Ordinance.
Providing false or erroneous information in an application shall be a reason for revoking or
suspending a permit.
Section VIII. Age Restriction
No sexually oriented business may permit any person under the age of 18 years into the premises in
which the sexually oriented business is located.
Section IX. Prominent Display of License; Price Charges and Names of Owners or Officers
A sexually oriented business licensee must display the sexually oriented business license at all times
in an open and conspicuous place in the sexually oriented business for which the license has been
issued. Sexually oriented business licenses must also display at all times in an open and
conspicuous place in the sexually oriented business a complete list of the names of owners and
officers of the sexually oriented business and a complete list of fees, prices charged for all food,
beverages, goods, wares, merchandise or services offered by the business unless the price is
conspicuously displayed on the individual product.
Section X. Prohibited Sites; Site Requirements
1. A sexually oriented business may not be sited within 500 feet of the closest part of the
structure of a business which caters to the general public or 1,000 feet of the closest part of
the structure of any of the following:
A. A church, synagogue or other house of religious worship;
B. A public or private elementary or secondary school;
C. A day care facility;
D. A public park or public recreational facility;
E. Any residence on adjacent property, excepting the owner or proprietor;
The distance cited in this section shall be measured between the closest edge of the structure of the
sexually oriented business and the closest edge of the structure of the use listed (A) through (E)
above.
2. A sexually oriented business will be required to construct a visual barrier around the sides of
the business as required by the Planning Board.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the operation, establishment, substantial
enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within one
thousand (1,000) feet of another sexually oriented business.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the operation or establishment of more
than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof.
6
Section XI. Signs and Exterior Layout of Sexually Oriented Businesses
1. Sexually Oriented Businesses shall have an 8.5 inch by 11 inch sign at each entrance stating
“Under 18 not admitted” or similar wording accepted by the Planning Board.
2. Sexually Oriented Businesses may have an 8.5 inch by 11 inch sign at entrances listing
business hours, and appropriately posted signs, with letters no larger than 3 inches high,
stating “Entrance”, “Parking”, “No Loitering” or other wording approved by the Planning
Board.
3. Sexually Oriented Businesses shall have only one exterior identification sign.
A. The sign shall contain only the name of the establishment and “XXX” or the type of
business as defined in Section III above.
B. The sign may not contain any other symbols or illustrations.
C. The sign must meet the approval of the Planning Board, who may require changes if they
believe the proposed sign would be offensive to a significant number of Vassalboro residents.
D. The exterior dimension of the sign shall not exceed 30 square feet.
E. The sign may be two sided.
F. The sign may be unlit, internally lit, or lit with spotlights.
G. The lights may not blink.
H. The bottom of the sign may not be more than 10 feet above grade.
I. The top of the sign may not be more than 15 feet above grade.
4. No signs or symbols, except as permitted in Section XI, paragraphs 1 through 3 above, shall
be visible from the exterior of the establishment.
5. Exterior lights shall be used for necessary illumination; they shall not blink nor be so bright as
to unduly disturb neighbors or passersby, as determined by the Planning Board.
Section XII. Prohibited Activities
A. All acts of public indecency, as defined in 17-A M.R.S.A., Section 854, are prohibited in
sexually oriented businesses.
B. All other acts prohibited by applicable ordinances or laws.
C. No alcoholic beverages allowed on the premises.
D. The sexually oriented business hours of operation will be allowed anytime during the hours
of 8:00 am – Midnight seven days a week.
7
Section XIII. Enforcement
A violation of this Ordinance is a civil violation and the civil penalties and remedies under Section
XV shall apply. The owner of the premises on or in which the sexually oriented business is located,
who is not the licensee of the sexually oriented business, is jointly and severally liable with the
licensee for any violation of Sections X to XIII. The Ordinance shall be enforced by the Code
Enforcement Officer, the Planning Board, and any law enforcement officials having jurisdiction
within the Town of Vassalboro. If court action is required to enforce this Ordinance, the Town shall
be awarded its enforcement costs, including its reasonable attorney's fees.
Section XIV. Penalties
Violation of this Ordinance shall result in a monetary penalty beginning on the date a notice of
violation from the Code Officer is mailed to the Applicant at the address contained in Town records.
If the violation is not remedied within ten days of notice being sent, the Code Officer shall send a
second notice. Fees are to be set by the Board of Selectmen and amended from time to time.
Remedying a violation does not prohibit the Planning Board from suspending the license as
provided in Section VII. “Standards for Suspension, Revocation.”
Section XV. Severability
If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions thereof.
Section XVI. Conflict with Other Ordinances
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision of
this Ordinance or of any other Ordinance, regulation or statute, the more restrictive provision shall
apply.
Section XVII. Appeals
An appeal from any final licensing, denial, suspension or revocation decision of the Planning Board
may be taken by an aggrieved party to the Vassalboro Appeals Board within 30 days of the
decision. The decision of the Vassalboro Appeals Board may be taken to Superior Court in
accordance with the provisions of Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure. Service of
Process shall be served on the Town Clerk. The Town shall file its responsive pleadings and record
of proceedings with the Court not later than ten (10) business days after service of the summons and
complaint. Additionally, the Town shall submit its responsive brief within fourteen (14) days after
receipt of the plaintiff's brief, and shall move for an expedited hearing. All enforcement action, if
any, shall be stayed during the pendency of the Rule 80B appeal.
Section XVIII. Effective Date
This Ordinance shall become effective immediately after approval by the voters of the Town of
Vassalboro.
8










CURFEW ORDINANCE
WHEREAS, there has been an increase in juvenile violence and crime, and an increased
presence of juvenile activity in the Town of Vassalboro; and
WHEREAS, persons under the age of eighteen are particularly susceptible, because of
their lack of maturity and experience, to participation in unlawful activities and gang
related activities, and to victimization by older perpetrators of crime; and
WHEREAS, the Town of Vassalboro is obligated to provide for: the protection of
minors from each other and from other persons, the protection of the health, safety, and
welfare of the general public, and the reduction of juvenile crime, violence, and related
activity in the Town; and
WHEREAS, a curfew for those under the age of eighteen will aid in the achievement of
these goals, and will be in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ENACTED BY THE TOWN OF VASSALBORO:
Section 1. Title
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Curfew Ordinance of the Town of
Vassalboro, Maine, dated November 3, 1998.
Section 2. Definitions
a. Curfew Hours means the hours from 10:01 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
b. Emergency means unforeseen circumstances, or the resulting situation, calling for
immediate action. This includes, but is not limited to, fire, natural disaster, or vehicular
accident, as well as any situation requiring action to avert serious injury or the loss of
life.
c. Guardian means a person or a public or private agency who, either pursuant to court
order or acceptance of testamentary appointment, is the legal guardian of the minor. This
definition also include a person to whom parental powers have been delegated under
18-A M.R.S.A. § 5-104.
d. Minor means any person who is seventeen years of age or younger.
e. Parent means a person who is the natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of the
minor.
f. Public place means a place located in the town of Vassalboro to which the public, or a
substantial group of the public, has access, including, but not limited to, streets,
highways, sidewalks, parking lots, vacant lots, parks, and the common areas in and about
apartment building, office buildings, hospitals, schools, shops, and places of
entertainment such as movie theaters.
Remain means to linger or stay, as well as to refuse to leave when requested to do so by a
police officer, or the owner or other person in control of a public place. This term also
encompasses activities that may be mobile, such as walking, driving, and riding about in
a public place.
Section 3. Offenses
It shall be unlawful for a minor to remain in a public place during curfew hours. For
purposed of this Ordinance, the following times of day and ages shall apply:
AGE CURFEW HOURS
17 AND YOUNGER 10:01 PM TO 6:00 AM
15 AND YOUNGER 9:01 PM TO 6:00 AM
It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or to allow
by exercising insufficient control, the minor to remain in a public place during curfew
hours.
Section 4. Defenses
It is a defense to prosecution under Section 3 of this ordinance that the minor was:
a. accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
b. involved in an emergency or on an errand necessitated by an emergency;
e. engaged in an employment activity, or on the way to or from an employment activity,
without any detour or stop except as necessary to drop off or pick up a co-employee;
d. in motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
e. on an errand directed by a parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
f. on the sidewalk abutting the minor’s home;
g. attending a school, religious, or governmental activity, which is supervised by adults,
or traveling to or from such a school, religious, or governmental activity without detour
or stop;
h. attending a recreational activity sponsored by the Town of Vassalboro, a civic
organization, or a similar entity, which is supervised by adults, or traveling to or from
such an activity without detour or stop;
i. exercising rights protected by the First Amendment of the Untied States Constitution:
j. married, or otherwise legally emancipated.
Section 5. Enforcement
Before taking any action to enforce this ordinance, a police officer shall ask the apparent
offender’s age. The officer may ask for proof of the apparent offender’s age, and shall be
justified in taking action to ascertain the apparent offender’s age in the absence of
identification, such as taking the apparent offender into custody while contacting his or
her parent or guardian, or accompanying the apparent offender to his or her residence for
the purpose of obtaining identification.
If the apparent offender is a minor, or cannot produce identification proving otherwise
immediately, the officer shall ask the reason for the apparent offender’s being in a public
place. The officer shall not take any action to enforce this section unless the officer
reasonable believes that an offense has occurred and, based on any response as well as
other circumstances, no defense provided in Section 4 is applicable. If the officer does
have such a reasonable belief, the officer may take the minor into custody for the
purposes of contacting the minor’s parent or guardian, to come to take control of the
minor. The police officer shall summons the minor and the minor’s parent to the District
court for violation of this ordinance. During this period, the officer may require the
minor or the minor’s parent or guardian or both to remain in the officer’s presence for a
period of up to two hours, so long as the officer complies with all requirements of law,
including, without limitation, 17-A M.R.S.A. §17.
Section 6. Penalties
a. The penalty for a minor who violates this ordinance shall be:
1. for the first offense, five hours of community service and a fine of up to $50.00; and
2. for each subsequent offense, ten hours of community service and a fine of up to
$100.00.
b. The penalty for a parent or guardian who violates this ordinance shall be:
1. for the first offense, a fine of $50.00; and for each subsequent offense, a fine of
$100.00.
Section 7. Severability
If any provision of this ordinance is determined to be invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such determination shall not render invalid the remaining provisions.
Town of Vassalboro
Enforcement and Appeals Ordinance
CERTIFIED BY
TOWN CLERK
ADOPTED JUNE 2009
AMENDED JUNE 2010
2
Table of Contents
Section Title Page
A. Preliminary Matters
1. Purpose------------------------------------------------------- 1
2. Authority----------------------------------------------------- 1
3. Applicability------------------------------------------------- 1
4. Effective Date----------------------------------------------- 1
5. Conflict with other Ordinances--------------------------- 1
6. Validity and Severability---------------------------------- 2
B. Enforcement
1. Enforcement Authority------------------------------------ 2
2. Enforcement Penalties------------------------------------- 2
3. Notice of Violation----------------------------------------- 2
4. Enforcement in Flood Zones----------------------------- 3
5. Prohibition of All Permitting----------------------------- 3
C. Appeals
1. Jurisdiction------------------------------------------------- 3
2. Administrative Appeals---------------------------------- 4
a. Timing and Fees------------------------------------------- 4
b. Appeals Relevant to the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance- 4
c. Notice of Appeal------------------------------------------ -- 4
d. Record of Appeal Transmitted to Board----------------- 4
e. Hearing Required-------------------------------------------- 4
f. Public Notice of Hearing----------------------------------- 4
g. Hearing Procedure------------------------------------------ 5
h. Decision by the Board of Appeals----------------------- 6
i. Reconsideration--------------------------------------------- 6
j. Review of Board of Appeals Decision------------------- 6
4
TOWN OF VASSALBORO ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS ORDINANCE
A. PRELIMINARY MATTERS
SECTION 1 - PURPOSE
In order to better promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Town of
Vassalboro and the overall protection of its environment, the purpose of this Ordinance is to:
(1) Streamline the procedures for enforcement of the Town’s Ordinances and any other laws
or rules administered and enforced primarily at the local level and set forth in 30-A
M.R.S.A. §4452(5), (6) and (7), as amended from time to time;
(2) Set forth in one ordinance the establishment, organization, procedure and jurisdiction of
the Board of Appeals for the Town;
(3) Limit the issuance of permits to those who are, at the time, in compliance with all Town
ordinances and state laws pertaining to land use; and
(4) Limit those undertaking work related to the permits including contractors, developers,
and other personnel or businesses that will gain monetary benefit to those who are at the
time, in compliance with all Town ordinances and state laws pertaining to land use
SECTION 2 – AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the Home Rule provisions of the Maine Constitution and
its enabling legislation, Me. Const. Art. VIII, Pt. 2, §1; 30-A M.R.S.A. §3001; and 30-A
M.R.S.A. §2691.
SECTION 3 - APPLICABILITY
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to the following land use ordinances of the Town:
Subdivision, Site Review, Building Permit, Shoreland Zoning, Automobile Graveyard and
Junkyard, Road Construction, Aquifer Protection, Floodplain Management, and any other
ordinance enforced or administered by the Code Enforcement Officer. This Ordinance shall also
apply to the state laws administered by the Local Plumbing Inspector including Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and the Maine Internal Plumbing Code and any state
laws pertaining to land use that may be enforced at the local level as indicated in 30-A M.R.S.A.
§4452(5), (6) and (7), as amended from time to time; .
SECTION 4 – EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall become effective immediately after approval by the voters of the Town of
Vassalboro.
1
SECTION 5 – CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
In the event any provisions of this Ordinance conflict with any other provisions of this
Ordinance, or in the event any provisions of this Ordinance conflict with the provisions of any
other Ordinance, the provisions with the stricter standards shall apply.
SECTION 6 – VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared invalid, such invalidity shall not
void or make invalid any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
B. ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 1 – ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY
The Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce the provisions of all the applicable Town
Ordinances and state laws as indicated in Section A(3) of this ordinance in accordance with 30-A
M.R.S.A. §4452, as amended from time to time. The Local Plumbing Inspector shall enforce the
provisions of the Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and Maine Internal Plumbing
Code in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. §4452, as amended from time to time.
SECTION 2 – ENFORCEMENT PENALTIES
Any person who violates a provision of any applicable Town ordinance or state law, including
but not limited to the landowner, his agent(s), lessees(s) and/or contractor(s), shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in 30-A M.R.S.A. §4452(3) as amended from time to time.
SECTION 3 – NOTICE OF VIOLATION
The appropriate enforcement authority as indicated in Section B(1) shall notify any person(s)
and/or entity(ies) whom or which he determines has violated the applicable Town Ordinances,
and any other laws or rules administered and enforced primarily by the Town, of said violation.
a. The notice shall state the nature of the violation, and shall specify the necessary
corrective action to be taken, which may include discontinuance of the illegal activity,
removal of any illegal buildings or structures, and abatement of any nuisance conditions.
The notice shall also state the time period in which the correction must be made.
b. A copy of this notice shall be maintained as a permanent Town record.
c. If the above action does not result in a resolution of the violation(s) that is satisfactory,
the appropriate enforcement authority may seek approval from the municipal officers to
commence legal action against the violator(s) pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. §4452, as
amended from time to time.
2
SECTION 4 – ENFORCEMENT IN FLOOD ZONES
In addition to any other action provided above, the Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon
determining that a violation of any State or local law, regulation or ordinance intended to
discourage or otherwise restrict development or occupancy in flood-prone areas exist, shall
submit a declaration to the Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration requesting a
denial of flood insurance. The declaration shall contain the following:
a. the name and address of the property owner and a legal description of the property
sufficient to confirm its identity or location;
b. a declaration that the property is in violation of a cited State or local law, regulation or
ordinance as set forth above;
c. a statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to do so and a
citation to that authority;
d. evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation and the
prospective denial of insurance; and
e. a statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section 1316 of the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended (42 U.S.C. §4023 (as amended)).
SECTION 5 – PROHIBITION OF ALL PERMITTING
A permit shall not be issued under the following conditions:
a. The applicant for the permit is currently in violation of any ordinance or state law
related to land use within the Town of Vassalboro.
b. The landowner for whom a permit application has been submitted is currently in
violation of any ordinance or state law related to land use within the Town of
Vassalboro
c. The applicant for the permit has engaged in activities requiring a permit under state
laws or local ordinances without having obtained a permit with respect to any land
within the Town of Vassalboro
d. The landowner for whom a permit application has been submitted has engaged in
activities requiring a permit under state laws or local ordinances without having
obtained a permit with respect to any land within the Town of Vassalboro
e. The applicant or landowner will be using a contractor, developer, or any business or
person gaining monetary benefit to undertake work related to the issuance of the
permit and the contractor, developer, business or person is currently in violation of
any ordinance or state law related to land use in the Town of Vassalboro. The only
3
exception to the above permitting prohibition shall be for a subsurface wastewater
disposal system permit if the original system has failed.
C. APPEALS
SECTION 1 – JURISDICTION
The Board of Appeals (sometimes referred to as the Board), previously established pursuant to
30-A M.R.S.A. §2691, shall have jurisdiction to hear appeals by any person with standing,
affected directly or indirectly, from any decision, order, regulation or failure to act of the Code
Enforcement Officer, Plumbing Inspector or Planning Board arising under the following
ordinances and/or state laws: Building Permit, Road Construction, Automobile Graveyard and
Junkyard, Floodplain Management, and Aquifer Protection, Shoreland Zoning and any other
ordinance enforced or administered by the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, the
Maine Internal Plumbing Code, the Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, the special
amusement permit statute (28-A M.R.S.A. §1054) and any other state law administered or
enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer.
All appeals to the Site Review or Subdivision Ordinance shall be made to Superior Court within
thirty days of the decision.
SECTION 2 – ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
a. Timing and fees
Written notice of appeals to the Board must be received by the Code Enforcement
Officer, at the Town office, within thirty (30) days of the date of the determination being
appealed, along with the appropriate appeal fee as set by the municipal officers each year.
b. Appeals Relevant to the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
All appeals of the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance shall follow provisions of that Ordinance.
c. Notice of Appeal
The notice of appeal must include the following:
(1) a written statement clearly describing the basis for the appeal; the specific or
conclusions of law being appealed, if any; and, if the appellant claims that the
decision violates any ordinance, regulation or statute, the specific ordinance,
regulation or statute which the appellant claims has been violated.
(2) a sketch plan drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of existing buildings and
other structures, and other pertinent features on the lot that are relevant to the
appeal.
4
d. Record of Appeal Transmitted to Board
Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer shall transmit the notice
of appeal and all papers and other exhibits constituting the record of the proceeding on
the original application to the Board of Appeals.
e. Hearing Required
The Board of Appeals shall schedule and hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty-five
(35) days of its receipt of the notice of appeal and record.
f. Public Notice of Hearing
The Board of Appeals shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer of the date on which the
hearing is scheduled. The Code Enforcement Officer shall then give written notice by
regular mail to all owners of property abutting the property subject to the appeal, to the
party making the appeal, and to the Town official(s) the decision of which is being
appealed (Code Enforcement Officer, Plumbing Inspector or Planning Board).
Public notice of the hearing shall also be given in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Town. The notice shall contain the date and time of the hearing, and shall provide a
brief description of the decision being appealed, the location of the property involved in
the appeal, and the name of the person taking the appeal.
g. Hearing Procedure
(1) Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. §2691(3).
(2) The appellant’s case shall be presented first. Parties opposing the appeal shall then
present their cases in the order determined by the chairperson of the Board of
Appeals.
(3) If needed to control the hearing, the Board may require questions to be asked through
the chairperson.
(4) Any party may be represented by an agent and/or an attorney.
(5) Hearings may not be continued except for good cause shown.
(6) The record may be kept open at the conclusion of the hearing to receive additional
documentary evidence until a date established by the Board.
h. Decision by the Board of Appeals
5
(1) A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum to conduct a hearing of an
appeal.
(2) Only those issues on which an appeal has been taken shall be heard, and the
appellant shall have the burden of proof on said issues.
(3) All decisions become a part of the record and must include (1) a statement of
findings and conclusions upon all the material issues of fact, law or discretion
presented by the appeal, (2) the reasons or basis for the findings and conclusions, and
(3) the appropriate order, relief or denial of relief.
(4) Notice of any decision must be mailed or hand delivered to the appellant, his
representative or agent, the Planning Board, Code Enforcement Officer, Plumbing
Inspector, or other Town office, as appropriate, and the municipal officers, within
seven (7) days of the Board’s decision.
i. Reconsideration
In accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. §2691(3)(F), the Board may reconsider any decision
reached within forty-five (45) days of the decision. A demonstration must be made by
the applicant that substantial new evidence has been brought before the Board or an error
or mistake of law or misunderstanding of fact has been made. A request to the Board to
reconsider a decision must be filed within ten (10) days of the decision that is to be
reconsidered. A vote to reconsider, and the action taken on that reconsideration, must
occur and be completed within forty-five (45) days of the date of the vote on the original
decision. The Board may conduct additional hearings and receive additional evidence
and testimony. All parties notified of the original appeal must be notified of the request
for reconsideration.
j. Review of Board of Appeals Decision
Any party to the proceedings before the Board of Appeals may take an appeal to the
Superior Court within forty-five (45) days of the date of the vote on the original decision,
in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. §2691(3)(G); except that, as provided in 30-A
M.R.S.A. §2691(3)(F), appeal of a reconsidered decision must be made within fifteen
(15) days after the vote on the decision on reconsideration.
6
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
FOR THE
TOWN OF VASSALBORO, MAINE
ENACTED: ____________________
Date
EFFECTIVE: ____________________
Date
CERTIFIED BY: ____________________
Signature
CERTIFIED BY: ____________________
Print Name
____________________
Title
Affix Seal
60.3(c)
Prepared by SPO/slb
1/5/2010
1
Town of Vassalboro
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
CONTENTS
ARTICLE PAGE
I. PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT.................................................................................2
II. PERMIT REQUIRED..........................................................................................................2
III. APPLICATION FOR PERMIT...........................................................................................2
IV. APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE.......................................................................4
V. REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATIONS.................................................................................................................4
VI. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.......................................................................................6
VII. CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.................................................................................11
VIII. REVIEW OF SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS..........................11
IX. APPEALS AND VARIANCES.........................................................................................12
X. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES..............................................................................14
XI. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY..................................................................................14
XII. CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES....................................................................14
XIII. DEFINITIONS...................................................................................................................14
XIV. ABROGATION.................................................................................................................19
60.3 (c) Rev. 4/09
(prepared 1/5/2010 by SPO/slb)
2
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT
Certain areas of the Town of Vassalboro, Maine are subject to periodic flooding, causing serious damages
to properties within these areas. Relief is available in the form of flood insurance as authorized by the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
Therefore, the Town of Vassalboro, Maine has chosen to become a participating community in the
National Flood Insurance Program, and agrees to comply with the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as delineated in this Floodplain Management Ordinance.
It is the intent of the Town of Vassalboro, Maine to require the recognition and evaluation of flood
hazards in all official actions relating to land use in the floodplain areas having special flood hazards.
The Town of Vassalboro has the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures to reduce future
flood losses pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA, Sections 3001-3007, 4352, 4401-4407, and Title 38 MRSA,
Section 440.
The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid Act, provides that areas of the Town
of Vassalboro having a special flood hazard be identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
and that floodplain management measures be applied in such flood hazard areas. This Ordinance
establishes a Flood Hazard Development Permit system and review procedure for development activities
in the designated flood hazard areas of the Town of Vassalboro, Maine.
The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A and AE for theTown of Vassalboro, Kennebec County Maine,
identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a report entitled “Flood Insurance
Study – Kennebec County” dated _______, 2010 with accompanying “Flood Insurance Rate Map” dated
_______, 2010 with panels:
168, 355, 360, 365, 370, 380, 390, 527, 531, 532, 555
derived from the county wide digital flood insurance rate map entitled “Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map,
Kennebec County,” are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE II - PERMIT REQUIRED
Before any construction or other development (as defined in Article XIII), including the placement of
manufactured homes, begins within any areas of special flood hazard established in Article I, a Flood
Hazard Development Permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer. This permit shall be
in addition to any other permits which may be required pursuant to the codes and ordinances of the Town
of Vassalboro, Maine.
ARTICLE III - APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
The application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement
Officer and shall include:
A. The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and contractor;
3
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site;
C. A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed development, including but not limited to
structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut and filled, and lot
dimensions;
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or development;
E. A statement of the cost of the development including all materials and labor;
F. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
G. Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or development;
[Items H-K.2 apply only to new construction and substantial improvements.]
H. The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) or to a locally established datum in Zone A only, of the:
1. base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved structures, which is
determined:
a. in Zones AE, from data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study – Kennebec County,
Maine" as described in Article I; or,
b. in Zone A:
(1) from any base flood elevation data from federal, state, or other technical sources (such
as FEMA’s Quick-2 model, FEMA 265/July 1995), including information obtained
pursuant to Article VI.K. and VIII.D.;
(2) from the contour elevation extrapolated from a best fit analysis of the floodplain
boundary when overlaid onto a USGS Quadrangle Map or other topographic map
prepared by a Professional Land Surveyor or registered professional engineer, if the
floodplain boundary has a significant correlation to the elevation contour line(s); or, in
the absence of all other data,
(3) to be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of the floodplain boundary and a line
perpendicular to the shoreline which passes along the ground through the site of the
proposed building.
2. highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the proposed building;
3. lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such structures contain a basement; and,
4. level, in the case of non-residential structures only, to which the structure will be floodproofed;
4
I. A description of an elevation reference point established on the site of all developments for which
elevation standards apply as required in Article VI;
J. A written certification by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer or architect,
that the base flood elevation and grade elevations shown on the application are accurate;
K. The following certifications as required in Article VI by a registered professional engineer or
architect:
1. a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65, 03/09, as amended), to verify that the
floodproofing methods for any non-residential structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of
Article III.H.4.; Article VI.G.; and other applicable standards in Article VI;
2. a Hydraulic Openings Certificate to verify that engineered hydraulic openings in foundation walls
will meet the standards of Article VI.L.2.a.;
3. a certified statement that bridges will meet the standards of Article VI.M.;
4. a certified statement that containment walls will meet the standards of Article VI.N.;
L. A description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development; and,
M. A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each applicable development standard in
Article VI will be met.
ARTICLE IV - APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE
A non-refundable application fee as established annually by the Board of Selectmen for all minor
development and for all new construction or substantial improvements shall be paid to the Town Clerk or
Code Enforcement Officer and a copy of a receipt for the same shall accompany the application.
An additional fee may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer and/or Board of Appeals needs the
assistance of a professional engineer or other expert. The expert's fee shall be paid in full by the applicant
within 10 days after the town submits a bill to the applicant. Failure to pay the bill shall constitute a
violation of the ordinance and be grounds for the issuance of a stop work order. An expert shall not be
hired by the municipality at the expense of an applicant until the applicant has either consented to such
hiring in writing or been given an opportunity to be heard on the subject. An applicant who is dissatisfied
with a decision to hire expert assistance may appeal that decision to the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE V - REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATIONS
The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
A. Review all applications for the Flood Hazard Development Permit to assure that proposed
developments are reasonably safe from flooding and to determine that all pertinent requirements of
Article VI (Development Standards) have been, or will be met;
5
B. Utilize, in the review of all Flood Hazard Development Permit applications:
1. the base flood and floodway data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study – Kennebec County,
Maine," as described in Article I;
2. in special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data are not provided, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation
and floodway data from federal, state, or other technical sources, including information obtained
pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article VI.K.; and Article VIII.D., in order to administer Article VI
of this Ordinance; and,
3. when the community establishes a base flood elevation in a Zone A by methods outlined in
Article III.H.1.b., the community shall submit that data to the Maine Floodplain Management
Program in the State Planning Office.
C. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas shown on the maps
described in Article I of this Ordinance;
D. In the review of Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, determine that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those federal, state, and local government agencies from which prior
approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344;
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Maine
Floodplain Management Program in the State Planning Office prior to any alteration or relocation of a
water course and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
F. If the application satisfies the requirements of this Ordinance, approve the issuance of one of the
following Flood Hazard Development Permits based on the type of development:
1. A two part Flood Hazard Development Permit for elevated structures. Part I shall authorize the
applicant to build a structure to and including the first horizontal floor only above the base flood
level. At that time the applicant shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer with an Elevation
Certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer or
architect based on the Part I permit construction , “as built”, for verifying compliance with the
elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, or H. Following review of the Elevation
Certificate data, which shall take place within 72 hours of receipt of the application, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue Part II of the Flood Hazard Development Permit. Part II shall
authorize the applicant to complete the construction project; or,
2. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Floodproofing of Non-Residential Structures that are
new construction or substantially improved non-residential structures that are not being elevated
but that meet the floodproofing standards of Article VI.G.1.a.,b., and c. The application for this
permit shall include a Floodproofing Certificate signed by a registered professional engineer or
architect; or,
3. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Minor Development for all development that is not new
construction or a substantial improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or
additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value of the structure. Minor development
6
also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Article VI.J., mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or
materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or
water supply facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges,
dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves and piers.
G. A permit shall not be issued if:
1. The applicant for the permit is currently in violation of any land use ordinance or state law
related to land use within the Town of Vassalboro.
2. The landowner for whom a permit application has been submitted is currently in violation of
any land use ordinance or state law related to land use within the Town of Vassalboro
3. The applicant for the permit has engaged in activities requiring a permit under state laws or
local ordinances without having obtained a permit with respect to any land within the Town of
Vassalboro
4. The landowner for whom a permit application has been submitted has engaged in activities
requiring a permit under state laws or local ordinances without having obtained a permit with
respect to any land within the Town of Vassalboro
5. The applicant or landowner will be using a contractor, developer, or any business or
person gaining monetary benefit to undertake work related to the issuance of the permit
and the contractor, developer, business or person is currently in violation of any ordinance
or state law related to land use in the Town of Vassalboro.
H In addition to any other action provided above, the Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon determining
that a violation of any State or local law, regulation or ordinance intended to discourage or otherwise
restrict development or occupancy in flood-prone areas exist, shall submit a declaration to the
Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration requesting a denial of flood insurance. The
declaration shall contain the following:
1. The name and address of the property owner and a legal description of the property
sufficient to confirm its identity or location;
2. A declaration that the property is in violation of a cited State or local law,
regulation or
ordinance as set forth above;
3. A statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to do so and
a citation
to that authority;
4. Evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation and the
prospective denial of insurance; and
7
5. A statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section 1316 of the
National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended (42 U.S.C. §4023 (as
amended)).
I. Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all Flood Hazard Development Permit Applications,
corresponding Permits issued, and data relevant thereto, including reports of the Board of Appeals on
variances granted under the provisions of Article IX of this Ordinance, and copies of Elevation
Certificates, Floodproofing Certificates, Certificates of Compliance and certifications of design
standards required under the provisions of Articles III, VI, and VII of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE VI - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following applicable standards:
A. All Development - All development shall:
1. be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation (excluding piers and
docks), collapse or lateral movement of the development resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
3. use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage; and,
4. use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and other service
facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during flooding conditions.
B. Water Supply - All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
C. Sanitary Sewage Systems - All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
and located to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from
the system into flood waters.
D. On Site Waste Disposal Systems - On site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed
to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during floods.
E. Watercourse Carrying Capacity - All development associated with altered or relocated portions of
a watercourse shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that no reduction occurs in the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse.
F. Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure located
within:
8
1. Zones AE, shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above
the base flood elevation.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article V.B; or
Article VIII.D.
G. Non Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any non-residential structure
located within:
1. Zones AE, shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above
the base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall:
a. be floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood elevation so that below that
elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing design
and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for
meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the
application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit, as required by Article III.K. and shall
include a record of the elevation above mean sea level to which the structure is floodproofed.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article V.B; or
Article VIII.D., or
a. together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities meet the
floodproofing standards of Article VI.G.1.
H. Manufactured Homes - New or substantially improved manufactured homes located within:
1. Zones AE, shall:
a. be elevated such that the lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at
least one foot above the base flood elevation;
b. be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured masonry slab or foundation walls, with
hydraulic openings, or may be reinforced piers or block supports, any of which support the
manufactured home so that no weight is supported by its wheels and axles; and,
c. be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to:
9
(1) over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four corners of the manufactured home,
plus two additional ties per side at intermediate points (manufactured homes less than
50 feet long require one additional tie per side); or by,
(2) frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five additional ties along each side at
intermediate points (manufactured homes less than 50 feet long require four additional
ties per side).
(3) all components of the anchoring system described in Article VI.H.1.c.(1)&(2) shall be
capable of carrying a force of 4800 pounds.
2. Zone A shall:
a. be elevated on a permanent foundation, as described in Article VI.H.1.b., such that the
lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article
V.B; or Article VIII.D.; and
b. meet the anchoring requirements of Article VI.H.1.c.
I. Recreational Vehicles - Recreational Vehicles located within:
1. Zones A and AE, shall either:
a. be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
b. be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use
if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or,
c. be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured
homes" in Article VI.H.1.
J. Accessory Structures - Accessory Structures, as defined in Article XIII, located within Zones A
and AE, shall be exempt from the elevation criteria required in Article VI.F. & G. above, if all other
requirements of Article VI and all the following requirements are met. Accessory Structures shall:
1. be 500 square feet or less and have a value less than $3000;
2. have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation;
3. have hydraulic openings, as specified in Article VI.L.2., in at least two different walls of the
accessory structure;
4. be located outside the floodway;
10
5. when possible be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters and be placed further from the source of flooding than is the
primary structure; and,
6. have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electric service disconnect shall be
located above the base flood elevation and when possible outside the Special Flood Hazard Area.
K. Floodways -
1. In Zones AE riverine areas, encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvement, and other development shall not be permitted within a regulatory floodway which
is designated on the community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map, Kennebec County unless a
technical evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that
such encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during
the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
2. In Zones AE and A riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designated,
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other
development shall not be permitted in the floodway as determined in Article VI.K.3. unless a
technical evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that
the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing
development and anticipated development:
a. will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
point within the community; and,
b. is consistent with the technical criteria contained in Chapter 5 entitled "Hydraulic Analyses,"
Flood Insurance Study - Guidelines and Specifications for Study Contractors, (FEMA 37/
January 1995, as amended).
3. In Zones AE and A riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designated, the regulatory
floodway is determined to be the channel of the river or other water course and the adjacent land
areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain as measured from the normal high
water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
L. Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor - New construction or substantial improvement of any
structure in Zones AE and A that meets the development standards of Article VI, including the
elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, or H and is elevated on posts, columns, piers,
piles, "stilts," or crawlspaces may be enclosed below the base flood elevation requirements provided
all the following criteria are met or exceeded:
1. Enclosed areas are not "basements" as defined in Article XIII;
2. Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood water. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either:
11
a. be engineered and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or,
b. meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of the enclosed area;
(2) the bottom of all openings shall be below the base flood elevation and no higher than
one foot above the lowest grade; and,
(3) openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the entry and exit of flood waters automatically without any
external influence or control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical
and other non-automatic mechanical means;
3. The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and,
4. The enclosed areas are usable solely for building access, parking of vehicles, or storage.
M. Bridges - New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge in Zones AE and A shall be
designed such that:
1. when possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the pilings, or columns) is elevated to at
least one foot above the base flood elevation; and
2. a registered professional engineer shall certify that:
a. the structural design and methods of construction shall meet the elevation requirements of
this section and the floodway standards of Article VI.K.; and
b. the foundation and superstructure attached thereto are designed to resist flotation, collapse
and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
structural components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood.
N. Containment Walls - New construction or substantial improvement of any containment wall
located within:
1. Zones AE and A shall:
a. have the containment wall elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions
12
of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the application for a Flood Hazard
Development Permit, as required by Article III.K.
O. Wharves, Piers and Docks - New construction or substantial improvement of wharves, piers, and
docks are permitted in Zones AE and A, in and over water and seaward of the mean high tide if the
following requirements are met:
1. wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations;
and
2. for commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered professional engineer shall develop or
review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction.
ARTICLE VII - CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no structure which is constructed or
substantially improved shall be occupied until a Certificate of Compliance is issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer subject to the following provisions:
A. For New Construction or Substantial Improvement of any elevated structure the applicant shall
submit to the Code Enforcement Officer, an Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional Land
Surveyor, registered professional engineer, or architect, for compliance with Article VI, paragraphs F,
G, or H.
B. The applicant shall submit written notification to the Code Enforcement Officer that the development
is complete and complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
C. Within 10 working days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall:
1. review the Elevation Certificate and the applicant’s written notification; and,
2. upon determination that the development conforms with the provisions of this ordinance, shall
issue a Certificate of Compliance.
ARTICLE VIII - REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed developments that require
review under other federal law, state law or local ordinances or regulations and all projects on 5 or more
disturbed acres, or in the case of manufactured home parks divided into two or more lots, assure that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
13
D. All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in a riverine floodplain, floodway
data. These determinations shall be based on engineering practices recognized by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
E. Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan approval requiring that structures
on any lot in the development having any portion of its land within a Special Flood Hazard Area, are
to be constructed in accordance with Article VI of this ordinance. Such requirement will be included
in any deed, lease, purchase and sale agreement, or document transferring or expressing an intent to
transfer any interest in real estate or structure, including but not limited to a time-share interest. The
condition shall clearly articulate that the municipality may enforce any violation of the construction
requirement and that fact shall also be included in the deed or any other document previously
described. The construction requirement shall also be clearly stated on any map, plat, or plan to be
signed by the Planning Board or local reviewing authority as part of the approval process.
ARTICLE IX - APPEALS AND VARIANCES
The Board of Appeals of the Town of Vassalboro may, upon written application of an aggrieved party,
hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board in the
administration or enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance.
The Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the requirements of this Ordinance consistent with state
law and the following criteria:
A. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge would result.
B. Variances shall be granted only upon:
1. a showing of good and sufficient cause; and,
2. a determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood occur, the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, public expense, or
create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances; and,
3. a showing that the issuance of the variance will not conflict with other state, federal or local laws
or ordinances; and,
4. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in "undue hardship," which in this
sub-section means:
a. that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted; and,
b. that the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the
general conditions in the neighborhood; and,
c. that the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and,
14
d. that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and the Board of Appeals may impose such conditions
to a variance as it deems necessary.
D. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements, or other development for
the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
1. other criteria of Article IX and Article VI.K. are met; and,
2. the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during
the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
E. Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of Historic
Structures upon the determination that:
1. the development meets the criteria of Article IX, paragraphs A. through D. above; and,
2. the proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
F. Any applicant who meets the criteria of Article IX, paragraphs A. through E. shall be notified by the
Board of Appeals in writing over the signature of the Chairman of the Board of Appeals that:
1. the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in greatly
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 per $100 of insurance
coverage;
2. such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property; and,
3. the applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of all the risks inherent in the use
of land subject to flooding, assumes those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the
municipality against any claims filed against it that are related to the applicant's decision to use
land located in a floodplain and that the applicant individually releases the municipality from any
claims the applicant may have against the municipality that are related to the use of land located
in a floodplain.
G. Appeal Procedure for Administrative and Variance Appeals
1. An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an aggrieved party
within thirty days after receipt of a written decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning
Board.
2. Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as
appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the
decision appealed from.
15
3. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within thirty-five days of its
receipt of an appeal request.
4. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
5. The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals within thirty-five days after the close of the
hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all appeals.
6. The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer a report of all variance
actions, including justification for the granting of the variance and an authorization for the Code
Enforcement Officer to issue a Flood Hazard Development Permit, which includes any
conditions to be attached to said permit.
7. Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings before the Board of
Appeals may take an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State laws within forty-five
days from the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE X - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance
pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA § 4452.
B. The penalties contained in Title 30-A MRSA § 4452 shall apply to any violation of this Ordinance.
C. In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer, upon determination that a violation
exists, may submit a declaration to the Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration
requesting a denial of flood insurance. The valid declaration shall consist of;
1. the name of the property owner and address or legal description of the property sufficient to
confirm its identity or location;
2. a clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a cited State or local law,
regulation, or ordinance;
3. a clear statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to do so and a citation
to that authority;
4. evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation and the prospective
denial of insurance; and,
5. a clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section 1316 of the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
ARTICLE XI - VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
If any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not
invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
16
ARTICLE XII - CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
This Ordinance shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other
applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw, permit, or provision of law. Where this Ordinance imposes
a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings, or structures, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
control.
ARTICLE XIII - DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have the same meaning
as they have at common law and to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application. Words used in
the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
Accessory Structure - means a small detached structure that is incidental and subordinate to the principal
structure.
Adjacent Grade - means the natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Area of Special Flood Hazard - means the land in the floodplain having a one percent or greater chance
of flooding in any given year, as specifically identified in the Flood Insurance Study cited in Article I of
this Ordinance.
Base Flood - means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year, commonly called the 100-year flood.
Basement - means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building - see Structure.
Certificate of Compliance - A document signed by the Code Enforcement Officer stating that a structure
is in compliance with all of the provisions of this Ordinance.
Code Enforcement Officer - A person certified under Title 30-A MRSA, Section 4451 (including
exceptions in subsection 4451, paragraph 1) and employed by a municipality to enforce all applicable
comprehensive planning and land use laws and ordinances.
Development - means any man made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated Building - means a non-basement building
a. built, in the case of a building in Zones AE and A, to have the top of the elevated floor elevated above
the ground level by means of pilings, columns, post, piers, or "stilts;" and
17
b. adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to
one foot above the magnitude of the base flood.
In the case of Zones AE and A, Elevated Building also includes a building elevated by means of fill or
solid foundation perimeter walls with hydraulic openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement
of flood waters, as required in Article VI.L..
Elevation Certificate - An official form (FEMA Form 81-31, 03/09, as amended) that:
a. is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program; and,
b. is required for purchasing flood insurance.
Flood or Flooding - means:
a. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
b. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of
erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe
storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by
some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph a.1.
of this definition.
Flood Elevation Study - means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if
appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - means an official map of a community, on which the Federal
Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study - see Flood Elevation Study.
Floodplain or Flood-prone Area - means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source (see flooding).
Floodplain Management - means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, and floodplain management regulations.
18
Floodplain Management Regulations - means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building
codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance,
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or
local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing - means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property,
water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents.
Floodway - see Regulatory Floodway.
Floodway Encroachment Lines - mean the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state, and
local floodplain maps.
Freeboard - means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of
floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors, such as wave
action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed, that could contribute
to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions.
Functionally Dependent Use - means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities
that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Historic Structure - means any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department
of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements
for individual listing on the National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical
significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
19
Locally Established Datum - means, for purposes of this ordinance, an elevation established for a
specific site to which all other elevations at the site are referenced. This elevation is generally not
referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)
or any other established datum and is used in areas where Mean Sea Level data is too far from a specific
site to be practically used.
Lowest Floor - means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements
described in Article VI.L. of this ordinance.
Manufactured Home - means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term manufactured home also includes park
trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level - means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum, to which
base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
Minor Development - means all development that is not new construction or a substantial improvement,
such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value
of the structure. It also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Article VI.J.,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or
materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply
facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing,
pipelines, wharves, and piers.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) - means the national vertical datum, whose standard was
established in 1929, which is used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). NGVD was based
upon mean sea level in 1929 and also has been called “1929 Mean Sea Level (MSL)”.
New Construction - means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)- means the national datum whose standard was established in
1988, which is the new vertical datum used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) for all new
Flood Insurance Rate Maps. NAVD is based upon vertical datum used by other North American countries
such as Canada and Mexico and was established to replace NGVD because of constant movement of the
earths crust, glacial rebound, and subsidence and the increasing use of satellite technology.
100-year flood - see Base Flood.
Recreational Vehicle - means a vehicle which is:
20
a. built on a single chassis;
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, not including slideouts;
c. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor vehicle; and
d. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory Floodway -
a. means the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot, and
b. when not designated on the community’s Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map, it is considered to be the
channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width
of the floodplain, as measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
Riverine - means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard Area - see Area of Special Flood Hazard.
Start of Construction - means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of
piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, or modification of any construction element, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Structure - means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building. A gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground is also a structure.
Substantial Damage - means, damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring
the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement - means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
21
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
b. Any alteration of a Historic Structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure, and a variance is obtained from the community’s Board
of Appeals.
Variance - means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.
Violation - means the failure of a structure or development to comply with a community's floodplain
management regulations.
ARTICLE XIV - ABROGATION
This ordinance repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously enacted to comply with the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended).
60.3 (c) Rev. 4/09
Prepared by SPO/slb
1/5/2010
22
ORDINANCE PROHIBITING RETAIL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
AND RETAIL MARIJUANA SOCIAL CLUBS IN THE TOWN OF VASSALBORO
Section 1. Authority.
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the Marijuana Legalization Act, 7 M.R.S.A. c. 417;
and Municipal Home Rule Authority, Me. Const., art. VIII, pt. 2; and 30-A M.R.S.A. §
3001.
Section 2. Definitions.
For purposes of this ordinance, retail marijuana establishments, including retail marijuana
stores, retail marijuana cultivation facilities, retail marijuana products manufacturing
facilities and retail marijuana testing facilities, and retail marijuana social clubs are defined
as set forth in 7 M.R.S.A. § 2442.
Section 3. Prohibition on Retail Marijuana Establishments and Retail Marijuana Social
Clubs.
Retail marijuana establishments, including retail marijuana stores, retail marijuana
cultivation facilities, retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities, and retail
marijuana testing facilities, and retail marijuana social clubs, are expressly prohibited in
this municipality.
No person or organization shall develop or operate a business that engages in retail or
wholesale sales of a retail marijuana product, as defined by 7 M.R.S.A. § 2442.
Nothing in this ordinance is intended to prohibit any lawful use, possession or conduct
pursuant to the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act, 22 M.R.S.A. c. 558-C.
Section 4. Effective date; duration.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon enactment by the municipal legislative
body unless otherwise provided and shall remain in effect until it is amended or repealed.
Section 5. Penalties.
This ordinance shall be enforced by the municipal officers or their designee. Violations of
this ordinance shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 4452.
______________________________________________________________
This ordinance was enacted by 143 registered voters of the Town of Vassalboro by a show of
hands vote at a Special Town Meeting held January 9, 2017 at 7:00 p.m. at the Vassalboro
Community School. This voter count exceeded the existing quorum requirement of a minimum
of 125 voters.
THE TOWN OF VASSALBORO PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY (PACE)
ORDINANCE
Version 2 – Administration by the Efficiency Maine Trust
PREAMBLE
WHEREAS, the 124th Maine Legislature has enacted Public Law 2009, Chapter 591,
“An Act to Increase the Affordability of Clean Energy for Homeowners and Businesses,” also
known as “the Property Assessed Clean Energy Act” or “the PACE Act”; and
WHEREAS, that Act authorizes a municipality that has adopted a Property Assessed
Clean Energy (“PACE”) Ordinance to establish a PACE program so that owners of qualifying
property can access financing for energy saving improvements to their properties located in the
Town, financed by funds awarded to the Efficiency Maine Trust under the Federal Energy
Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant (EECBG) Program and by other funds available for
this purpose, and to enter into a contract with the Trust to administer functions of its PACE
program; and
WHEREAS, the Municipality wishes to establish a PACE program; and
NOW THEREFORE, the Municipality hereby enacts the following Ordinance:
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE AND ENABLING LEGISLATION
§ XX-1 Purpose
By and through this Chapter, the Town of Vassalboro declares as its public purpose the
establishment of a municipal program to enable its citizens to participate in a Property Assessed
Clean Energy (“PACE”) program so that owners of qualifying property can access financing for
energy saving improvements to their properties located in the Town. The Town declares its
purpose and the provisions of this Ordinance to be in conformity with federal and State laws.
§ XX-2 Enabling Legislation
The Town enacts this Ordinance pursuant to Public Law 2009, Chapter 591 of the
124th Maine State Legislature -- “An Act to Increase the Affordability of Clean Energy for
Homeowners and Businesses,” also known as “the Property Assessed Clean Energy Act” or “the
PACE Act” (codified at 35-A M.R.S.A. § 10151, et seq.).
ARTICLE II - TITLE AND DEFINITIONS
§ XX-3 Title
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as “the Town of Vassalboro Property Assessed
Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance” (the “Ordinance”).”
§ XX-4 Definitions
1
Except as specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have their
customary meanings; as used in this Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings indicated:
1. Energy saving improvement. “Energy saving improvement” means an improvement to
qualifying property that is new and permanently affixed to qualifying property and that:
A. Will result in increased energy efficiency and substantially reduced energy use and:
(1) Meets or exceeds applicable United States Environmental Protection Agency and
United States Department of Energy Star program or similar energy efficiency standards
established or approved by the Trust; or
(2) Involves air sealing, insulating, and other energy efficiency improvements of
residential, commercial or industrial property in a manner approved by the Trust; or
B. Involves a renewable energy installation or an electric thermal storage system that meets
or exceeds standards established or approved by the Trust.
2. Municipality. “Municipality” shall mean the Town of Vassalboro.
.
3. PACE agreement. “Pace agreement” means an agreement between the owner of qualifying
property and the Trust that authorizes the creation of a PACE mortgage on qualifying property
and that is approved in writing by all owners of the qualifying property at the time of the
agreement, other than mortgage holders.
4. PACE assessment. “PACE assessment” means an assessment made against qualifying
property to repay a PACE loan.
5. PACE district. “Pace district” means the area within which the Municipality establishes a
PACE program hereunder, which is all that area within the Municipality’s boundaries.
6. PACE loan. “PACE loan” means a loan, secured by a PACE mortgage, made to the owner(s)
of a qualifying property pursuant to a PACE program to fund energy saving improvements.
7. PACE mortgage. “PACE mortgage” means a mortgage securing a loan made pursuant to a
PACE program to fund energy saving improvements on qualifying property.
8. PACE program. “PACE program” means a program established under State statute by the
Trust or a municipality under which property owners can finance energy savings improvements
on qualifying property.
9. Qualifying property. “Qualifying property” means real property located in the PACE district
of the Municipality.
10. Renewable energy installation. “Renewable energy installation” means a fixture, product,
system, device or interacting group of devices installed behind the meter at a qualifying property,
or on contiguous property under common ownership, that produces energy or heat from
renewable sources, including, but not limited to, photovoltaic systems, solar thermal systems,
2
biomass systems, landfill gas to energy systems, geothermal systems, wind systems, wood pellet
systems and any other systems eligible for funding under federal Qualified Energy Conservation
Bonds or federal Clean Renewable Energy Bonds.
11. Trust. “Trust” means the Efficiency Maine Trust established in 35-A M.R.S.A.
§ 10103 and/or its agent(s), if any.
ARTICLE III - PACE PROGRAM
1. Establishment; funding. The Municipality hereby establishes a PACE program allowing
owners of qualifying property located in the PACE district who so choose to access financing for
energy saving improvements to their property through PACE loans administered by the Trust or
its agent. PACE loan funds are available from the Trust in municipalities that 1) adopt a PACE
Ordinance, 2) adopt and implement a local public outreach and education plan, 3) enter into a
PACE administration contract with the Trust to establish the terms and conditions of the Trust’s
administration of the municipality’s PACE program, and 4) agree to assist and cooperate with
the Trust in its administration of the municipality’s PACE program.
2. Amendment to PACE program. In addition, the Municipality may from time to time amend
this Ordinance to use any other funding sources made available to it or appropriated by it for the
express purpose of its PACE program, and the Municipality shall be responsible for
administration of loans made from those other funding sources.
ARTICLE IV – CONFORMITY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE TRUST
1. Standards adopted; Rules promulgated; model documents. If the Trust adopts
standards, promulgates rules, or establishes model documents subsequent to the
Municipality’s adoption of this Ordinance and those standards, rules or model documents
substantially conflict with this Ordinance, the Municipality shall take necessary steps to
conform this Ordinance and its PACE program to those standards, rules, or model
documents.
ARTICLE VI – PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION; MUNICIPAL LIABILITY
1. Program Administration
A. PACE Administration Contract. Pursuant to 35-A M.R.S.A. §10154(2)(A)(2) and (B), the
Municipality will enter into a PACE administration contract with the Trust to administer the
functions of the PACE program for the Municipality. The PACE administration contract
with the Trust will establish the administration of the PACE program including, without
limitation, that:
i. the Trust will enter into PACE agreements with owners of qualifying property in the
Municipality’s PACE district;
ii. the Trust, or its agent, will create and record a Notice of the PACE agreement in the
appropriate County Registry of Deeds to create a PACE mortgage;
iii. the Trust, or its agent, will disburse the PACE loan to the property owner;
3
iv. the Trust, or its agent, will send PACE assessment statements with payment deadlines
to the property owner;
v. the Trust, or its agent, will be responsible for collection of the PACE assessments;
vi. the Trust, or its agent, will record any lien, if needed, due to nonpayment of the
assessment;
vii. the Municipality, or the Trust or its agent on behalf of the Municipality, promptly
shall record the discharges of PACE mortgages upon full payment of the PACE loan.
B. Adoption of Education and Outreach Program. In conjunction with adopting this
Ordinance, the Municipality shall adopt and implement an education and outreach program so
that citizens of the Municipality are made aware of home energy saving opportunities, including
the opportunity to finance energy saving improvements with a PACE loan.
C. Assistance and Cooperation. The Municipality will assist and cooperate with the Trust in its
administration of the Municipality’s PACE program.
D. Assessments Not a Tax. PACE assessments do not constitute a tax but may be assessed and
collected by the Trust in any manner determined by the Trust and consistent with applicable law.
2. Liability of Municipal Officials; Liability of Municipality
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, municipal officers and municipal
officials, including, without limitation, tax assessors and tax collectors, are not personally liable
to the Trust or to any other person for claims, of whatever kind or nature, under or related to a
PACE program, including, without limitation, claims for or related to uncollected PACE
assessments.
B. Other than the fulfillment of its obligations specified in a PACE administration contract with
the Trust entered into under Article VI, §1(A) above, a municipality has no liability to a property
owner for or related to energy savings improvements financed under a PACE program.
ARTICLE VII – EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall become effective immediately after approval by the voters of the Town of
Vassalboro.
Efficiency Maine Trust, Model Ordinance Version 2 (Administration by the Trust): Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance (July 23,
2010)
4
SITE REVIEW ORDINANCE
FOR THE
TOWN OF VASSALBORO
as Revised and Adopted June 11, 2012
1
SITE REVIEW ORDINANCE
Table of Contents
SECTION TITLE PAGE
I PURPOSE 3
II APPLICABILITY 3
III AUTHORITY 3
IV CLASSIFICATION OF PROJECTS 4
V APPLICATION PROCEDURE – MINOR 4
VI APPLICATION PROCEDURE – MAJOR 6
VII SITE PLAN CONTENT - MINOR 8
VIII SITE PLAN CONTENT – MAJOR 9
IX PERFORMANCE STANDARDS - MINOR 11
X PERFORMANCE STANDARDS - MAJOR 12
XI PERMITS 16
XII GENERAL PROVISIONS 17
XIII ADMINISTRATION 17
XIV ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS 17
XV VIOLATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND FINES 18
XVI VALIDITY/SEVERABILITY/CONFLICT/OTHER
ORDINANCES 18
XVII AMENDMENTS 19
XVIII EFFECTIVE DATE 19
XIX DEFINITIONS 19
2
SITE REVIEW ORDINANCE
SECTION I. PURPOSE
The purpose of this Site Plan Ordinance is to promote public health,
safety, and general welfare by requiring plans to be submitted to, reviewed,
and approved by the Planning Board. The purpose of such review shall be to
ensure orderly, beneficial, and environmentally sound development and the
most appropriate use of land in keeping with the purposes of the general
area in which a development is proposed.
SECTION II. APPLICABILITY
A. This Ordinance shall apply to all new uses, and structures, new
construction, alterations and substantial enlargement to existing uses and
structures for commercial, retail, industrial, and institutional purposes.
This Ordinance does not apply to detached single and two-family dwelling
units, multiple family dwelling units consisting of three (3) or more units
along with accessory uses and structures thereof, agricultural land management or
forest land management practices, or home occupations as defined in Section
XVII.
B. This Ordinance shall also apply to any commercial, retail, industrial or
institutional activity that commenced prior to the adoption of this
Ordinance and is discontinued for more than 90 (ninety) calendar days.
C. This Ordinance also applies to any seasonal, commercial, retail,
industrial or institutional activity which commenced prior to the adoption
of this Ordinance and is discontinued for more than 1 (one) year.
SECTION III. AUTHORITY
Review and Approval Authority:
The Planning Board is authorized to review and act on site plans for both
Minor and Major developments as defined below in “Classification of Projects”.
In considering Site Plans under this section, the Planning Board may act to
approve, disapprove, or approve the project with conditions as are
authorized by these provisions.
3
SECTION IV. CLASSIFICATION OF PROJECTS
The Planning Board shall classify each project as a minor or major
development. Minor developments are smaller scale, less complex projects
for which a less complex review process is adequate to protect the Town's
interest. Major developments are larger, more complex projects for which a
more detailed review process and additional information may be required.
A. Minor Developments shall include:
1. Projects involving the construction or addition of fewer than five
thousand (5,000) square feet of gross developed area.
2. Projects involving the conversion of existing uses or structures
five thousand (5,000) square feet or less from one use to another without
enlargement of the gross developed area.
B. Major Developments shall include:
1. Projects involving the construction or addition of five thousand (5,000) or
more square feet of developed area.
2. Projects involving the conversion of existing buildings or structures
five thousand (5,000) square feet or more from one use to another
without enlargement of the developed area.
3. Other projects requiring review which are not classified as minor
developments.
SECTION V. APPLICATION PROCEDURE – MINOR
A. Persons seeking Site Plan approval shall file site plans in duplicate
(meeting the specifications of this Ordinance) with the Planning Board, which
shall immediately refer copies of such plans to the Code Enforcement Officer.
The filing of required plans with the Planning Board shall constitute filing of an
application for Site Plan Review.
B. The applicant shall be required to notify, by mail, all abutting property
owners that a Site Plan has been filed. For notification purposes, the East
Vassalboro Water Company is considered to be an abutting property owner to
all projects located on parcels wholly or partially within their Wellhead
Protection Area as mapped by the Maine Drinking Water Program. Return
receipts will be required to verify notification of all abutting property owners.
C. The application shall be filed with the Planning Board for review and
accompanied by a fee of $50 for processing the application. Within thirty (30)
days of the filing of an application, the Planning Board shall notify the applicant,
in writing, either that the application is a complete application or, if the
4
application is incomplete, the specific additional material needed to make a
complete application. After the Planning Board has determined that a complete
application has been filed, it shall notify the applicant, in writing, and begin its
review of the proposed development.
D. On all Minor Site Review Applications the Planning Board may hold a public
hearing within thirty (30) days of the filing of the completed
application. The Planning Board shall publish the time, date, and place of
the hearing at least two (2) times; the date of the first publication to be
at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of area wide
circulation. The abutting landowners shall be notified of the hearing and return
receipts will be required to verify their notification.
E. Public hearings by the Planning Board shall be conducted according to the
procedures outlined in Title 30, M.R.S.A., §241 1, Subsection 3,
(A), (B), (C), (D), and (E).
F. The Planning Board may determine that it is necessary to conduct a site visit in
order to obtain first hand knowledge of the site. Written permission for members
of the Planning Board and the interested public to enter the property will be
necessary. Proper public notice of the site visit must be given to interested
parties and abutters since the site visit is technically a meeting. The applicant
shall be required to notify all abutting property owners that a site visit is
scheduled. Return receipts or signed affidavits will be required to verify
notification of all abutting property owners.
G. Within thirty (30) days of the public hearing or sixty (60) days of
receiving the completed application, the Planning Board shall approve, approve
with conditions, or dis-approve the application.
H. Within seven (7) days of reaching their decision, the Planning Board shall notify
the applicant, in writing, of any action taken and the reason for taking such
action.
I. All time limits provided for in this section may be extended by mutual
agreement of the applicant and the Planning Board.
J. Minor changes in approved plans to address field conditions may be approved
by the Code Enforcement Officer provided that such change does not affect
compliance with the standards or alter the essential nature of the proposal.
Any such change must be endorsed in writing by the CEO on the approved
plan.
K. Approvals of site plans are dependent upon and limited to the proposals and
plans contained in the application and supporting documents submitted and
affirmed by the applicant. Any variation from the plans, proposals, and
supporting documents, except minor changes as noted in paragraph G of this
section, is subject to further review and approval.
5
SECTION VI. APPLICATION PROCEDURE – MAJOR
A. Preapplication: Prior to submitting a formal application, the
applicant or his/her representative shall attend a preapplication conference with
the Planning Board. The preapplication meeting shall be informal and
informational in nature. There shall be no fee for a preapplication review, and
such review shall not cause the plan to be a pending application or proceeding
under Title 1 M.R.S.A.302. No decision on the substance of the plan shall be
made at the pre-application conference.
There are no formal submission requirements for a preapplication
conference. However, the applicant should be prepared to discuss the
following with the Board:
1. The proposed site, including its location, size, and general
characteristics;
2. The nature of the proposed use and potential development;
3. Any issues or questions about existing municipal regulations and their
applicability to the project; and
4. Any request for waivers from the submission requirements.
B. Persons seeking Site Plan approval shall file site plans in duplicate
(meeting the specifications of this Ordinance) with the Planning Board, which
shall immediately refer copies of such plans to the Code Enforcement Officer.
The filing of required plans with the Planning Board shall constitute filing of an
application for Site Plan Review.
C. The applicant shall be required to notify, by mail, all abutting property
owners that a Site Plan has been filed. For notification purposes, the East
Vassalboro Water Company is considered to be an abutting property owner to
all projects located on parcels wholly or partially within their Wellhead
Protection Area as mapped by the Maine Drinking Water Program. Return
receipts will be required to verify notification of all abutting property owners.
D. The application shall be filed with the Planning Board for review and
accompanied by a fee of $50 for processing the application. Within thirty (30)
days of the filing of an application, the Planning Board shall notify
the applicant, in writing, either that the application is a complete
application or, if the application is incomplete, the specific additional
material needed to make a complete application.
E. After the Planning Board has determined that a complete application has been
filed, it shall notify the applicant, in writing, and begin its review of the proposed
development.
F. On all Major Site Review Applications the Planning Board may hold a public
hearing within thirty (30) days of the filing of the completed
application. The Planning Board shall publish the time, date, and place of
6
the hearing at least two (2) times; the date of the first publication to be
at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of area wide
circulation. The abutting landowners shall be notified of the hearing and return
receipts will be required to verify their notification.
G. Public hearings by the Planning Board shall be conducted according to the
procedures outlined in Title 30, M.R.S.A., §241 1, Subsection 3,
(A), (B), (C), (D), and (E). Any public hearings by the Planning Board shall be
conducted according to the procedures outlined in Title 30, M.R.S.A., §241 1,
Subsection 3, (A), (B), (C), (D), and (E). Within thirty (30) days of the public
hearing or sixty (60) days of receiving the completed application, the Planning
Board shall approve, approve with conditions, or dis-approve the application.
H. The Planning Board may determine that it is necessary to conduct a site visit in
order to obtain first hand knowledge of the site. Proper public notice of the site
visit must be given to interested parties and abutters since the site visit is
technically a meeting. The applicant shall be required to notify all abutting
property owners that a site visit is scheduled. Return receipts or signed
affidavits will be required to verify notification.
I. Within seven (7) days of reaching their decision, the Planning Board shall notify
the applicant, in writing, of any action taken and the reason for taking such
action.
J. All time limits provided for in this section may be extended by mutual agreement
of the applicant and the Planning Board.
K. The Code Enforcement Officer may approve minor changes in approved plans
to address field conditions provided that such changes do not affect
compliance with the standards or alter the essential nature of the proposal.
Any such changes must be endorsed in writing by the CEO on the approved
plan.
L. Approvals of site plans are dependent upon and limited to the proposals and
plans contained in the application and supporting documents submitted and
affirmed by the applicant. Any variation from the plans, proposals, and
supporting documents, except minor changes as noted in paragraph G of this
section, is subject to further review and approval
7
SECTION VII. SITE PLAN CONTENT - Minor
A. The Final Plan shall be drawn to scale of not less than one (1”) inch equals (50’)
feet, and shall contain the following:
1. Name and address of owner and applicant.
2. Scale and north arrow.
3. Location, dimensions, and acreage of parcel to be built upon.
4. Existing contours at intervals of not more than ten (10') feet and proposed
contours at intervals of not more than five (5') feet. The Board may waive
this requirement or require closer contour intervals depending on the nature
of the project.
5. The size, shape, and location of existing and proposed buildings.
6. The location and dimensions of existing and proposed parking areas,
loading and unloading facilities, and points of ingress and egress of vehicles
to and from the site to public streets.
7. Location of all existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way.
8. Location and dimension existing and proposed of pedestrian access ways.
9. Location and size of existing and proposed water and sewer mains,
culverts, and storm drains.
10. Location of existing and proposed outdoor lighting.
11. Location of natural features such as watercourses, marshes, rock
out-cropping, and stands of trees.
12. Landscape plan showing location and type of existing and proposed
plantings and screenings.
13. Location and size of existing and proposed signs and advertising features.
14. Any other provisions contained in the Town of Vassalboro's Subdivision
Regulations or Shoreland Zoning Ordinance, whenever applicable.
15. Due to the nature of the project, the Planning Board may require one or
more additional plan contents as specified in the “Site Plan Content –
Major’, Section VIII.
16. For projects located wholly or partially within the Wellhead Protection Area
of the East Vassalboro Water Company as mapped by the Maine Drinking
8
Water Program, a written statement obtained from the East Vassalboro
Water Company indicating that the proposed project will not negatively
impact their essential operations.
B. A narrative, with supporting data, shall be required to address the
environmental suitability of the chosen site to support the proposed
development. This may require the use of appropriate qualified
profession(s). This narrative shall address the standards as listed in
Section IX.
SECTION VIII. SITE PLAN CONTENT - Major:
A. The Final Plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one (1") inch
equals (50') feet, and shall contain the following:
1. Name and address of owner and applicant.
2. Scale and north arrow.
3. Location, dimensions, and acreage of parcel to be built upon.
4. Existing contours at intervals of not more than ten (10') feet and proposed
contours at intervals of not more than five (5') feet. The Board may
require closer contour intervals depending on the nature of the project.
5. The size, shape, and location of all existing and proposed buildings.
6. The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed parking areas,
loading and unloading facilities, and points of ingress and egress of
vehicles to and from the site to public streets. Parking Layout and Design
- Off-street parking must conform to the following standards:
(a) Parking areas with more than two (2) parking spaces must be
arranged so that it is not necessary for vehicles to back into the
street.
(b) All parking spaces, access drives, and impervious surfaces must be
located at least five (5) feet from any side or rear lot line, except
where standards for buffer yards require a greater distance. No
parking spaces or asphalt type surface shall be located within five (5)
feet of the front property line. Parking lots on adjoining lots may be
connected by access ways not exceeding twenty-four (24) feet in
width.
(c) In lots utilizing diagonal parking, the direction of proper traffic flow
must be indicated by signs, pavement markings or other permanent
indications and maintained as necessary.
(d) Parking areas for nonresidential uses must be designed to permit
each motor vehicle to proceed to and from the parking space
9
provided for it without requiring the moving of any other motor
vehicles.
(e) Provisions must be made to restrict the "overhang" of parked
vehicles when it might restrict traffic flow on adjacent through roads,
restrict pedestrian or bicycle movement on adjacent walkways, or
damage landscape materials.
7. Location of all existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way.
8. Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed pedestrian access
ways.
9. Location and size of existing and proposed water and sewer mains,
culverts, and storm drains.
10. Location of all existing and proposed outdoor lighting.
11. Location of natural features such as watercourses, marshes, rock
out-cropping, and stands of trees.
12. Landscape Plan showing location and type of all existing and proposed
plantings and screenings.
Landscaping must be provided as part of site design and may include
plant materials such as trees, shrubs, groundcovers, perennials, and
annuals, and other materials such as rocks, water, sculpture, art, walls,
fences, paving materials, and street furniture.
13. Location and size of all existing and proposed signs and advertising
features.
Freestanding commercial business signs should be placed at right angles
to the street so as to be viewed from both directions. Signs shall be no
larger than 4' X 8'.
In urban, built-up areas commercial business signs should be placed on
the building, unless visibility is impaired and a freestanding sign is the
best
option.
14. Any other provisions contained in the Town of Vassalboro's Subdivision
Regulations whenever applicable.
15. Any other requirements deemed necessary by the Planning Board based
on the nature of the proposed development.
16. For projects located wholly or partially within the Wellhead Protection Area of
the East Vassalboro Water Company as mapped by the Maine Drinking
10
Water Program, a written statement obtained from the East Vassalboro Water
Company indicating that the proposed project will not negatively impact their
essential operations.
B. A narrative, with supporting data, shall be required to address the
environmental suitability of the chosen site to support the proposed
development. This may require the use of appropriate qualified
professional(s). This narrative shall address the standards as listed in
Section X.
SECTION IX. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS – Minor
A. The Site Plan shall be approved, unless the Planning Board makes a written
finding that the applicant is not able to meet one or more of these standards. In
all instances, the burden of proof shall be on the applicant and such burden of
proof shall include the production of evidence necessary to complete the
application.
1. The provisions for vehicular loading and unloading and parking and for
vehicular and pedestrian circulation on the site and onto adjacent public
streets and ways will create no hazards to safety.
Internal Vehicular Circulation - The layout of the site must provide for the
safe movement of passenger, service and emergency vehicles through
the site.
2. The location or height of proposed structures and the proposed uses
thereof will not be detrimental to other public or private development in
the neighborhood.
3. The provision for on-site landscaping provides adequate protection to
neighboring properties from detrimental features of the development.
4. The proposed use will not impose undue burdens so as to exceed the
capacity of the sewers, sanitary and storm drains, water, solid waste, fire
protection, or other public facilities.
5. The Site Plan provides sufficient information to show that storm water
will be adequately drained from the site with no adverse impact on other
property or publicly-owned drainage systems.
6. Soil erosion and all other adverse impacts on the soil ground water and
surface water shall be prevented. Ground water shall not be adversely
impacted in quality or quantity.
7. The provisions for exterior lighting do not create hazards to motorists
traveling on adjacent public streets and are adequate for the safety of
11
occupants or users of the site and such provisions will not damage the
value and diminish the usability of adjacent properties.
8. An applicant for Site Plan approval has provided evidence of his
financial capability to complete the development as planned.
9. The proposed development will not create safety hazards and will provide
adequate access for emergency vehicles to the site, and to all buildings on
the site.
10. The proposed development will not adversely affect the use and
enjoyment of abutting property as a result of noise, vibrations, fumes,
odor, dust, glare, or other cause.
SECTION X. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS – Major
A. The Site Plan shall be approved, unless the Planning Board makes a written
finding that the applicant is not able to meet one or more of these standards. In
all instances, the burden of proof shall be on the applicant and such burden of
proof shall include the production of evidence necessary to complete the
application.
1. The provisions for vehicular loading and unloading and parking and for
vehicular and pedestrian circulation on the site and onto adjacent public
streets and ways will create no hazards to safety and will conform to the
following:
Access to the Site:
a. Any driveway or proposed street must be designed so as to provide
the minimum sight distance according to the Maine Department of
Transportation standards, to the maximum extent possible.
b. Points of access and egress must be located to avoid hazardous
conflicts with existing turning movements and traffic flows.
c. The grade of any proposed drive or street must be not more than +3%
for a minimum of two (2) car lengths, or forty feet, from the
intersection.
d. The intersection of any access/egress drive or proposed street must
function at a level which will allow for safe access into and out of the
project if at least one thousand (1,000) trips are generated.
e. Where a lot has frontage on two (2) or more streets, the primary
access to and egress from the lot must be provided from the street
where there is less potential for traffic congestion and for traffic and
pedestrians hazards. Access from other streets may be allowed if is
safe and does not promote shortcutting through the site.
f. Where it is necessary to safeguard against hazards to traffic and
pedestrians and/or to avoid traffic congestion, the applicant shall be
12
responsible for providing turning lanes, traffic directional islands, and
traffic controls within public streets.
g. Access ways must be designed and have sufficient capacity to avoid
queuing of entering vehicles on any public street.
h. The following criteria must be used to limit the number of driveways
serving a proposed project:
? No use that generates less than one hundred (100) vehicle trips
per day shall have more than one (1) two-way driveway onto a
single roadway. Such driveway must be no greater than thirty
(30) feet wide.
? No use which generates one hundred (100) or more vehicle trips
per day shall have more than two (2) points of entry from and two
(2) points of egress to a single roadway. The combined width of
all access ways must not exceed sixty (60) feet.
Access way Location and Spacing:
Access ways must meet the following standards:
a. Private entrance/exits must be located at least fifty (50) feet from the
closest un-signalized intersection and one hundred fifty (150) feet
from the closest signalized intersection, as measured from the point
of tangency for the corner to the point of tangency for the access
way. This requirement may be reduced if the shape of the site does
not allow conformance with this standard.
b. Private access ways in or out of a development must be separated
by a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet where possible.
Internal Vehicular Circulation
a. The layout of the site must provide for the safe movement of
passenger, service, and emergency vehicles through the site.
b. Nonresidential projects that will be served by delivery vehicles must
provide a clear route for such vehicles with appropriate geometric
design to allow turning and backing for a minimum of a vehicle with a
wheelbase of 40 feet.
c. Clear routes of access must be provided and maintained for
emergency vehicles to and around buildings and must be posted with
appropriate signage (fire lane - no parking).
d. The layout and design of parking areas must provide for safe and
convenient circulation of vehicles throughout the lot.
e. All roadways must be designed to harmonize with the topographic
and natural features of the site insofar as practical by minimizing
filling, grading, excavation, or other similar activities which result in
unstable soil conditions and soil erosion, by fitting the development
to the natural contour of the land and avoiding substantial areas of
excessive grade and tree removal, and by retaining existing
vegetation during construction. The road network must provide for
13
vehicular, pedestrian, and cyclist safety, all season emergency
access, snow storage, and delivery and collection services.
2. The location or height of proposed structures and the proposed uses
thereof will not be detrimental to other public or private development in
the neighborhood.
3. The provision for on-site landscaping provides adequate protection to
neighboring properties from detrimental features of the development.
The development must provide for the buffering of adjacent uses where
there is a transition from one type of use to another use and for screening
of mechanical equipment and service and storage areas.
Buffering must be designed to provide a year-round visual screen in order
to minimize adverse impacts. It may consist of fencing, evergreens,
berms, rocks, boulders, mounds, or a combination thereof.
A development must provide sufficient buffering when topographical or
other barriers do not provide reasonable screening and where there is a
need to:
? Shield neighboring properties from any adverse external effects of the
development, or
? Shield the development from the negative impacts of adjacent uses.
The width of the buffer may vary depending on the treatment of the area.
Within densely built-up areas, a buffer with dense plantings, fencing, or
changes in grade may be as little as five (5) feet in width. A buffer with
moderate levels of planting should be ten (10) feet to fifteen (15) feet in
width. In suburban and rural settings, the width of the vegetated buffer
should be increased to a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. Areas
adjacent
to service loading or storage areas should be screened by dense planting,
berms, fencing, or a combination thereof with a width of a minimum of five
(5) feet.
4. The proposed use will not impose undue burdens so as to exceed the
capacity of the sewers, sanitary and storm drains, water, solid waste, fire
protection, or other public facilities.
Storage of Materials - Exposed nonresidential storage areas, exposed
machinery, and areas used for the storage or collection of discarded
automobiles, auto parts, metals or other articles of salvage or refuse must
have sufficient setbacks and screening (such as a stockade fence or a
dense evergreen hedge) to provide a visual buffer sufficient to minimize
their impact on abutting residential uses and users of public streets.
14
All dumpsters or similar large collection receptacles for trash or other
wastes must be located on level surfaces, which are paved or graveled.
Where the dumpster or receptacle is located in a yard which abuts a
residential or institutional use or a public street, it must be screened by
fencing or landscaping.
Where a potential safety hazard to children is likely to arise, physical
screening sufficient to deter small children from entering the premises
must be provided and maintained in good condition.
5. The Site Plan provides sufficient information to show that storm water
will be adequately drained from the site with no adverse impact on other
property or publicly owned drainage systems.
6. Soil erosion and all other adverse impacts on the soil, ground water, and
surface water shall be prevented. Ground water shall not be adversely
impacted in quality or quantity. Adequate provisions must be made for the
collection and disposal of all storm water that runs off from proposed
streets, parking areas, roofs and other surfaces, through a storm water
drainage system and maintenance plan, which must not have adverse
impacts on abutting or downstream properties.
7. The provisions for exterior lighting do not create hazards to motorists
traveling on adjacent public streets and are adequate for the safety of
occupants or users of the site and such provisions will not damage the
value and diminish the usability of adjacent properties.
Exterior Lighting - The proposed development must have adequate
exterior lighting to provide for its safe use during nighttime hours, if such
use is contemplated.
Lighting may be used which serves security, safety and operational needs
but which does not directly or indirectly produce deleterious effects on
abutting properties or which would impair the vision of a vehicle operator
on adjacent roadways. Lighting fixtures must be shielded or hooded so
that the lighting elements are not exposed to normal view by motorists,
pedestrians, or from adjacent dwellings and so that they do not
unnecessarily light the night sky. Direct or indirect illumination must not
exceed 0.5 foot-candles at the lot line or upon abutting residential
properties.
All exterior lighting, except security lighting, must be turned off between
11 P.M. and 6 A.M. unless located on the site of a commercial or
industrial
use that is open for business during that period.
Wiring to light poles and standards must be underground.
15
8. An applicant for Site Plan approval has provided evidence of his
financial capability to complete the development as planned. This could
include a letter of support from an accredited financial institution or some
other means of documenting financial solvency.
9. The proposed development will not create safety hazards and will provide
adequate access for emergency vehicles to the site, and to all buildings
on
the site.
10. The proposed development will not adversely affect the use and
enjoyment of abutting property as a result of noise, vibrations, fumes,
odor, dust, glare, or other cause.
The maximum permissible sound pressure level of any continuous,
regular or frequent or intermittent source of sound produced by any
activity on the site shall be limited by the time period and by the abutting
land use as
listed below. Sound levels shall be measured at least four (4) feet above
ground at the property boundary of the source.
Sound Pressure Level Limits Using the Sound Equivalent Level of One
Minute (leq 1) (Measured in dB(a)Scale)
Abutting Use 7 am- 10pm 10pm - 7am
Residential 55 45
Residential in a commercial area 65 55
Public, semipublic and institutional 60 55
Vacant or rural 60 55
Commercial 65 55
Industrial 70 60
Noise shall be measured by a meter set on the A-weighted
response scale, fast response. The meter shall meet the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI S1 4-1961)
'American Standards Specification for General Purpose
Sound Level Meters.'
SECTION XI. PERMITS
A. Permits required: After the effective date of this ordinance, no person
shall engage in any use or construct, alter, or substantially enlarge any
structure to which this Ordinance applies without first obtaining a permit.
Following the issuance of a permit, if no substantial start is made in
construction (completion of the exterior shell) or in the use of the property within
one year of the date of permit, the permit shall lapse and become void.
16
The Planning Board may grant up to two (2), six (6) month extensions to the
periods if the approved plan conforms to the ordinance in effect at the time the
extension is requested and all federal, state and local approvals and permits
are current. The permitee’s request for an extension must be received at least
30 days prior to the expiration of the permit and include explanations for the
request.
B. Permits expire for use or structures that are discontinued for more than
90 days, unless the permittee can demonstrate that the discontinuance was
for factors beyond his/her control.
C. Permits expire for seasonal uses or structures that are discontinued for
more than 1 (one) year, unless the permittee can demonstrate that the
discontinuance was for factors beyond his/her control.
D. Permits shall be issued to the applicant of record. The permit(s) are not
transferable to a new owner.
SECTION XII. GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. The Planning Board may modify or waive any of the above application
requirements or Performance Standards when the Planning Board determines
that because of the special circumstances of the site or the nature of the
project, such application requirements or standards would not be applicable
or would be an unnecessary burden upon the applicant and when such waivers
would not adversely affect the abutting land owners and the general health,
safety, welfare, and environment of the Town.
B. The Planning Board shall require proof of ownership of the site or
written authority from the owner verifying the applicant's right, title, and
interest to develop the site.
C. The Planning Board may require the filing of a Performance Bond or the
execution of a conditional agreement with the municipality by the applicant.
D. All construction performed under the authorization of a building permit
or certificate of occupancy issued for development within the scope of this
Ordinance shall be in conformance with the approved Site Plan.
SECTION XIII. ADMINISTRATION
A. The Planning Board of the Town of Vassalboro shall administer this
Ordinance.
17
B. No building permit or plumbing permit shall be issued by the Municipal
Officers or Code Enforcement 0fficer for any use or development within
the scope of this Ordinance until a Site Plan has been reviewed and
favorably acted upon by the Planning Board.
SECTION XIV. ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
An aggrieved party may appeal any decision of the Board or the Code
Enforcement Officer under this Ordinance to the Superior Court within thirty
(30) days from the date of the written notice of such decision.
SECTION XV. VIOLATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND FINES
A. Code Enforcement Officer (CEO): It shall be the duty of the Code
Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. If the CEO
shall find that any provision of this Ordinance is being violated, he shall
notify, in writing, the person(s) responsible for such violation. The notification
will indicate the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to
correct it, including discontinuance of illegal use of land, building, structure, or
work being done, removal of illegal building or structure, and abatement of
nuisance conditions. A copy of such notice shall be maintained as a
permanent record.
B. Legal Action: When the above action does not result in the correction or
abatement of the violation or nuisance condition, the Municipal Officers,
upon notice from the CEO, are hereby authorized and directed to institute
any and all actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, including
seeking injunction of violation and the imposition of a fine that may be
appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance in the
name of the municipality.
C. Fine: Any person who continues to violate any provision of this
Ordinance, after receiving notice of such violation, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor subject to a fine of up to $100 for each violation. Each day
such a violation is continued is a separate offense.
SECTION XVI. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY AND CONFLICT WITH
OTHER ORDINANCES.
A. Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court to
be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of
the Ordinance.
18
B. Conflict with Other Ordinance: Whenever the requirements of this
Ordinance are inconsistent with the requirements of any other ordinance,
code, or statute, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.
SECTION XVII. AMENDMENTS
This Ordinance may be amended by a majority vote of the Town meeting.
Amendments may be initiated by a majority vote of the Planning Board, or by
request of the Board of Selectmen to the Planning Board, or on petition of
ten (10%) percent of the votes cast in the last gubernatorial election in
the Town. The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing on any proposed
amendment.
SECTION XVIII. EFFECTIVE DATE
The effective date of this revised ordinance is June 11, 2012. The first effective date
was June 7, 1986. Past amendments have been accepted in 1987, 1989, 1992, and
2003.
SECTION XIX. DEFINITIONS
A. Accessory Use or Structure: A subordinate use of a building, other structure, or
land, or a subordinate building or other structure:
1. Whose use is customary in connection with the principal building, other
structure or use of land; and
2. Whose use is clearly incidental to the use of the principal building,
other structure, or use of land; and
3. Which is located on the same lot with the principal building, other
structure, or use of land, or on a lot adjacent to such a lot if in the same
ownership.
4. Is part of the same establishment.
B. Agricultural Land Management Practices: Those devices and procedures
utilized in the cultivation of land in order to further crop and livestock production
and conservation of related soil and water resources.
C. Alteration: Structural changes, rearrangement, change of location, or addition to
a building or structure other than repairs and modification in building equipment
involving more than twenty-five (25%) percent increase in the overall floor
space, or bulk of the building, or structure at any time or in total since the
effective date of this Ordinance.
D. Building: Any structure having a roof or partial roof supported by columns or
walls used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods, or property
of any kind. A building shall include a multiple family dwelling.
19
E. Commercial: Connected with the buying or selling of goods or services or
the provision of facilities for a fee.
F. Developed area: any site where the existing features (natural features i.e.,
topography, soils, vegetation, water bodies or resources, floodplains, unique
natural features) are modified in some way (i.e., building structures or changing
the use of buildings, locating public utilities or water supplies, sewage disposal
facilities, locations of curb cuts for driveways) shall constitute a developed area.
G. Discontinuance: Cessation of use.
H. Dwelling Unit: A room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively
for use as living quarters for one family including provisions for living, cooking,
and eating.
I. Forest Management Activities: Includes timber cruising and other forest
resource evaluation activities, pesticide application, timber stand improvement,
pruning, timber harvesting and other forest harvesting, regeneration of forest
stands, and other similar associated activities, but not the construction, creation
of maintenance of land management roads.
J. Home Occupations: Home occupation means an occupation conducted within a
dwelling unit by a resident thereof which is customarily incidental and
secondary to the residential use of the unit which such use does not occupy
more than fifty (50%) percent of the dwelling unit devoted to living quarters,
except that the area devoted to living quarters shall not be reduced below six
hundred (600) square feet by this subsection; which requires no display of
goods, no stock in trade, no commodity sold on the premises; not more than
two (2) non-residents of the dwelling unit employed, and which does not
interfere with the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. The office of a doctor
or dentist shall be considered as a home occupation provided that it conforms
to the restrictions set forth above.
K. Industrial: Connected with the assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing,
packaging or processing of goods or the extraction of minerals.
L. Institutional: A building devoted to some public, governmental, educational,
charitable, medical, or similar purpose.
M. Multiple Family Dwelling: A building consisting of three (3) or more attached
dwelling units designed and intended for long-term occupancy, rather than
temporary occupancy as with a hotel or motel.
N. Persons: Means any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation,
municipal, or other local government entity, quasi-municipal entity, state
agency, educational, or charitable organization or institution or other legal
entity.
20
O. Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle or vehicular attachment for temporary
sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons which is not a dwelling
and which may include a pick-up camper, travel trailer, tent trailer, or
motor home.
P. Retail: Connected with the sale of goods to the ultimate consumer for
direct use and consumption and not for trade.
Q. Seasonal: Less than or equal to seven (7) months of use.
R. Structure: Anything constructed, erected, or placed in or on the ground,
the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something
on the ground, including but not limited to buildings, mobile homes, recreational
vehicles, piers, floats, recreation areas, and parking lots. Boundary walls and
fences are not included under this regulation.
S. Substantial Enlargement: An expansion of the land area of the development
site, volume or square footage of buildings, addition of fixtures or equipment
involving more than twenty-five percent (25%) increase in floor space, or the
volume of activity by more than twenty-five (25%) percent, at any one time or in
total since the effective date of this Ordinance.
T. Substantial Start: Completion of thirty (30%) percent of a permitted
structure or use measured as a percentage of the estimated total cost. Exterior
walls and roof must be completely closed in and finish applied.
21
TOWN OF VASSALBORO
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
June 10, 2014
ENACTED: ______________________________________
Date
EFFECTIVE: ______________________________________
Date
CERTIFIED BY: ________________________________
Name
________________________________
Title
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1 – PURPOSES AND APPLICABILITY...........................................................................................4
1.1 Purposes......................................................................................................................................................4
1.2 Applicability...............................................................................................................................................4
SECTION 2 – AUTHORITY, ADMINISTRATION AND APPEALS..............................................................6
2.1 Authority.....................................................................................................................................................6
2.2 Amendments to this Ordinance...................................................................................................................6
2.3 Interpretation, Conflict and Severability.....................................................................................................6
2.4 Effective Date and Repeal of Prior Ordinances...........................................................................................6
2.5 Violations and Enforcement........................................................................................................................7
2.6 Appeals.......................................................................................................................................................7
SECTION 3 – DEFINITIONS...............................................................................................................................8
3.1 Construction of Language...........................................................................................................................8
3.2 Definition of Terms.....................................................................................................................................8
SECTION 4 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES AND FEES....................................................................12
4.1 Agenda......................................................................................................................................................12
4.2 Establishment of File for Subdivision.......................................................................................................12
4.3 Joint Meetings with Adjacent Municipalities............................................................................................12
4.4 Application Fee.........................................................................................................................................12
4.5 Escrow Account for Review by Outside Experts.......................................................................................12
4.6 Transfer of Approved Subdivision Permits...............................................................................................12
SECTION 5 – APPLICATION REVIEW PROCESS.......................................................................................13
5.1 Classification as Minor or Major Subdivision...........................................................................................13
5.2 Minor Subdivisions...................................................................................................................................13
5.3 Major Subdivisions...................................................................................................................................15
5.4 Final Approval and Filing for Major and Minor Subdivisions..................................................................18
SECTION 6 - MINOR SUBDIVISION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS....................................................19
6.1 Sketch Plan Submissions...........................................................................................................................19
6.2 Final Plan Submissions.............................................................................................................................19
SECTION 7 – MAJOR SUBDIVISION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS...................................................23
7.1 Sketch Plan Submissions...........................................................................................................................23
7.2 Preliminary Plan Submissions...................................................................................................................23
7.3 Final Plan Submissions.............................................................................................................................27
SECTION 8 - REVIEW CRITERIA AND STANDARDS................................................................................29
8.1 Sufficient Water Supply...........................................................................................................................29
8.2 Impact on Groundwater Quality and Quantity...........................................................................................30
8.3 Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Impact on Water Bodies........................................................................31
8.4 Traffic Conditions.....................................................................................................................................31
8.5 Sewage Disposal.......................................................................................................................................32
8.6 Solid Waste...............................................................................................................................................33
8.7 Aesthetic, Cultural and Natural Values.....................................................................................................33
8.8 Farmland...................................................................................................................................................34
8.9 Conformance with Local Ordinances and Plans........................................................................................35
8.10 Financial and Technical Capacity..............................................................................................................35
8.11 Floodplain Management............................................................................................................................35
8.12 Freshwater Wetlands, Rivers, Streams and Brooks...................................................................................36
8.13 Stormwater Management..........................................................................................................................36
8.14 Lake Phosphorus Concentration................................................................................................................36
8.15 Spaghetti Lots Prohibited (Shoreland Zoning Areas)................................................................................37
8.16 Impact on Adjoining Municipality............................................................................................................37
8.17 Lands Subject to Liquidation Harvesting..................................................................................................37
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 2
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
8.18 Pollution....................................................................................................................................................38
SECTION 9 - WAIVERS.....................................................................................................................................39
9.1 Waivers of Certain Submission Requirements..........................................................................................39
9.2 Waivers of Certain Improvements.............................................................................................................39
9.3 Requirements for Waivers.........................................................................................................................39
SECTION 10 - REVISIONS TO APPROVED PLANS.....................................................................................39
10.1 Procedure and Scope of Review................................................................................................................39
10.2 Submissions..............................................................................................................................................39
SECTION 11 - PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES AND INSPECTION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
...............................................................................................................................................................................40
11.1 Performance Guarantees............................................................................................................................40
11.2 Types of Guarantees..................................................................................................................................40
11.3 Conditions and Contents of the Guarantee................................................................................................40
11.4 Release of Guarantee.................................................................................................................................41
11.5 Conditional Agreement.............................................................................................................................41
11.6 Inspection of Required Improvements.......................................................................................................41
SECTION 12 - APPENDIX.................................................................................................................................42
A. 30-A MRSA, §4401 (Definitions)
B. 30-A MRSA §4403 (Municipal Review and Regulation)
C. 30-A MRSA, §4404 (Review Criteria)
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 3
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION 1 – PURPOSES AND APPLICABILITY
1.1 Purposes
The purposes of this Ordinance are as follows: to assure the comfort, convenience, safety, health, and welfare of the
people of the Town of Vassalboro, Maine; to protect the environment; to promote the development of an
economically sound and stable community; to assure that a sufficient level of services and facilities is available to
the residents of new subdivisions and that lots in subdivisions are capable of supporting the proposed uses and
structures; to minimize potential negative impacts from new subdivisions on neighboring properties and on the
Town; to provide for the expeditious and efficient process for the review of proposed subdivisions; and to comply
with 30-A, MRSA, §4403 (Municipal Review and Regulation) and §4404 (Review Criteria).
1.2 Applicability
1.2.1 The provisions of this Ordinance shall pertain to all land proposed for subdivision as defined in Title 30-A,
MRSA, §4401(4), as amended. Also included are all mobile/manufactured home parks, condominiums, and
apartment buildings or complexes proposed for subdivision into 3 or more dwelling units.
1.2.2 Any subdivision is a division of a tract or parcel of land into 3 or more lots within any 5-year period that
begins after September 23, 1971. The definition applies whether the division is accomplished by sale, lease,
development, buildings, or otherwise. The term “subdivision” also includes the division of a new structure
or structures on a tract of land into 3 or more dwelling units within a 5-year period, the construction or
placement of 3 or more dwelling units on a single tract or parcel of land, and the division of an existing
structure, structures previously used for commercial or industrial use into 3 or more dwelling units within a
5-year period.
1.2.3 In determining whether a tract or parcel of land is divided into 3 or more lots, the first dividing of such tract
or parcel shall be considered to create the first 2 lots and the next dividing of either of the first 2 lots, by
whomever accomplished, unless otherwise exempted herein shall be considered to create a 3rd lot, unless:
A. Both dividings are accomplished by a subdivider who has retained one of the lots for the subdivider’s use
as a single-family residence that has been the subdivider’s principal residence for a period of at least 5
years immediately preceding the 2nd division; or the division of the tract or parcel is otherwise exempted
under this section (Section 1.2 Applicability).
B. A lot of 40 acres or more shall not be counted as a separate lot, except where the lot or parcel from which it
was divided is located entirely or partially within any shoreland area as defined in 38 MRSA, §435, or the
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
1.2.4 A division accomplished by devise, condemnation, order of court, gift to a person related to the donor by
blood, marriage or adoption or a gift to a municipality (if the municipality accepts the gift), or by transfer of
any interest in land to the owner of land abutting that land, does not create a lot or lots for the purposes of
this Ordinance, unless the intent of the transferor in any transfer or gift is to avoid the objectives of this
Ordinance. If the real estate exempt under this paragraph by a gift to a person related to the donor by blood,
marriage or adoption is transferred within 5 years to another person not related to the donor of the exempt
real estate by blood, marriage or adoption, then that exempt division creates a lot or lots for the purposes of
this definition. A grant of bona fide security interest in an entire lot that has been exempted from the
definition under this paragraph, or subsequent transfer of that entire lot by the original holder of the
security interest or that person’s successor in interest, does not create a lot for the purposes of this
definition, unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of this Ordinance.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 4
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
1.2.5 In determining the number of dwelling units in a structure, the provisions regarding the determination of
the number of lots shall apply, including exemptions from the definition of a subdivision of land.
1.2.6 Leased dwelling units meeting any part of the definition of subdivision above are subject to the
requirements of this Ordinance.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 5
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION 2 – AUTHORITY, ADMINISTRATION AND APPEALS
2.1 Authority
2.1.1 This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Home Rule Powers as provided for in Article VIII-A Part 2, Section
1 of the Maine Constitution and 30-A MRSA, §3001. These standards have been prepared in accordance
with the provisions of 30-A MRSA, §4403.
2.1.2 This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as “Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance."
2.1.3 The Planning Board of the Town of Vassalboro, hereinafter called the “Board”, shall administer this
Ordinance.
2.2 Amendments to this Ordinance
2.2.1 An amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by:
A. The Planning Board provided a majority of the Board has so voted;
B. Request by the Board of Selectmen; or
C. Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least 10% of the number of votes cast in the Town at the
last gubernatorial election.
2.2.2 The Board shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment. Notification of the hearing shall be
posted and advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town at least 7 days prior to the hearing.
2.2.3 An amendment to this Ordinance may be adopted by a majority vote of the Town Meeting.
2.3 Interpretation, Conflict and Severability
2.3.1 The provisions of this Ordinance shall be construed as minimum requirements. More stringent provisions
may be required if it is demonstrated that such are necessary to promote the public health, safety and
welfare. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this Ordinance are either more restrictive or
less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this Ordinance or any other
applicable law, ordinance, or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose
higher standards or requirements shall govern.
2.3.2 The provisions of this Ordinance are separable. If any portion of this Ordinance is declared by the courts to
be invalid, the decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance.
2.3.3 This Ordinance shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other
applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw, permit, or provision of law. Where this Ordinance imposes a
greater restriction upon the use of land or structures, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control.
2.4 Effective Date and Repeal of Prior Ordinances
This Ordinance becomes effective on the date it is adopted by Town Meeting. This Ordinance repeals and replaces
any municipal ordinance previously enacted to control the development of subdivisions in the Town of Vassalboro.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 6
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
2.5 Violations and Enforcement
2.5.1 No plan of a division of land within the Town which would constitute a subdivision shall be recorded in the
Registry of Deeds until a final plan has been approved by the Board in accordance with this Ordinance.
2.5.2 A person shall not convey, offer or agree to convey any land in a subdivision which has not been approved
by the Board and recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
2.5.3 A person shall not sell, lease or otherwise convey any land in an approved subdivision which is not shown
on the plan as a separate lot.
2.5.4 No public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility company of any kind shall serve any lot in a
subdivision for which a final plan has not been approved by the Board.
2.5.5 Development of a subdivision without Board approval shall be a violation of law. Development includes
grading or construction of roads, grading of land or lots, or construction of buildings which require a plan
approved as provided in this Ordinance and recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
2.5.6 Default. Any developer who (1) fails to perform any required improvements in accordance with any
timetable established at the time of final plan approval, (2) completes required improvements in a manner
which, although timely, is not acceptable to the Town, or (3) maintains a situation that is hazardous to the
public health and safety, shall be deemed in default. In addition, a developer shall be deemed in default if
any required improvement is not completed in accordance with the plan and all applicable regulations
before the expiration date of any performance guarantees tendered by the developer to the Town with
respect to required improvements. The Town will not be required to initiate action to exercise its rights
under any financial performance guarantee in order to declare a developer in default. For purposes of
interpreting this paragraph, “hazards to public health and safety” shall include, but not be limited to,
inadequate drainage, stormwater management, or erosion and sedimentation control measures.
2.5.7 No lot in a subdivision may be sold, leased, or otherwise conveyed before the street upon which the lot
fronts is completed in accordance with final plan approval and this Ordinance up to and including the entire
frontage of the lot. No unit in a multifamily development shall be occupied before the street upon which the
unit is accessed is completed in accordance with final plan approval and this Ordinance.
2.5.8 Violations of the above provisions of this section are a nuisance and shall be punished in accordance with
the provisions of 30-A MRSA, §4452.
2.6 Appeals
An aggrieved party may appeal any decision of the Board under this Ordinance to the Superior Court within 30
days from the date the Board issues a written notice of its decision.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 7
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION 3 – DEFINITIONS
3.1 Construction of Language
In the interpretation and enforcement of this Ordinance, all words other than those specifically defined in the
Ordinance shall have the meaning implied by their context in the Ordinance or their ordinarily accepted meaning.
The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and plural numbers include the
singular.
The words "shall," "will" and "must" are mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
The word "lot" includes the word "parcel".
The word "structure" includes the word "building".
The word "Town" means the Town of Vassalboro, Maine.
The term “Board” means the Vassalboro Planning Board, unless a different board is specifically mentioned.
3.2 Definition of Terms
In this Ordinance the following terms shall have the following meanings:
Abutter: The owner of any property with one or more common boundaries, or across the street or stream from, the
property involved in an application or appeal.
Agriculture: The production, keeping or maintenance for sale or lease, of plants and/or animals including but not
limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry
products; livestock; fruits and vegetables; and ornamental and greenhouse products. “Agriculture” does not include
forest management and timber harvesting activities.
Agricultural Products: Those plants and animals and their products that are useful to humans and includes, but is
not limited to, forages and sod crops, grains and feed crops, dairy and dairy products, poultry and poultry products,
bees and bees' products, livestock and livestock products and fruits, berries, vegetables, flowers, seeds, grasses and
other similar products, or any other plant, animal or plant or animal products that supply humans with food, feed,
fiber or fur. "Agricultural products" does not include trees grown and harvested for forest products.
Applicant: The person or persons applying for subdivision approval under this Ordinance.
Basement: Any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of 6 feet or more and having more than 50% of
its volume below the existing ground level.
Buffer Area: A part of a property or an entire property, which is not built upon and is specifically intended to
separate and thus minimize the effects of a land use activity (e.g. noise, dust, visibility, glare, etc.) on adjacent
properties or on sensitive natural resources.
Certified Soil Scientist: As registered, licensed and/or certified by the appropriate licensing and registration boards
in the State of Maine.
Commercial: The use of lands, buildings, or structures, the intent and result of which activity is the production of
income from the buying and selling of goods and/or services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings and/or
dwelling units.
Common Open Space: Land within or related to a subdivision, not individually owned or within an individual lot,
which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment by the residents of the development or general
public. It may include complementary structures and improvements, typically used for maintenance and operation
of the open space, such as for outdoor recreation.
Complete Application: An application shall be considered complete upon submission of the required fee and all
information required by this Ordinance unless waived, after the applicant's written request, by a vote by the Board.
The Board shall issue a written statement to the applicant upon its determination that an application is complete.
Complete Substantial Construction: The completion of a portion of the improvements which represents no less
than 30% of the costs of the proposed improvements within a subdivision. If the subdivision is to consist of
individual lots to be sold or leased by the subdivider, the cost of construction of buildings on those lots shall not be
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 8
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
included. If the subdivision is a multifamily development, or if the applicant proposes to construct the buildings
within the subdivision, the cost of building construction shall be included in the total costs of proposed
improvements.
Conservation Easement: A nonpossessory interest in real property imposing limitations or affirmative obligations,
the purposes of which include retaining or protecting natural, scenic or open space values of real property; assuring
its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational or open space use; protecting natural resources; or maintaining
air or water quality.
Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
Development: A change in land use involving alteration of the land, water or vegetation, or the addition or
alteration of structures or other man-made construction.
Direct Watershed of a Great Pond: That portion of the watershed which drains directly to the great pond without
first passing through an upstream great pond. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the watershed boundaries shall be
as depicted in the drainage divide data layer provided by the Maine Office of GIS. Due to the scale of the map there
may be small inaccuracies in the delineation of the watershed boundary. Where there is a dispute as to exact
location of a watershed boundary, the Board or its designee and the applicant shall conduct an on-site investigation
to determine where the drainage divide lies. If the Board and the applicant cannot agree on the location of the
drainage divide based on the on-site investigation, the burden of proof shall lie with the applicant to provide the
Board with information from a professional land surveyor showing where the drainage divide lies.
Drinking Water Standards: Thresholds for contaminants set by the Maine Department of Health and Human
Services. Standards have been established for contaminants which pose a health threat (“primary drinking water
standards”) and those which pose an aesthetic concern (“secondary drinking water standards”).
Driveway: A vehicular accessway serving two lots or less.
Dwelling Unit: A room or suite of rooms used as a habitation which is separate from other such rooms or suites of
rooms, and which contains independent living, cooking, and sleeping facilities; includes single family houses, and
the units in a duplex, apartment house, multifamily dwellings, and residential condominiums and time-share units.
Engineered Subsurface Waste Water Disposal System: A subsurface waste water disposal system designed,
installed, and operated as a single unit to treat and dispose of 2,000 gallons of waste water per day or more; or any
system designed to be capable of treating waste water with higher BODs and total suspended solids concentrations
than domestic waste water. Any engineered system must be approved by the Maine Department of Health and
Human Services.
Farmland: A parcel consisting of 5 or more acres of land that is either: (a) classified as prime farmland, unique
farmland or farmland of statewide or local importance by the Natural Resources Conservation Service within the
United States Department of Agriculture; or (b) used for the production of agricultural products as defined in 7
MRSA, §152, sub-§2.
Final Plan: The final drawings on which the applicant’s plan of subdivision are presented to the Board for approval
and which, if approved, must be recorded at the Registry of Deeds.
Flood, 100-Year: The highest level of flood that, on the average, has a 1% chance of occurring in any given year.
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more than one foot in
height.
Great Pond: Any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess of 10 acres, and any
inland body of water artificially formed or increased which has surface area in excess of 30 acres, except for the
purposes of this Ordinance, where the artificially formed or increased inland body of water is completely
surrounded by land held by a single owner.
Groundwater: The water that is found beneath the earth's surface recharged from rain infiltration. Groundwater
moves slowly, finding its way from pore space to pore space in the subsurface soils and rocks; but it may surface as
seeps and springs when intercepted by an excavation or slope cut.
High Intensity Soil Survey: A map prepared by a certified soil scientist, identifying the soil types down to 1/8 acre
or less at a scale equivalent to the subdivision plan submitted. The soils shall be identified in accordance with the
National Cooperative Soil Survey. The map shall show the location of all test pits used to identify the soils, and
shall be accompanied by a log of each sample point identifying the textural classification and the depth to a limiting
factor such as seasonal high water table or bedrock at that location.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 9
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
Level of Service: A description of the operating conditions a driver will experience while traveling on a particular
street or highway calculated in accordance with the provisions of the Highway Capacity Manual, most recent
edition, published by the National Academy of Sciences, Transportation Research Board. There are 6 levels of
service ranging from Level of Service A with free traffic flow and no delays, to Level of Service F with forced flow
and congestion resulting in complete failure of the roadway.
Liquidation Harvesting: The purchase of timberland followed by a harvest that removes most or all commercial
value in standing timber, without regard for long-term forest management principles, and the subsequent sale or
attempted resale of the harvested land within 5 years.
Medium Intensity Soil Survey: The Soil Survey of Kennebec County, Maine, published by the USDA, Soil
Conservation Service, is recognized as a medium intensity soil survey.
Multifamily Development: A subdivision that contains 3 or more dwelling units on land in common ownership,
such as apartment buildings, condominiums or mobile home parks.
New Structure or Structures: Includes any structure for which construction began on or after September 23,
1988. The area included in the expansion of an existing structure is deemed to be a new structure.
Person: Includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as an
individual.
Preliminary Plan: The preliminary drawings indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to
the Planning Board for its consideration.
Principal Structure: Any building or structure in which the main use of the premises takes place.
Professional Engineer: A professional engineer registered in the State of Maine.
Professional Land Surveyor: As registered, licensed and/or certified by the appropriate licensing and registration
boards in the State of Maine.
Public Improvements: The term shall include all roads; fire protection structures and ponds; any structure or land
proposed to be dedicated to the Town; any land or structure which is offered as an easement to the Town; and, all
stormwater drainage structures designed to allow water to flow outside the property or the subdivision.
Public Water System: There are 2 basic types: (a) a “community water system” which serves at least 15 service
connections used by year-round residents or regularly serves at least 25 year-round residents; and (b) a “noncommunity
water system” that is not a “community water system”, but that serves at least 25 of the same persons
for 6 months or more per year and may include, but is not limited to, a school, factory, industrial park or office
building, or a water system that serves at least 25 persons, but not necessarily the same persons, for at least 60 days
per year and may include, but is not limited to, a highway rest stop, seasonal restaurant, seasonal motel, golf course,
park or campground. A bottled water company is a non-community water system.
Recording Plan: An original of the final plan, suitable for recording at the Registry of Deeds and which needs to
show only information relevant to the transfer of an interest in the property, and which does not show other
information presented on the plan such as sewer and water line locations and sizes, culverts, and building lines.
River, Stream or Brook: A channel between defined banks that is created by the action of surface water and has
two or more of the following characteristics:
A. It is depicted as a solid or broken blue line on the most recent edition of the U.S. Geological Survey 7.5-
minute series topographic map or, if that is not available, a 15-minute series topographic map.
B. It contains or is known to contain flowing water continuously for a period of at least 6 months of the year in
most years.
C. The channel bed is primarily composed of mineral material such as sand and gravel, parent material or
bedrock that has been deposited or scoured by water.
D. The channel contains aquatic animals such as fish, aquatic insects or mollusks in the water or, if no surface
water is present, within the stream bed.
E. The channel contains aquatic vegetation and is essentially devoid of upland vegetation.
"River, stream or brook" does not mean a ditch or other drainage way constructed, or constructed and
maintained, solely for the purpose of draining stormwater or a grassy swale.
Runoff: The part of precipitation excluding evaporation and infiltration that becomes a discharge of stormwater.
Sketch Plan: Conceptual maps, renderings, and supportive data describing the project proposed by the applicant
for initial review prior to submitting an application for subdivision approval.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 10
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
Street: Public and private ways such as alleys, avenues, highways, roads, and other rights-of-way, as well as areas
on subdivision plans designated as rights-of-way for vehicular access other than driveways.
Stormwater: The part of precipitation, including runoff from rain or melting ice and snow that flows across the
ground surface or in drainage ways.
Subdivision: The term shall be defined as in 30-A, MRSA, §4401, sub-§4, with the modifications as described in
Section 1.2 Applicability of this Ordinance.
Subdivision, Major: Any subdivision containing more than 4 lots or dwelling units, or any subdivision containing
a proposed street.
Subdivision, Minor: Any subdivision containing 4 lots or dwelling units or fewer, and in which no street is
proposed to be constructed.
Substantial Construction: (See “Complete Substantial Construction”)
Tract or Parcel of Land: All contiguous land in the same ownership, except that lands located on opposite sides of
a public or private road are considered each a separate tract or parcel of land unless the road was established by the
owner of land on both sides of the road after September 22, 1971.
Vegetation: All live trees, shrubs, and other plants.
Vernal pool: An area exhibiting pooling, vegetation and even small creatures for a limited time of year, usually
during the spring flooding, and drying up over the course of the summer.
Wetland: Areas which are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and for a duration
sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soils; and which are not part of a great pond, river, stream, or brook.
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not conform to the above
criteria. This also includes forested wetlands.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 11
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION 4 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES AND FEES
4.1 Agenda
The Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) in consultation with the Board Chair shall prepare a written agenda for each
regularly scheduled meeting. The agenda shall be prepared no less than one week prior to the meeting, distributed
to Board members and any applicants appearing on the agenda, and posted at the Town Office. Applicants shall
request to be placed on the Board's agenda at least 14 days in advance of a regularly scheduled meeting by
contacting the CEO. Applicants who attend a meeting but who are not on the Board’s agenda may be heard only
after all agenda items have been completed. However, the Board shall take no action on any application not
appearing on the written agenda.
4.2 Establishment of File for Subdivision
The CEO shall establish a file for every proposed subdivision. The file shall be a permanent record of all matters
concerning the subdivision, including all correspondence, submissions, proceedings and minutes.
4.3 Joint Meetings with Adjacent Municipalities
If any portion of a subdivision crosses town boundaries, all meetings and hearings to review a subdivision
application, including an application for an amendment or revision to a subdivision, must be held jointly by the
reviewing authorities from each town. The reviewing authorities in each town, upon written agreement, may waive
the requirement under this subsection for any joint meeting or hearing.
4.4 Application Fee
An application for subdivision approval shall include payment of a non-refundable permit fee as set by the Board of
Selectmen. The application shall not be considered complete until this fee is paid.
4.5 Escrow Account for Review by Outside Experts 1
4. 5.1 The Board may require that the applicant deposit with the Town, funds sufficient to reimburse the Town for
all reasonable costs for hiring independent consulting services to review engineering and other technical
submissions associated with the application and to ensure compliance with this Ordinance.
4. 5.2 If the Board requires an escrow account, the applicant shall pay an escrow fee of $250 per lot or dwelling
unit, to be deposited in a special escrow account designated for that subdivision application. If the balance
in this special account is drawn down by 75%, the Board shall notify the applicant, and require that the
balance be brought back up to the original deposit amount. The Board shall continue to notify the applicant
and require a deposit as necessary whenever the balance of the escrow account is drawn down by 75% of
the original deposit.
4.5.3 In the event that the amount held in escrow is more than the amount of actual invoicing at the conclusion of
the project, the remaining balance shall be promptly refunded to the applicant.
4.6 Transfer of Approved Subdivision Permits
When an approved subdivision permit is transferred to a new owner or lessee of the property for which the permit
was granted, the new owner or lessee must appear before the Board with a signed statement that he/she will adhere
to all of the conditions and specifications of the approved final plan. This provision shall not supersede the
expiration of approved subdivision permits (Section 5.4.6 Subdivision Approval Expiration).
1 Also see Section 11.6.1 regarding inspections of required improvements.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 12
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION 5 – APPLICATION REVIEW PROCESS
5.1 Classification as Minor or Major Subdivision
5.1.1 Classification. The CEO shall classify each project as a major or minor subdivision.
A. A Minor Subdivision is any subdivision containing 4 lots or dwelling units or fewer, and in which no street
is proposed to be constructed.
B. A Major Subdivision is defined as any subdivision containing more than 4 lots or dwelling units, or any
subdivision containing a proposed street.
5.1.2 Upon receipt of the formal application (preliminary plan or final plan) the CEO shall determine if the
classification is still correct and may reclassify the application if the scope has changed.
5.2 Minor Subdivisions
5.2.1 Two-Step Process. Minor subdivisions require a two-step application process consisting of: (1) sketch
plan review by the CEO; and (2) final plan review by the Planning Board. Applicants are also encouraged
to consult with the CEO prior to the submission of a sketch plan to become familiar with the review
procedures, submission requirements, and approval criteria.
5.2.2 Sketch Plan Review Process
A. Purpose. The purpose of sketch plan review is for the applicant to present general information regarding
the proposed subdivision to the CEO, and to receive the CEO’s comments prior to undertaking the costs
associated with the development of the final plan. Sketch plan review shall not be considered the initiation
of the review process for the purposes of bringing the plan under protection of 1 MRSA, §302.
B. Sketch Plan Review Meeting with the CEO
1. Appointment Required. The applicant shall make an appointment with the CEO for the sketch plan
review meeting.
2. Meeting Procedure
a. The applicant shall present the sketch plan application (See Section 6.1 Sketch Plan Submissions)
and make a verbal presentation regarding the site and the proposed subdivision.
b. The CEO may ask questions, point out potential problems or issues for future discussions, and
make suggestions to be incorporated into the final plan.
c. Waivers. Requests for waivers may be discussed, but formal acceptance of any waivers shall not
occur until the Board has an opportunity to review the final plan (See Section 9 Waivers).
3. Site Inspection. The CEO may visit the site to observe existing conditions, generally confirm the
information submitted, and assess the development proposal. Prior to the site inspection, the applicant
shall place "flagging" at lot corners. If the proposed project includes buildings, the approximate corners
of building footprints shall be “flagged.”
4. CEO Authorization to Submit Final Plan. The CEO shall authorize the submission of the final plan
application when sketch plan review is complete. (See Section 6 for submission requirements)
5.2.3 Final Plan Review Process
A. The applicant shall submit a final plan within 6 months after the CEO has authorized the submission. The
CEO may, upon failure to meet the 6 month deadline, require the application to return to the sketch plan
review phase. Each time that an application is returned to the sketch plan phase, the applicant shall pay the
required application fees.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 13
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
B. Consistency with Sketch Plan. The final plan shall approximate the layout shown on the sketch plan, plus
any recommendations made by the CEO.
C. Final Plan Submission and Public Notice Requirements
1. CEO. Within 3 business days of receipt of a final plan application, the CEO shall issue a dated receipt
to the applicant, and notify the clerk and the review authority of neighboring municipalities if any
portion of the subdivision abuts or crosses the municipal boundary.
2. Applicant. Upon submission of the final plan to the CEO, the applicant shall notify by return receipt
mail all owners of abutting property and/or property owners within 200 feet of the subdivision property
line that an application for subdivision approval has been submitted. The notification shall specify the
location of the proposed subdivision and include a general description of the project. This notice shall
also include notice for the Board meeting where the final plan will be considered. The applicant shall
also notify any supplier of a “public drinking water system” (as defined) when the subdivision is
located on parcels wholly or partially within the “source water protection area” as mapped by the
Maine Drinking Water Program. Return receipts will be required to verify notification of all of the
notified property owners and public drinking water system suppliers.
D. Determination of Completeness. Within 30 days of the receipt of a final plan application, the CEO shall
determine if the submission is complete, and shall notify the applicant in writing of this finding. If the CEO
determines the application is incomplete, the notice shall specify the additional materials required, and shall
advise the applicant that the application will not be considered by the Board until the additional information
is submitted. These steps, except the notification requirements, shall be repeated until the application is
complete. A determination of completeness under this subsection does not preclude the Board from
requiring additional materials necessary for the review of the project.
E. Review by Others. Upon a determination that the application for a final plan is complete, the CEO shall
inform the applicant of the requirements for notification of other town officials and entities, such as the
Town Manager, Road Foreman, Fire Chief, public water suppliers, etc.
F. Planning Board Meeting to Review the Final Plan
1. Upon a determination that the final plan application is complete, the CEO shall schedule, and provide
the required public notice for, a meeting of the Board to review the application. The applicant or his/her
authorized agent must be present at all Board meetings and/or hearings where the application is to be
considered by the Board.
2. All final plan submission requirements shall be submitted to the CEO at the Town Office at least 14
days prior to the meeting at which the applicant wishes to be heard by the Board.
3. Public Hearing
a. If the Board decides to hold a public hearing, the hearing must be held within 30 days after the
determination that a complete application has been submitted or within any other time limit that is
mutually agreed upon by the Board and the applicant. The purpose of the hearing is to allow the
applicant and affected property owners to provide information as part of the record the Board will
use in considering its action on the application.
b. Public Notice Requirements
i. CEO. The CEO shall notify the applicant and publish the time, date, and place of the hearing at
least 2 times; the date of the first publication to be at least 7 days prior to the hearing in a
newspaper of area wide circulation.
ii. Applicant. The applicant shall follow the notification requirements in Section 5.2.3,C.2, except
this notice shall be made at least 7 days prior to the hearing.
4. Planning Board Decision on the Final Plan Application
a. The Board shall, within 30 days from the public hearing or within 60 days of determining a
complete application has been received, if no hearing is held, or within another time limit as may
be otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board and the applicant, make findings of fact and
conclusions of law on the application, and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the final plan
application. The Board shall specify in writing its findings of fact, conclusions of law, and reasons
for any conditions or denial.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 14
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
b. The Board shall notify the applicant of the action of the Board including the findings of fact,
conclusions of law, and any conditions of approval or reasons for denial. This requirement can be
met through the distribution of minutes of the meeting or an approval letter.
c. All time limits within this section may be extended by mutual agreement of the applicant and
Board.
5.2.4 Final Approval and Filing (See Section 5.4)
5.3 Major Subdivisions
5.3.1 Three-Step Process. Major subdivisions require a 3-step application process consisting of: (1) sketch
plan review; (2) preliminary plan review; and (3) final plan review. Each step requires the Board
consideration.
5.3.2 Pre-application Consultation. Applicants are encouraged to consult with the CEO prior to submission of a
sketch plan to become familiar with the review procedures, submission requirements and approval criteria.
The applicant should present the proposed subdivision on copies of the property tax map and a topographic
map, to show the location and general characteristics of the site. The applicability of any state or municipal
regulations, and any potential waivers (See Section 9 Waivers) may also be discussed.
5.3.3 Sketch Plan Review Process
A. Purpose. The purpose of sketch plan review is for the applicant to present general information regarding
the proposed subdivision to the Board, and to receive the Board's comments prior to the expenditure of
substantial sums of money on surveying, soils identification, and engineering by the applicant. Sketch plan
review shall not be considered the initiation of the review process for the purposes of bringing the plan
under protection of 1 MRSA §302.
B. Sketch Plan Review Meeting with the Board
1. Upon receipt of a completed sketch plan application, the CEO shall schedule, and provide the required
public notice for, a meeting of the Board to review the application. The CEO shall also notify the clerk
and the review authority of neighboring municipalities if any portion of the subdivision abuts or crosses
the municipal boundary.
2. All sketch plan application requirements (See Section 7.1) shall be submitted to the CEO at least 14
days prior to the sketch plan review meeting with the Board.
3. The applicant, or his/her representative, shall present the sketch plan to the Board. Failure to attend the
meeting may result in a delay of the Board’s review until the next meeting the applicant attends.
4. Public Notice, Applicant. Upon submission of the sketch plan application to the CEO, the applicant
shall notify by return receipt mail all owners of abutting property and/or property owners within 200
feet of the subdivision property line that an application for subdivision approval has been submitted,
specifying the location of the proposed subdivision and including a general description of the project.
This notice shall also include notice for the meeting where the application will be considered by the
Board. The applicant shall also notify any supplier of a “public drinking water system” (as defined)
when the subdivision is located on parcels wholly or partially within the “source water protection area”
as mapped by the Maine Drinking Water Program. Return receipts will be required to verify
notification of all of the notified property owners and public drinking water system suppliers.
5. Meeting Procedure
a. The applicant shall present the sketch plan and make a verbal presentation regarding the proposal.
b. The Board and CEO may ask questions, point out potential problems or issues for future
discussions, and make suggestions to be incorporated into the preliminary plan. Substantive,
lengthy discussions about compliance with review standards shall be postponed until the
subsequent review of the full application.
c. Waivers. Requests for waivers may be discussed, but formal acceptance of any waivers shall not
occur until the Board has an opportunity to review the preliminary plan.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 15
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
C. Site Inspection. The CEO and/or Board may choose to visit the site to observe existing conditions,
generally confirm the information submitted, and assess the development proposal. The Board may decide
not to hold, or postpone, a site inspection when the site is snow covered. If the Board is to conduct the site
inspection, written permission for members of the Board and the interested public to enter the property will
be necessary. The site inspection may be conducted during preliminary plan and/or final plan review.
1. Public Notice.
a. CEO. If the Board decides to conduct a site inspection, notice of the site inspection shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation at least 7 days prior to the inspection.
b. Applicant. The applicant shall notify property owners and others as specified in Section 5.3.3, B.4,
except that this notice shall be made at least 7 days prior to the site inspection.
2. Prior to the site inspection, the applicant shall place "flagging" at the centerline of any proposed streets,
and at the approximate intersections of the street centerlines and lot corners. If the proposed project
includes buildings, the approximate corners of building footprints shall be “flagged”. The applicant
shall provide a copy of the sketch plan (on an 8½ by 11 inch or an 11 by 17 inch sheet) of the project
for each member of the Board and the CEO.
3. Minutes. Minutes shall be taken of the site inspection in the same manner as for regular meetings.
D. Board Authorization to Submit Preliminary Plan Application. The Board shall authorize the submission of
the preliminary plan application when sketch plan review is complete.
5.3.4 Preliminary Plan Process
A. Timeframe. The applicant shall submit the preliminary plan within 6 months after the Board has authorized
its submission. The Board may, upon failure to meet the 6 month deadline, require the applicant to return to
the sketch plan phase, including the payment of application fees.
B. Consistency with the Sketch Plan. The preliminary plan shall approximate the layout shown on the sketch
plan, plus any recommendations made by the Board.
C. Preliminary Plan Submission and Public Notice Requirements
1. Within 3 business days of receipt of a preliminary plan application, the CEO shall issue a dated receipt
to the applicant, and notify the clerk and the review authority of neighboring municipalities if any
portion of the subdivision abuts or crosses the municipal boundary.
2. Public Notice, Applicant. Upon submission of the preliminary plan to the CEO, the applicant shall
notify property owners and others as specified in Section 5.3.3, B.4.
D. Determination of Completeness. Within 30 days of the receipt of a preliminary plan application, the CEO
shall determine if the submission is complete, and shall notify the applicant in writing of this finding. If the
CEO determines the application is incomplete, the notice shall specify the additional materials required and
shall advise the applicant that the application will not be considered by the Board until the additional
information is submitted. A determination of completeness under this subsection does not preclude the
Board from requiring additional materials necessary for review of the project.
E. Review by Others. Upon determination that a complete application has been submitted, the CEO shall
inform the applicant of the requirements for notification of other town officials and entities, such as the
Town Manager, Road Foreman, Fire Chief, School Superintendent, public water suppliers, etc..
F. Planning Board Meeting(s) to Review the Preliminary Plan Application
1. Upon a determination that the preliminary plan application is complete, the CEO shall schedule, and
provide the required public notice for, a meeting of the Board to review the application.
2. All preliminary plan submission requirements shall be submitted to the CEO at the Town Office at least
14 days prior to the meeting at which the applicant wishes to be heard by the Board.
3. The applicant, or a representative, shall present the preliminary plan to the Board. Failure to attend the
meeting may result in a delay of the Board’s review until the next meeting the applicant attends.
4. Public Hearing
a. If the Board decides to hold a public hearing, the hearing must be held within 30 days after the
determination that a complete application has been submitted or within any other time limit that is
mutually agreed upon by the Board and applicant. The purpose of the hearing is to allow the
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 16
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
applicant and affected property owners to provide information as part of the record that the Board
will use in considering its action on the application.
b. Public Notice Requirements
i. CEO. The CEO shall notify the applicant and publish the time, date, and place of the hearing at
least 2 times; the date of the first publication to be at least 7 days prior to the hearing in a
newspaper of area wide circulation.
ii. Applicant. The applicant shall notify property owners and others as specified in Section 5.3.3,
B.4, excepting that this notice shall be made at least 7 days prior to the public hearing.
G. Planning Board Decision on the Preliminary Plan Application
1. Within 30 days after the public hearing or within 60 days of determining a complete preliminary plan
application has been received, if no hearing is held, or within another time limit as may be otherwise
mutually agreed to by the Board and the applicant, the Board shall make findings of fact and
conclusions on the application, and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the preliminary plan
application. The Board shall specify in writing its findings of facts, conclusions, and reasons for any
conditions or denial.
2. If the Board decides the preliminary plan must be revised, the applicant shall have 6 months to return
with the required revisions. If a revised plan is not submitted within this timeframe, the Board may
grant an extension of up to 3 months or require that the application return to sketch plan phase.
Application fees shall not be refunded. New fees will be required for each phase of the review repeated.
3. When granting approval to a preliminary plan application, the Board shall state the conditions of such
approval, if any, with respect to:
a. The specific changes which it will require in the final plan.
b. The character and extent of required improvements for which waivers have been requested and that
the Board finds may be waived without jeopardy to public health, safety and general welfare.
c. The construction items for which cost estimates and performance guarantees will be required as
prerequisite to the approval of the final plan.
4. Approval of a preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of the final plan or intent to approve the
final plan, but rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the preliminary plan design as a
guide to the preparation of the final plan. The final plan shall be submitted for approval by the Board
upon fulfillment of the requirements of this Ordinance and the conditions of the preliminary plan
approval, if any. Prior to approval of the final plan, the Board may require additional information and
changes in the plan as a result of further study of the proposed subdivision or as a result of new
information received.
5.3.5 Final Plan Application Process
A. Timeframe. The applicant shall submit the final plan within 6 months after the Board has approved the
preliminary plan. If the final plan is not submitted within 6 months, the Board may require that the
applicant repeat preliminary plan review, including the payment of required application fees. If an applicant
cannot submit the final plan within 6 months due to delays caused by other regulatory bodies, or other
reasons, the applicant may make a written request for an extension prior to the 6-month deadline. The
Board may grant an extension if the applicant has made due progress in preparation of the final plan and/or
in pursuing other agency approvals. The Board shall also take into consideration any amendments made to
local ordinances or regulations that might impact the project.
B. Plan Consistency. The final plan shall be consistent with the preliminary plan, plus any requirements made
by the Board.
C. Review Process
1. The final plan review process shall follow the same steps as required for preliminary plan review,
including Sections 5.3.4, C, D, E, and F.
2. Planning Board Decision on the Final Plan Application
a. Within 30 days from the public hearing, or within 60 days of determining a complete final plan
application has been received, if no hearing is held, or within another time limit as may be
otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board and the applicant, the Board shall make findings of fact
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 17
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
and conclusions on the application, and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the final plan
application. The Board shall specify in writing its findings of fact, conclusions, and reasons for any
conditions or denial.
b. Submission of Revisions. If the Board decides the final plan must be revised, the applicant shall
have 6 months to return to the Board with the required revisions. If an applicant cannot comply
with this section, the Board may grant an extension in accordance with Subsection 5.3.5,A above.
5.4 Final Approval and Filing for Major and Minor Subdivisions
5.4.1 No plan shall be approved by the Board as long as the applicant is in violation of the provisions of a
previously approved subdivision plan within the Town.
5.4.2 Upon findings of fact and a determination that all standards in 30-A, MRSA, §4404, and this Ordinance
have been met, the Board shall vote to approve the subdivision and sign the final plan. The Board shall
specify in writing its findings of fact, conclusions of law, and reasons for any conditions or denial. One
copy of the signed plan shall be retained by the Board for its permanent records. Copies of the signed plan
shall be forwarded to the Tax Assessor and the CEO. Any subdivision not recorded in the Registry of
Deeds within 90 days of the date upon which the plan is approved and signed by the Board shall become
null and void.
5.4.3 Phasing of Development. At the time the Board grants final plan approval, it may permit the plan to be
divided into two or more separate and distinct phases subject to any conditions it deems necessary to ensure
the orderly development of the subdivision. If any municipal or quasi-municipal department head informs
the Board their department or district does not have adequate capacity to service the subdivision, the Board
may require the plan to be divided into phases subject to any conditions it deems necessary for orderly
planning, financing and provision of public services to the subdivision. The applicant shall provide a
separate performance guarantee, in a form and amount acceptable to the Board, for the completion of the
infrastructure of each phase. In all cases, final approval of lots in subsequent phases shall be given only
upon satisfactory completion of all requirements pertaining to previous phases.
5.4.4 No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made to any final plan after Board approval and
endorsement in writing on the plan, unless a revised plan is first submitted and the Board approves any
modifications in accordance with Section 10. The Board shall make findings and conclusions of law that
the revised plan meets the criteria of 30-A, MRSA, §4404, and the standards of this Ordinance. If a plan is
recorded without complying with this requirement, it shall be considered null and void, and the Board shall
institute proceedings to have the plan stricken from the records of the Registry of Deeds.
5.4.5 Board approval of a subdivision plan shall not constitute or be evidence of any acceptance by the Town of
any street, easement, or other open space shown on such plan. When a park, playground, or other recreation
area is shown on the plan to be dedicated to the Town, approval of the plan shall not constitute an
acceptance by the Town of such areas. The Board shall require the plan to contain appropriate notes to this
effect. The Board may also require the filing of a written agreement between the applicant and the Board of
Selectmen covering future deed and title dedication, and provision for the cost of grading, development,
equipment, and maintenance of any such dedicated area.
5.4.6 Subdivision Approval Expiration. Except in the case of a phased development plan, failure to complete
substantial construction (see definitions) of the subdivision within 3 years of the date of approval and
signing of the plan shall render the plan null and void. Upon determining that a subdivision's approval has
expired under this paragraph, the Board shall have a notice placed in the Registry of Deeds to that effect.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 18
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION 6 - MINOR SUBDIVISION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
6.1 Sketch Plan Submissions
6.1.1 The sketch plan shall show, in simple form, the proposed layout of the subdivision. The intent of the sketch
plan is to provide the applicant and the CEO with a flexible, low-cost means to understanding the site, and
to create a development plan that reflects the site’s opportunities and constraints in accordance with the
requirements of this Ordinance.
6.1.2 The sketch plan shall contain, at a minimum, 2 copies of the following information:
A. A completed sketch plan application form for a minor subdivision.
B. A description of existing conditions of the site - the number and size of lots, constraints and opportunities.
C. Name, addresses, and phone numbers of the record owner, the applicant, preparer, and any consultants.
D. Evidence of right, title, or interest in the property.
E. Evidence of payment of the applicable fee and escrow deposit, if required.
F. A copy of a portion of the U.S.G.S. topographic map (7.5 min. quad.) of the area showing the boundaries of
the proposed subdivision.
G. A copy of that portion of the Kennebec County Medium Intensity Soil Survey covering the proposed
subdivision with the boundaries of the proposed subdivision shown.
H. A plan of the parcel, with an accurate scale, showing at a minimum the information listed below.2
1. Name(s) of the applicant and owner of the parcel.
2. North arrow, date and map scale.
3. Boundary and lot lines of the subdivision.
4. Approximate location, width and purpose of easements or restrictions, if applicable.
5. Streets on and adjacent to the tract.
6. Approximate location and size of existing utilities on and adjacent to the tract.
7. Existing buildings, structures, or other improvements on the site.
8. The major natural features of the site, approximated by the applicant, including wetlands, streams,
ponds, floodplains, groundwater aquifers, tree lines, significant wildlife habitat and fisheries and other
important natural features.
6.2 Final Plan Submissions
6.2.1 Consistency with the Sketch Plan. The final plan shall approximate the layout shown on the sketch plan,
plus any recommendations made by the CEO.
6.2.2 Mandatory Submissions. The following items shall be submitted as part of the final plan application, unless
the applicant is granted a waiver from the submission requirement (see Section 9 Waivers). The Board may
require additional information, as necessary, to determine if the criteria of this Ordinance are met (See
Section 8 Review Criteria and Standards). Seven copies (unless otherwise specified by the CEO) of the
following shall be submitted:
A. A Completed Application, the Application Fee, Establishment of Escrow Account (if applicable)
B. Location Map. The location map shall be drawn at a size adequate to show the relationship of the proposed
subdivision to adjacent properties, and to allow the Board to locate the subdivision within the town. The
location map shall show:
1. Existing land uses and subdivisions in the proximity of the proposed subdivision.
2. Locations and names of existing and proposed streets, if applicable.
2 If the applicant decides to survey the property as part of the sketch plan, the applicant may want to obtain the required
electronic data while the surveyor is on site (See electronic submission requirements for a final plan review)
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 19
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
3. Boundaries and designations of shoreland zoning districts, if applicable.
4. An outline of the proposed subdivision and any remaining portion of the owner's property if the final
plan submitted covers only a portion of the owner's entire contiguous holdings.
C. Final Plan. The final plan shall consist of one or more maps or drawings drawn to a scale of not more than
100 feet to the inch. Plans for subdivisions containing more than 100 acres may be drawn at a scale of not
more than 200 feet to the inch provided all necessary detail can be easily read. Plans shall be no larger than
24 by 36 inches in size, and shall have a margin of 2 inches outside of the borderline on the left side for
binding and a one-inch margin outside the border along the remaining sides. Space shall be reserved on the
plan for endorsement by the Board. One reproducible, stable-based transparency of the recording plan to be
recorded at the Registry of Deeds, and 3 full sized paper copies of all the final plan sheets and any
supporting documents shall be submitted. The original reproducible plan shall be embossed with the seal of
the professional land surveyor and be signed by that individual. In addition, one copy of the plan shall be
reduced to a size of 8½ by 11 inches or 11 by 17 inches for forwarding to Board members. The following
information shall be included on the plan:
1. Proposed name of the subdivision, or identifying title, and the name of the municipality(ies) in which it
is located, plus tax assessor’s map and lot numbers.
2. Date the plan was prepared, magnetic and true north point, and graphic map scale.
3. Names and addresses of record owner, applicant, and all those involved in preparing the plan.
4. Deed references, and existing and proposed deed restrictions, covenants, easements, rights-of-way, or
other encumbrances or conditions affecting the property. Include any public rights for physical or
visual access to the shoreline of a water body.
5. Names and addresses of all abutters, including any property owners directly across any existing road
from the subdivision. Include property lines, tax map and lot numbers, and deed references.
6. Standard boundary survey and internal development survey with complete descriptive data by bearings
and distances, made by a professional land surveyor. The entire parcel shall be shown, including all
contiguous land in common ownership within the last 5 years, as required by Title 30-A MRSA §4401.
The plan shall contain sufficient data to allow the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot
line, and boundary line to be readily determined and be reproduced upon the ground. These lines shall
be tied to reference points previously established.3
7. Location of all monuments, including monuments to be placed at the corners of the parcel and each lot,
and the type of monument (granite, concrete, iron pin, or drilled hole in ledge).
8. Number of acres within the subdivision, and proposed lot numbers and acreages for each lot.
9. Contour lines at the interval specified by the CEO, showing elevations relative to mean sea level.
10. Location and boundaries of all water bodies and wetlands, including vernal pools, and the location of
any shoreland zoning affecting the tract. If any portion of the subdivision is located in the direct
watershed of a great pond, the boundaries of the direct watershed and the name of the great pond.
11. Location and type of vegetative cover, unusually large trees and other essential existing physical
features.
12. Location, names, and dimensions of existing and proposed streets, highways, utilities, easements,
buildings, parks, open spaces or other improvements on or adjacent to the subdivision.
13. Proposed building locations or building envelops that meet all setback requirements of the Vassalboro
Building Permit Ordinance and the Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
14. Proposed locations of private and/or community wells.
15. For proposed subsurface wastewater disposal systems, the location of at least one test pit per lot,
performed by a Maine licensed site evaluator or certified soil scientists; on lots where the limiting soil
factor is less than 24”, the location of a reserve disposal area not to be built upon.
16. Location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water mains, culverts, and drainage ways on or
adjacent to the property to be subdivided.
17. Location of any proposed open space areas to be preserved including vegetative buffers, common use
areas, significant wildlife habitat and unique natural areas, historic or prehistoric sites, shoreland zone
resource protection zones, and farmland. (See Sections 8.7 and 8.8)
3 The Board may require that this information be submitted electronically in a format compatible with the assessor’s records.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 20
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
18. Delineation of any flood hazard areas and the 100-year flood elevation, as depicted on the Town’s
Flood Insurance Rate Map. If any portion of the subdivision is within the flood hazard area, the
following note shall be on the final recording plan: “If any portion of this subdivision is within a flood
hazard area, all principal structures hereafter constructed or placed herein shall be so located that their
lowest floor, including basement, is at least one foot above the 100-year flood elevation.”
19. Any waiver(s) approved by the Board as required in Section 9.3 Waivers.
D. Other Required Information
1. Verification of right, title, and interest to the property by deed, purchase and sales agreement, option to
purchase, or some other proof of interest.
2. Copy of the most recently recorded deed, deed restrictions, easements, rights-of-way, or other
encumbrances affecting the property.
3. Copy of any proposed deed restrictions intended to cover all or part of the lots or dwellings in the
subdivision.
4. When sewage disposal is to private subsurface systems, a copy of the test pit analysis for each lot.
5. When sewage disposal is to a public sewer, a letter from the sanitary district confirming there is
adequate capacity to collect and treat the wastewater, and that the design of the proposed collection
system meets applicable utility rules and standards.
6. When water is to be supplied by an on-site well(s), a letter from a local well-driller or hydrogeologist
familiar with the area indicating it is likely the water supply will be adequate.
7. When water is to be supplied by public water supply, a written statement from the servicing water
district indicating there is adequate supply and pressure for the subdivision, and that the design of the
water service system meets applicable utility rules and standards.
8. For projects located wholly or partially within the wellhead protection area of a public water supply as
mapped by the Maine Drinking Water Program, a written statement from the water provider indicating
the proposed development will not negatively impact their essential operations.
9. When a private community water supply system is proposed, evidence that the system shall conform to
the Maine Rules Relating to Drinking Water (10-144A CMR 231).
10. Medium intensity soils map (USDA Kennebec County Soil Survey) that encompasses the area to be
subdivided. Wetlands shall be identified on the survey, regardless of size. The Board may require a
high intensity soils map in instances where poor soils are evident.
11. Description of the measures to be taken to control erosion and sedimentation onto adjacent properties
including roads, and into lakes, ponds and other water bodies in accordance with the Maine Erosion
and Sedimentation Control Best Management Practices, MDEP, 2003 (or most current edition).
12. Location of any sand and gravel aquifers as mapped by the Maine Geologic Survey. The Board may
require a hydrogeologic assessment prepared by a certified geologist or professional engineer,
experienced in hydrogeology, when the subdivision is not served by a public sewer and/or any part of
the subdivision is located over a sand and gravel aquifer identified by the Maine Geological Survey.
13. Copy of driveway/entrance permit(s) from the Town and/or the Maine Department of Transportation.
14. A letter from (each) the Vassalboro Town Manager, Road Commissioner and Chief Fire indicating
their review and approval of the subdivision.
15. Landscape plan that shows the preservation of any existing trees, the replacement of trees and
vegetation, graded contours, streams, and the preservation of scenic, historic, or environmentally
significant areas.
16. Description of the measures to be taken to assure there will not be an undue adverse effect to identified
significant wildlife habitat and unique natural areas based on attached letters from public agency(ies)
(Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, Maine Natural Areas Program, Maine Department
of Marine Resources) and/or other experts as approved by the Board.
17. Description of the measures to be taken to assure there will not be an undue adverse effect to any
historic or prehistoric sites within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision that are either listed on or
eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places based on attached letter(s) from the
Maine Historic Preservation Commission and/or other experts as approved by the Board.
18. Description of the measures to be taken to conserve productive farmland.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 21
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
19. Description of proposed ownership, management and any improvements for all parcels proposed to be
dedicated to public use and the conditions of such dedication.
20. Evidence of adequate financial and technical capability to complete the project in the form of a letter(s)
from certified financial institution(s) and/or a letter of credit. The Board may allow alternative forms of
evidence should circumstances warrant.
21. Affidavit signed by the applicant indicating that no timber harvest occurred on the tract within the
preceding 5 years, or if it has, an affidavit signed by a licensed forester or an agent of the Maine Forest
Service indicating that the timber harvest was not conducted in violation of rules adopted pursuant to
12 MRSA, §8869(14).
22. E911 lot addresses shown on plan.
6.2.3 Prior to submittal of the final plan application, any of the approvals required in Section 7.2.3, where
applicable, shall be obtained in writing. If the Board is unsure whether a permit or license from a state or
federal agency is necessary, the applicant may be required to obtain a written opinion from the appropriate
agency as to its applicability.
6.2.4 Prior to submittal of the final plan application, the applicant shall provide evidence that a legal entity has
been established for common multi-user systems and ownership vested by deed reference for future
potential owners for such items as roads, wells, septic systems, stormwater facilities, etc.. (See Section 7
Major Subdivision Submission Requirements for additional requirements, as applicable)
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 22
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION 7 – MAJOR SUBDIVISION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
7.1 Sketch Plan Submissions
7.1.1 A sketch plan showing in simple form, the proposed layout of the subdivision shall be required for all
major subdivision applications. The intent of the sketch plan is to provide the applicant, the CEO and the
Board with a flexible, low-cost means to understanding the site, and to create a development plan that
reflects the site’s opportunities and constraints in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
7.1.2 The sketch plan shall contain, at a minimum, 7 copies of the following information:
A. Complete sketch plan application for a major subdivision.
B. Narrative describing the existing conditions of the site, the number and size of lots, and the constraints and
opportunities of the site. The narrative should outline any traffic studies, utility studies, market studies or
other applicable work to be conducted for the preliminary plan.
C. Name, addresses, and phone numbers of the record owner, the applicant, the preparer, and any consultants
working on the project.
D. Evidence of right, title, or interest in the property.
E. Evidence of payment of the application fee and escrow deposit, if required.
F. Any anticipated requests for waivers from the submission requirements (See Section 9 Waivers).
G. Copy of the property tax map showing the map and lot number of the parcel to be subdivided.
H. Copy of a portion of the U.S.G.S. topographic map (7.5 min. quad.) of the area showing the boundaries of
the proposed subdivision.
I. Copy of that portion of the Kennebec County Medium Intensity Soil Survey covering the proposed
subdivision with the boundaries of the proposed subdivision shown.
J. Plan of the parcel, with an accurate scale, showing at a minimum the information listed, below.4
1. Name(s) of the subdivision applicant and the owner of the parcel.
2. North arrow, date and map scale.
2. Boundary and lot lines of the subdivision.
3. Approximate location, width and purpose of easements or restrictions, if applicable.
4. Streets on and adjacent to the tract.
5. Approximate location and size of existing utilities on and adjacent to the tract.
6. Existing buildings, structures, or other improvements on the site.
7. Major natural features of the site, approximated, including wetlands, streams, ponds, floodplains,
groundwater aquifers, treelines, significant wildlife habitat and fisheries or other important natural
features.
7.2 Preliminary Plan Submissions
7.2.1 Consistency with Sketch Plan. The preliminary plan shall approximate the layout shown on the sketch plan,
plus any recommendations made by the CEO and the Board. The CEO and the applicant should review
Section 8 Review Criteria and Standards to determine if addition submissions may be required.
7.2.2 Mandatory Submissions. The following items shall be submitted as part of the preliminary plan application,
unless the applicant submits a written waiver request, and is granted a waiver from the Board, pursuant to
Section 9 Waivers. The Board may require additional information where it finds it necessary to determine
whether the criteria of 30-A, MRSA, §4404 and this Ordinance are met. Seven copies of the following shall
be submitted, unless otherwise indicated by the CEO.
A. A Completed Application, the Application Fee, and Establishment of Escrow Account (as applicable)
4 If the applicant decides to survey the property as part of the sketch plan, the applicant may want to obtain the required
electronic data while the surveyor is on site (See electronic submission requirements for a final plan review)
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 23
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
B. Location Map. The location map shall be drawn at a size adequate to show the relationship of the proposed
subdivision to the adjacent properties, and to allow the Board to locate the subdivision within the
municipality. The location map shall show:
1. Existing land uses and subdivisions in the proximity of the proposed subdivision.
2. Locations and names of existing and proposed streets.
3. Boundaries and designations of shoreland zoning districts, if present.
4. Outline of the proposed subdivision and any remaining portion of the owner’s property if the
preliminary plan submitted covers only a portion of the owner’s entire contiguous holdings.
C. Preliminary Plan. The preliminary plan shall be submitted in duplicate copies of one or more maps or
drawings that may be reproduced on paper, with all dimensions shown in feet. The plan shall be drawn to a
scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch. Plans for subdivisions containing more than 100 acres may be
drawn to a scale of not more than 200 feet per inch provided all necessary detail can be easily read. In
addition, the applicant shall provide seven copies of the plan(s) reduced to a size of 8½ by 11 inches or 11
by 17 inches for forwarding to the Board. The following information shall be included on the plan:
D. Preliminary Plan
1. Proposed name of the subdivision, or identifying title, and the name of the municipality(ies) in which it
is located, plus assessor’s map(s) and lot numbers.
2. Date the plan was prepared, magnetic and true north points, and graphic map scale.
3. Names and addresses of record owner, applicant, and preparer(s) of the plan.
4. Deed references, and existing and proposed deed restrictions, covenants, easements, rights-of-way, or
other encumbrances and conditions affecting the property. Include any public rights for physical or
visual access to the shoreline of a water body.
5. Names and addresses of all abutters, including any property owners directly across any existing road or
street from the subdivision. Include property lines, tax map and lot numbers, and deed references.
6. Standard boundary survey of the parcel with complete descriptive data by bearings and distances made
by a licensed professional land surveyor. The entire parcel shall be shown, including all contiguous
land in common ownership within the last 5 years, as required by Title 30-A MRSA §4401. The plan
shall contain sufficient data to allow the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, and
boundary line to be readily determined and be reproduced upon the ground. These lines shall be tied to
reference points previously established.5
7. Location of all monuments to be placed at the corners of the parcel and each lot, and the type of
monument (granite, concrete, iron pin, or drilled hole in ledge).
8. Number of acres within the subdivision, and proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and lot
areas. Lot numbers to identify each lot.
9. Contour lines at intervals determined by the Board.
10. Location and boundaries of all water bodies and wetlands including vernal pools, and the location of
any shoreland zoning affecting the tract. If any portion of the subdivision is located in the direct
watershed of a great pond, the boundaries of the direct watershed and the name of the great pond.
11. Location and type of vegetative cover, unusually large trees and other essential existing physical
features.
12. Location, names, and dimensions of existing and proposed streets, highways, utilities, easements,
buildings, parks, open spaces or other improvements on or adjacent to the subdivision.
13. Proposed building locations or envelops that meet all setback requirements of the Vassalboro Building
Permit Ordinance and the Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
14. Proposed locations of private and community wells.
15. For subsurface wastewater disposal systems, the location of at least one test pit per lot, performed by a
Maine licensed site evaluator or certified soil scientist. On lots where the limiting soil factor is less than
24”, the location of a reserve disposal area not to be built upon.
16. Location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water mains, culverts, and drainage ways on or
adjacent to the property to be subdivided.
5 The Board may require that this information be submitted electronically in a format compatible with the assessor’s records.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 24
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
17. Delineation of any flood hazard areas and the 100-year flood elevation, as depicted on the Town’s
Flood Insurance Rate Map.
18. Location of any proposed open space areas to be preserved including vegetative buffers, common use
areas, significant wildlife habitat and unique natural areas, historic or prehistoric sites, shoreland zone
resource protection zones, and farmland.
E. Other Required Information
1. Verification of right, title, and interest to the property by deed, purchase and sales agreement, option to
purchase, or some other proof of interest.
2. Copy(ies) of the most recently recorded deed, deed restrictions, easements, rights-of-way, or other
encumbrances affecting the property.
3. Copy of any proposed deed restrictions intended to cover all or part of the lots or dwellings in the
subdivision.
4. For private subsurface sewage disposal systems, a copy of the test pit analysis for each lot performed
by a Maine licensed site evaluator or certified soil scientist.
5. For sewage disposal to a public sewer, a letter from the sanitary district confirming there is adequate
capacity to collect and treat the wastewater from the subdivision.
6. When water is to be from on-site wells, a letter from a local well-driller or hydrolgeologist familiar
with the area indicating it is likely the water supply will be adequate.
7. When water is to be from a public water supply, a written statement from the servicing water district
indicating there is adequate supply and pressure for the subdivision.
8. When a private community water supply system is proposed, evidence the system shall conform to the
Maine Rules Relating to Drinking Water (10-144A CMR 231).
9. For projects located wholly or partially within the wellhead protection area of a public water supply as
mapped by the Maine Drinking Water Program, a written statement from the water provider indicating
the proposed development will not negatively impact their essential operations.
10. High-intensity soil survey by a certified soil scientist. Wetlands shall be identified, regardless of size. A
medium-intensity survey may be adequate, if the subdivision proposes low-density development and
lots large enough to find house sites on suitable soils.
11. The Board may require a hydrogeologic assessment when the subdivision is not served by a public
sewer and/or any part of the subdivision is located over a sand and gravel aquifer identified by the
Maine Geological Survey, or the subdivision has an average density of more than one dwelling unit per
100,000 square feet, or in other cases where site considerations or development design indicate greater
potential of adverse impacts on groundwater quality. (See Section 8.2)
12. An estimate of the amount and type of vehicular traffic to be generated on a daily basis and at peak
hours. Trip generation rates shall be taken from the most recent available edition of the Trip Generation
Manual, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. Trip generation rates from other
sources may be used if the applicant demonstrates these sources better reflect local conditions.
13. For subdivisions involving 28 or more parking spaces or projected to generate more than 140 vehicle
trips per day, a traffic impact analysis, prepared by a professional engineer with experience in traffic
engineering. The analysis shall indicate the expected average daily vehicular trips, peak-hour volumes,
access conditions at the site, distribution of traffic, types of vehicles expected, effect upon the level of
service of the street giving access to the site and neighboring streets which may be affected, and
recommended improvements to maintain the desired level of service on the affected streets.
14. All submissions required by the Town of Vassalboro Road Construction Ordinance and the Vassalboro
Site Review Ordinance, as applicable.
15. For subdivisions requiring a state permit under the Maine Site Location of Development Law or the
Maine Stormwater Management Law, a stormwater management plan prepared by a professional
engineer, demonstrating compliance with the standards of MDEP Rule Chapter 500 and 502
(Stormwater Management Regulations).
16. For subdivisions within, or with areas within, the watershed of a great pond, and containing 5 or more
lots or dwelling units created within any 5-year period, or any combination of 800 linear feet of new or
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 25
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
upgraded driveways and/or streets see Section 8.14 Phosphorus Control in Great Pond Watersheds for
submission requirements.
17. An erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared by a qualified professional that details control
structures to be installed along with ongoing maintenance procedures and practices to be followed
during site preparation, construction and clean-up stages. The plan shall comply with 38 MRSA §420-
H. Erosion and Sedimentation Control and the Maine Erosion and Sediment Control BMPs, Maine
Department of Environmental Protection, 2003, or most current edition.
18. A letter from (each) the Vassalboro Town Manager, Fire Chief, Road Commissioner, and School
Superintendent indicating their review and approval of the subdivision.
19. An affidavit that no timber harvesting has occurred on the tract within the preceding 5 years, or if it
has, that it has not been conducted in violation of rules adopted pursuant to 12 MRSA §8869(14). The
affidavit may be signed by a licensed forester or an agent of the Maine Forest Service.
20. Landscape or open space plan that shows the preservation of any existing trees, the replacement of
trees and vegetation, graded contours, streams, and the preservation of scenic, historic, or
environmentally significant areas.
21. Description of the measures to be taken to assure there will not be an undue adverse effect to identified
significant wildlife habitat and unique natural areas based on attached letters from public agency(ies)
(Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, Maine Natural Areas Program, Maine Department
of Marine Resources) and/or other experts as approved by the Board.
22. Description of the measures to be taken to assure there will not be an undue adverse effect to any
historic or prehistoric sites within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision that are either listed on or
eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places based on attached letter from the Maine
Historic Preservation Commission and/or other experts as approved by the Board.
23. Description of the measures to be taken to conserve productive farmland.
24. Description of proposed ownership, management and any improvements for all parcels proposed to be
dedicated to public use and the conditions of such dedication.
25. Evidence of adequate financial capability to complete the project in the form of a letter(s) from
certified financial institution(s) and/or a letter of credit. The Board may allow alternative forms of
evidence should circumstances warrant the substitution.
26. Evidence of adequate technical capacity to construct the project to include the applicant’s previous
experience and the experience and training of the consultants and contractors.
7.2.2 The Board may require any additional information not listed above, when necessary to determine whether
the statutory review criteria of 30-A, MRSA, §4404 and the requirements of this Ordinance have been met.
7.2.3 Prior to submittal of the final plan application, the following approvals shall be obtained in writing, where
applicable:
A. Maine Department of Environmental Protection, under the Site Location of Development Act, the Natural
Resources Protection Act or the Stormwater Management Law, or if an MEPDES wastewater discharge
license is needed.
B. Maine Department of Health and Human Services, if the applicant proposes to provide a public water
system, or if an engineered subsurface waste water disposal system(s) is to be utilized.
C. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, if a permit under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act is required.
D. Maine Department of Transportation Traffic Movement Permit, and/or Highway Entrance/Driveway
Access Management Permit.
E. Written approval of any proposed street names from the Town of Vassalboro E911 Addressing Officer.
If the Board is unsure whether a permit or license from a state or federal agency is necessary, the applicant may
be required to obtain a written opinion from the appropriate agency as to the applicability of their regulations.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 26
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
7.3 Final Plan Submissions
7.3.1 Mandatory Submissions. The following shall be submitted as part of the final plan application, unless the
applicant submits a written waiver request, and is granted a waiver from the Board, pursuant to Section 9
Waivers. The Board may require additional information where it finds it necessary to determine whether
the criteria of 30-A, MRSA, §4404 and this Ordinance are met. Seven copies of the following shall be
submitted, unless otherwise indicated by the CEO.
7.3.2 All information presented in the preliminary plan and any amendments or conditions required by the Board
must appear in the final plan application.
7.3.3 Final Plan. The final plan shall consist of one or more maps or drawings drawn to a scale of not more than
100 feet to the inch. Plans for subdivisions containing more than 100 acres may be drawn at a scale of not
more than 200 feet to the inch provided all necessary detail can be easily read. Plans shall be no larger than
24 by 36 inches in size, and shall have a margin of 2 inches outside of the borderline on the left side for
binding and a one-inch margin outside the border along the remaining sides. Space shall be reserved on the
plan for endorsement by the Board. One reproducible, stable-based transparency of the recording plan to be
recorded at the Registry of Deeds, and 3 full sized paper copies of all the final plan sheets and any
supporting documents shall be submitted. The original reproducible plan shall be embossed with the seal of
the professional land surveyor or design engineer, and be signed by that individual. In addition, one copy of
the plan shall be reduced to a size of 8½ by 11 inches or 11 by 17 inches for forwarding to Board members.
7.3.4 Application Form, Fees, and Submissions. In addition to the information provided in the preliminary plan,
the final plan shall reflect revisions, including those required by the Board, and shall include or be
accompanied by the following:
A. Completed final plan application form and any required fees.
B. If different than those submitted with the preliminary plan, a copy of any proposed deed restrictions
intended to cover all or part of the lots or dwellings in the subdivision.
C. Final proposed lot lines with dimensions, bearings, deflection angles radii and central angles sufficient to
reproduce any line on the ground, and lot areas and total area to be subdivided. 6
D. The location, names, and dimensions of existing and proposed streets, highways, easements, building lines,
parks and other open spaces on or adjacent to the subdivision. The plan shall contain sufficient data to
allow the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, and boundary line to be readily
determined and be reproduced upon the ground. These lines shall be tied to reference points previously
established.
E. Detailed design and construction plans for the infrastructure, including, but not limited to, roads, streets,
parking lots, sidewalks, and utilities in accordance with the requirements of the Town of Vassalboro Road
Construction Ordinance, the Town of Vassalboro Site Plan Review Ordinance, and this Ordinance.
F. When sewage disposal is through connection to the public sewer, a written statement from the sewer
district indicating the district has reviewed and approved the sewerage design.
G. When water is to be from an existing public water supply, a written statement from the servicing water
district indicating the district has reviewed and approved the water system design. Also, a written statement
from the Fire Chief approving all hydrant locations or other fire protection measures.
H. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such dedication. Written
offers to convey title to the Town of all public ways and open spaces shown on the plan, and copies of
agreements or other documents showing the manner in which open spaces to be retained by the developer
or lot owners are to be managed and maintained. These may include homeowners’ association bylaws and
condominium declarations.
6 In order to facilitate the addition of the subdivision into the town property records and geographic information system, the
Board may require that subdivision plans be submitted in electronic format compatible with Town’s property tax records.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 27
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
I. If proposed streets and/or open spaces or other land is to be offered to the Town, written evidence that the
Board of Selectmen are satisfied with the legal sufficiency of the written offer to convey title. All roads and
other public improvements not dedicated to the Town during such time prior to the actual acceptance by the
Town shall be maintained by the subdivision owners or developer. A legal agreement indicating how the
infrastructure will be maintained shall be submitted. The Board shall review the maintenance plan to ensure
sufficient provisions have been incorporated to maintain all improvements for the applicable time period.
The Road Commissioner shall review the road plan to confirm there is an adequate right-hand turnout for
snowplow access, unless the road is to be forever private.
J. If roads are to remain privately owned, the following shall be noted on the final plan: “All roads shall
remain private roads to be maintained by the developer or lot owners, and shall not be accepted or
maintained by the Town.”
K. The construction items for which cost estimates and performance guarantees will be required as
prerequisite to the approval of the final plan. This submission shall include a construction schedule, cost
estimates for each major phase of the development taking into account inflation, provisions for inspections
of each phase of construction, and a completion date after which the developer will be in default and the
Town will have the option to access the funds in the performance guarantee to finish the construction.
Approval by the Board of a subdivision plan shall not constitute or be evidence of any acceptance by the
Town of any street, easement, or other open space shown on the plan. When a park or other recreation area
has been shown on the plan to be dedicated to the Town, approval of the plan shall not constitute an
acceptance by the Town of such areas. The Board shall require the plan to contain appropriate notes to this
effect. The Board may also require the filing of a written agreement between the applicant and the Board of
Selectmen covering future deed and title dedication, and provision for the cost of grading, development,
equipment, and maintenance of any such dedicated area.
L. E911 lot addresses shall be shown on the plan.
M. If any portion of the subdivision is within the flood hazard area, the following note shall be on the final
recording plan: “If any portion of this subdivision is within a flood hazard area, all principal structures
hereafter constructed or placed herein shall be so located that their lowest floor, including basement, is at
least one foot above the 100-year flood elevation.”
N. Any waiver(s) approved by the Board shall be noted on the recording plan (See Section 9.3 Waivers.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 28
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION 8 - REVIEW CRITERIA AND STANDARDS
Purpose: The review criteria in this section are those found in 30-A, MRSA, §4404. The following standards
clarify and expand upon the review criteria. Alternative designs and approaches to the standards that will satisfy the
criteria equally as well, or better, may be considered. In all instances, the burden of proof shall be upon the
applicant to present information that, in the judgment of the Board, sufficiently demonstrates conformance with the
review criteria and standards. This shall not be construed as limiting the authority of the Board to require additional
evidence or impose additional standards based on characteristics of the site or development. For example, the Board
may require that minor subdivisions meet the additional requirements of major subdivisions where necessary to
demonstrate conformance with the review criteria and standards of this section.
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law. In issuing its decision, the Board shall make written findings of fact and
conclusions of law relative to the review criteria and standards contained in 30-A, MRSA, §4404 and in this
Ordinance. Applicants for major subdivisions shall prepare written findings of fact and conclusions of law for the
Board’s consideration. If the Board finds that all criteria and standards of the Statute and this Ordinance have been
met, it shall approve the final plan. If the Board finds that any of the provisions of the Statute, or of this Ordinance
have not been met, the Board shall either deny the application or approve the application with conditions to ensure
all of the criteria and standards shall be met by the development.
8.1 Sufficient Water Supply
8.1.1 Criterion: The proposed subdivision has sufficient water available for the reasonably foreseeable needs of
the subdivision.
8.1.2 Criterion: Municipal Water Supply. The proposed subdivision will not cause an unreasonable burden on
an existing water supply, if one is to be used.
8.1.3 Standards:
A. Individual Wells and Private Community Water Supplies. A subdivision not served by a either the East
Vassalboro Water Company (EVWC) or Kennebec Water District (KWD) shall be served in accordance
with applicable state rules for individual wells or private community water supply systems.
1. The Board may require applicants to submit a letter from a local well driller or hydrogeologist familiar
with the area indicating there is a sufficient, healthful water supply to serve the needs of the
subdivision.
2. Individual Wells
a. Individual wells shall be sited and constructed to prevent infiltration of surface water, and
contamination from subsurface waste water disposal systems and other potential sources of
contamination.
b. A dug well on a lot with an area of less than one acre shall not be used as a drinking water source.
Where applicable, this restriction shall be included in lot deeds and noted on the subdivision plan.
c. Each lot shall be designed so that wells can comply with the Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules and the Maine Well Drillers and Pump Installers Rules.
3. Private Community Water Supply Systems
a. The water source, source protection measures, and system design, installation and operating
procedures for a private community water supply system shall conform to the standards of the
Maine Rules Relating to Drinking Water (10-144A C.M.R. 231).
b. Documents establishing the legal responsibilities and procedural framework for the ongoing fiscal
and operational management of the community water system shall be executed prior to occupancy
of the subdivision.
4. Major Subdivisions (additional standards), Fire-Fighting Water Storage Facilities. In areas where the
Vassalboro Fire Department (VFD) has identified the need for additional water storage capacity for
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 29
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
fire-fighting, water storage facilities such as ponds and underground storage tanks, satisfactory to the
VFD Fire Chief, shall be provided at the applicant's expense.
B. East Vassalboro Water Company (EVWC) and Kennebec Water District (KWD). The following standards
apply to a subdivision located within either the EVWC or KWD service area:
1. Upon occupation of the subdivision, service demand shall fall within the EVWC’s or KWD’s available
service capacity, as applicable.
2. The complete water service system, including the service lines to each lot or unit, and fire hydrants,
shall be designed and installed in accordance with the rules and specifications of the applicable public
water supplier (EVWC, KWD) and at the applicant’s expense. The applicant shall provide letters from
the applicable water supplier and Fire Chief indicating that the water service system is designed to their
satisfaction.
8.2 Impact on Groundwater Quality and Quantity
8.2.1 Criterion: The subdivision will not, alone or in conjunction with existing activities, adversely affect the
quality or quantity of groundwater.
8.2.2 Standards:
A. Groundwater Quality and Quantity. The subdivision shall not pose an unreasonable risk that a discharge of
pollutants to groundwater will occur, or that groundwater withdrawals will lower the water table beyond
the boundaries of the subdivision. Additionally, the subdivision shall not pose an unreasonable risk of
lowering of the water table beyond the boundaries of the subdivision by increasing runoff with a
corresponding decrease in infiltration.
B. Hydrogeologic Assessment
1. The Board may require a hydrogeologic assessment prepared by a certified geologist or professional
engineer, experienced in hydrogeology, when the subdivision is not served by public sewer and;
a. Any part of the subdivision is located over a sand and gravel aquifer, as shown on a map entitled
“Hydrogeologic Data for Significant Sand and Gravel Aquifers,” by the Maine Geological Survey,
1985 as amended; or
b. The subdivision has an average density of more than one dwelling unit per 100,000 square feet.
2. The Board may require a hydrogeologic assessment in other cases where site considerations or
development design indicate greater potential of adverse impacts on groundwater quality. These cases
may include:
a. Extensive areas of shallow depth to bedrock soils;
b. Developments in which the average density is less than one dwelling unit per 100,000 square feet,
but the density of the developed portion is in excess of one dwelling unit per 80,000 square feet;
and/or
c. The proposed development will use shared or common subsurface waste water disposal systems.
3. The hydrogeologic assessment should contain at least the following information:
a. A map showing the basic soils types and locations of any subsurface waste water disposal systems
and drinking water wells within the subdivision and within 200 feet of the subdivision boundaries.
b. The depth to the water table at representative points throughout the subdivision.
c. Drainage conditions throughout the subdivision.
d. Data on existing groundwater quality, either from test wells in the subdivision or from existing
wells on neighboring properties.
e. An analysis and evaluation of the effect of the subdivision on groundwater resources. In the case of
residential development, the evaluation shall, at a minimum, include a projection of postdevelopment
nitrate-nitrogen concentration at any wells within the subdivision, at the subdivision
boundaries and at a distance of 1,000 feet from potential contamination sources, whichever is a
shorter distance. Projections of groundwater quality shall be based on the assumption of drought
conditions (i.e. 60% of annual average precipitation).
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 30
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
4. Drinking water wells and subsurface wastewater disposal systems shall be constructed as shown on the
map submitted with the assessment. If construction standards for drinking water wells are
recommended in the assessment, those standards shall be included as a condition of plan approval, and
as restrictions in the deeds to the affected lots.
8.3 Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Impact on Water Bodies
8.3.1 Criterion: The proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or reduction in the land’s
capacity to hold water so that a dangerous or unhealthy condition results.
8.3.2 Standards:
A. The proposed subdivision shall be designed to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation from entering water
bodies, wetlands, and adjacent properties.
B. The subdivision shall comply with 38 MRSA, §420-C. Erosion and Sedimentation Control and the Maine
Erosion and Sediment Control BMPs, Maine Department of Environmental Protection, 2003, or most
current edition.
C. Filling, excavation, and earth moving activity shall be carried out in a way that keeps erosion and
sedimentation to a minimum, including:
1. Preservation and protection of natural vegetation where possible;
2. Keeping duration of exposure of disturbed soils to as short a period as possible before stabilization;
3. Use of temporary vegetation or mulching to protect exposed critical areas during development;
4. Where appropriate or necessary, use of sediment basins, silt traps or other acceptable methods to trap
sediment from stormwater run-off;
5. No storage of fill materials within 50 feet of any intermittent or perennial stream, or water body;
6. Topsoil shall not be removed from the site, except for surplus topsoil removed from areas to be
occupied by buildings, paving, or other surfaces that will not be revegetated;
7. Adequate provision shall be made for surface drainage so that discharge of stormwaters will not have
an unreasonable adverse effect on neighboring properties, downstream water quality, soil erosion or the
public storm drain system. Whenever possible, on-site absorption of run-off shall be used to minimize
discharges from the site.
D. Cutting or removal of vegetation along water bodies shall not increase water temperature or result in
shoreline erosion or sedimentation.
E. Major Subdivisions (additional requirement), Erosion Control Plan. An application for a major subdivision
shall include an erosion and sedimentation control plan, prepared by a qualified professional that details
control structures to be installed, ongoing maintenance procedures, and practices to be followed during the
site preparation, construction, and clean-up stages.
8.4 Traffic Conditions
8.4.1 Criterion: The proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable highway or public road congestion or
unsafe conditions with respect to the use of the highways or public roads existing or proposed and, if the
proposed subdivision requires driveways or entrances onto a state or state aid highway, the Department of
Transportation has provided documentation indicating that the driveways or entrances conform to Title 23,
section 704 and any rules adopted under that section.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 31
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
8.4.2 Standards:
A. Provision shall be made for vehicular access to the subdivision and circulation within the subdivision to:
safeguard against hazards to traffic and pedestrians in existing streets and within the subdivision; avoid
traffic congestion on any street; and provide safe and convenient circulation on public streets and within the
subdivision.
B. Access and circulation shall also conform to the following:
1. Entrance/ Driveway Permits Required
a. State Permit. If the proposed subdivision requires driveways or street entrances onto a state or state
aid highway, the applicant shall provide documentation indicating that the driveways or entrances
conform to Maine Department of Transportation (MDOT) Chapter 299, Highway Driveway and
Entrance Rules.
b. Local Permit. If the proposed subdivision requires driveways or street entrances onto a town road,
the applicant shall provide documentation indicating the driveways or entrances conform to the
Vassalboro Road Construction Ordinance.
2. If the proposed subdivision requires a MDOT Traffic Movement Permit (23 MRSA, §704-A), the
applicant shall submit evidence of permit approval from the MDOT.
3. Where a subdivision lot is proposed to have frontage on two or more streets, access to the lot shall be
via the street where there is lesser potential for traffic congestion and for hazards to traffic and
pedestrians. The Board may waive this requirement where there are aspects of the site that would make
this requirement not feasible.
C. Major Subdivisions (additional standards)
1. The street providing access to the subdivision and neighboring streets and intersections which can be
expected to carry traffic generated by the subdivision shall have the capacity or be suitably improved to
accommodate that traffic and avoid unreasonable congestion. The Board may require a traffic impact
study of roadways and intersections in the vicinity of the proposed subdivision if the subdivision has
the potential of generating significant amounts of traffic, or if traffic safety and capacity deficiencies
exist in the vicinity of the project site.
2. Accessways shall be designed to avoid queuing of entering vehicles on any street. Internal roadways
should be utilized if at all possible. A study or analysis to determine the need for a left-turn storage lane
shall be done when peak hour traffic is forecast to be 40 or more vehicles.
3. Where topographic and other conditions allow, provisions shall be made, and noted on the plan, for
connections to adjoining lots of similar existing or potential use wherever: (i) the access connection
will facilitate fire protection services as approved by the Fire Chief; (ii) the adjoining tract is deeded to
or otherwise under the control of the subdivider; or (iii) it would enable the public to travel between
adjacent developments without the need to travel upon a street outside the subdivision.
4. All transportation infrastructure, including, but not limited to, roads, streets, parking and loading and
unloading areas, and sidewalks shall conform to the design and construction standards of the Town of
Vassalboro, Maine, Road Construction Ordinance, and the Town of Vassalboro Site Plan Review
Ordinance.
8.5 Sewage Disposal
8.5.1 Criterion: The proposed subdivision will provide for adequate sewage waste disposal and will not cause an
unreasonable burden on municipal services if they are utilized.
8.5.2 Standards:
A. Private Systems. A proposed subdivision served by individual subsurface wastewater disposal systems, or
by a common collection and subsurface disposal system, or other treatment system shall be in full
compliance with the Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 32
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
1. The applicant shall submit evidence of site suitability for subsurface sewage disposal prepared by a
Maine licensed site evaluator in full compliance with the requirements of the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
2. On lots in which the limiting factor has been identified as being within 24 inches of the surface, a
second site with suitable soils shall be shown as a reserve area for future replacement of the disposal
area. The reserve area shall be shown on the plan and restricted in the deed so as not to be built upon.
3. In no instance shall a disposal area be on a site that requires a New System Variance from the
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
B. Vassalboro Sanitary District (VSD). For a subdivision located within the service area of the VSD, prior to
final subdivision approval, the applicant shall provide written confirmation from the VSD that: the design
of the proposed subdivision collection system meets applicable utility rules and standards; and the District’s
collection and treatment system has or will have, prior to occupancy of the subdivision, sufficient capacity
to serve the proposed subdivision.
8.6 Solid Waste
8.6.1 Criterion: The proposed subdivision will not cause an unreasonable burden on the municipality's ability to
dispose of solid waste, if municipal services are to be utilized.
8.6.2 Standards:
A. The application shall include a letter from the Town Manager referencing the ability of the Town’s facility
to absorb the additional materials.
B. If solid waste from a proposed subdivision is expected to: (a) exceed the available capacity of the Town’s
solid waste facility; (b) cause the Town’s facility to become non-compliant with its MDEP license; or (c)
cause the Town to exceed the tonnage limits of its contract with a non-municipal facility, the Board shall
require the applicant to submit evidence of an alternate arrangement for the disposal of solid waste. Any
disposal facility included in the alternate arrangement shall be in compliance with its license.
8.7 Aesthetic, Cultural and Natural Values
8.7.1 Criterion: The proposed subdivision will not have an undue adverse effect on the scenic or natural beauty
of the area, aesthetics, historic sites, significant wildlife habitat identified by the Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife or the municipality, or rare and irreplaceable natural areas or any public rights for
physical or visual access to the shoreline.
8.7.2 Standards:
A. Landscape Plan. The Board may require a landscape plan that shows the preservation of any existing trees,
the replacement of trees and vegetation, graded contours, streams, and the preservation of scenic, historic,
or environmentally significant areas. Further, the Board may require notes on the final plan and deed
restrictions, as necessary to assure the required landscaping is maintained in the future.
B. Public Rights for Physical or Visual Access to the Shoreline. Any existing or proposed public or private
rights for physical or visual access, including access to the shoreline of a water body, shall be depicted on
the plan and shall be described in the deed or deeds of any lot or other parcel within the subdivision that
benefits from or is subject to such access rights.
C. Retention of Important Open Spaces, and Natural and Cultural Resources. Developments shall be designed
to retain and conserve important open spaces, and natural and cultural resources to the greatest extent
practicable to assure there will be no undue adverse effect to these resources. The Board may require that
any restrictions to protect historic and prehistoric sites, unique natural areas, or significant wildlife habitat
appear as notes on the plan and as deed restrictions to the affected lots.
1. Historic/Prehistoric Sites. An application for a subdivision that includes any historic or prehistoric sites
that are either listed on, or deemed eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places, shall
describe the measures to be taken to assure there will not be an undue adverse effect on these sites.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 33
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
2. Unique Natural Areas. An application for a subdivision that includes any area designated as a Unique
Natural Area by the Maine Natural Areas Program (MNAP) shall describe the measures to be taken to
assure there will not be an undue adverse effect on these unique natural areas and the species they
support.
3. Significant Wildlife Habitat (SWH). If any portion of a subdivision lies within 250 feet of SWH as
identified and mapped by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (MDIFW), the
following shall apply: (i) the application shall describe the measures to be taken to assure there will not
be an undue adverse effect on the SWH and the species it supports; (ii) there shall be no cutting of
vegetation within such areas, or within the strip of land extending at least 75 feet from the edge of the
normal high-water mark of such habitat areas unless the applicant demonstrates there will be no undue
adverse effects; and (iii) the application shall include written comments from the MDIFW.
D. Major Subdivisions (additional standards): Reservation, Dedication and Maintenance of Common Open
Space and Associated Facilities. The Board may require the reservation of common open space (as
defined) within a proposed subdivision to conserve cultural or natural resources, to maintain productive
farmland, and/or to provide for the recreational needs of the occupants of the subdivision.
1. In determining the need for common open space the Board shall consider the following:
a. Open space needs consistent with the Board’s findings for Sections 8.7.2, A, B and C (above), and
Section 8.8 Farmland, including the proximity of the subdivision to neighboring open space with
similar purposes.
b. Recreational needs for common open space based on the proximity of the subdivision to
neighboring facilities, the type of development and the demographic characteristics of potential
residents of the subdivision, and the density of the development.
2. Land reserved for common open space purposes shall be of a character, configuration and location
suitable for the particular use intended.
3. Further subdivision of common open space and its use for other than conservation, agriculture or noncommercial
recreation shall be prohibited, except that easements for underground utilities may be
allowed. Only structures accessory to conservation or non-commercial recreation uses may be erected
on common open space. Common open space that is to be owned by an entity other than the Town shall
be subject to a perpetual conservation easement, held by the Town, the state, or a qualified land trust.
4. All common open space and associated facilities shall be owned by an incorporated lot owners'
association to which all lot or dwelling unit owners shall belong, a land trust or other qualified
nonprofit land conservation organization, or the Town.
5. Notes on the final plan shall state that common open space shall not be used for residential or
commercial purposes, and shall indicate which portions of the common open space, if any, are to be
offered to the Town for acceptance.
6. The final plan application shall include draft legal documents to assure the common open space is
adequately maintained by the lot owners, and the developer until there is adequate development for the
lot owners to assume maintenance of the open space.
8.8 Farmland
8.8.1 Criterion: All farmland within the proposed subdivision has been identified on maps submitted as part of
the application. Any mapping of farmland may be done with the help of the local soil and water
conservation district.
8.8.2 Standards: All developments shall be configured to preserve productive farmland (as defined) to the
maximum extent practicable. New structures and roads may be built on farmland to the extent allowed
under other provisions of this Ordinance, but the applicant shall seek creative measures to minimize
development that occurs on productive farmland, or divides a single field, or otherwise reduces the ease
with which a parcel of farmland can be farmed in the future. All areas of farmland of 5 or more acres must
be identified on one or more plan drawings. Farmland is defined by state statute as any area of 5 or more
acres of land that is classified as prime farmland, unique farmland, or farmland of statewide importance by
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 34
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
the United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resource Conservation Service, or is used for the
production of agricultural products as defined in 7 MRSA §152(2).
8.9 Conformance with Local Ordinances and Plans
8.9.1 Criterion: The proposed subdivision is in conformance with the duly adopted plans and ordinances for the
Town of Vassalboro. In making this determination, the Planning Board may interpret these ordinances and
plans.
8.9.2 Standard: The proposed subdivision shall conform to the Town’s Shoreland Zoning Ordinance, Site
Review Ordinance, Floodplain Ordinance, Road Construction Ordinance, Building Permit Ordinance, and
other ordinances and plans, as applicable.
8.10 Financial and Technical Capacity
8.10.1 Criterion: The developer has adequate financial and technical capacity to meet the standards of this
Ordinance.
8.10.2 Standards:
A. Financial Capacity. The applicant shall demonstrate the availability of financial resources sufficient to
implement the proposed subdivision plan. In determining the applicant’s financial capacity, the Board shall
consider cost estimates for implementation of the plan, letters from prospective sources of financing, the
proposed time frame for construction, and performance guarantees required of the applicant, as applicable.
(See Section 11 Performance Guarantees and Inspection of Required Improvements)
B. Technical Capacity. The applicant shall demonstrate the qualifications of the contractors and consultants,
who will supervise, construct and inspect the improvements of the proposed subdivision, as applicable. In
determining the applicant's technical ability, the Board shall consider the applicant's previous experience,
the experience and training of the applicant's consultants and contractors, and the number and nature of any
violations of previous approvals granted to the applicant, as applicable.
8.11 Floodplain Management
8.11.1 Criterion: Based on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps
and Flood Insurance Rate Maps, and information presented by the applicant whether the subdivision is in
a flood-prone area. If the subdivision, or any part of it, is in such an area, the subdivider shall determine
the 100-year flood elevation and flood hazard boundaries within the subdivision. The proposed subdivision
plan must include a condition of plan approval requiring that principal structures in the subdivision will be
constructed with their lowest floor, including the basement, at least one foot above the 100-year flood
elevation.
8.11.2 Standards: When any part of a subdivision is located in a special flood hazard area as identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the following shall apply:
A. The applicant shall determine the 100-year flood elevation, and the flood hazard boundaries within the
subdivision shall be shown on the subdivision plan.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
C. Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. The subdivision plan shall include a statement that all principal structures shall be constructed with their
lowest habitable floor, including the basement, at least one foot above the 100-year flood elevation. Such a
restriction shall be included in any deed, lease, purchase and sales agreement, or document transferring or
expressing the intent to transfer any interest in real estate or structure.
E. The plan shall meet the requirements of the Town’s Floodplain Management Ordinance.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 35
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
8.12 Freshwater Wetlands, Rivers, Streams and Brooks
8.12.1 Criterion: All freshwater wetlands within the proposed subdivision shall be identified on any maps
submitted as part of the application, regardless of the size of these wetlands.
8.12.2 Criterion: Any river, stream or brook within or abutting the proposed subdivision has been identified on
any maps submitted as part of the application. For purposes of this section, "river, stream or brook" has
the same meaning as in Title 38, §480-B, sub§9.
Standards. Every wetland, river, stream or brook within or abutting the proposed subdivision shall be
identified and depicted on the subdivision plan. Wetland boundaries shall be delineated in the field in
accordance with the 1987 Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual, published by the United States
Army Corps of Engineers.
8.13 Stormwater Management
8.13.1 Criterion: The proposed subdivision will provide for adequate stormwater management.
8.13.2 Standards:
A. Adequate provision shall be made for the management of the quantity and quality of all stormwater
generated within the subdivision, including the collection and disposal of all runoff from proposed streets,
parking areas, and other impervious surfaces. Stormwater shall be retained using vegetation and other
natural features of the site to the greatest extent feasible. Stormwater shall not create adverse impacts on
water bodies, or on abutting or downstream properties.
B. Major Subdivisions and Developments Requiring State Stormwater Permits (additional standards)
1. Applications for subdivisions that require a state permit under the Site Location of Development Law
or the Stormwater Management Law shall include a stormwater management plan, prepared by a
professional engineer, demonstrating compliance with the standards of MDEP Rule Chapter 500
(Stormwater Management Regulations). Applications shall include a copy of the State permit.
2. For projects involving structural treatments, such as detention ponds, a Stormwater Maintenance
Agreement that describes how the stormwater facilities shall be maintained through the course of their
projected life, shall be submitted at the time of application.
8.14 Lake Phosphorus Concentration
8.14.1 Criterion: The long-term cumulative effects of the proposed subdivision will not unreasonably increase a
great pond's phosphorus concentration during the construction phase and life of the proposed subdivision.
8.14.2 Standards: If any portion of the proposed subdivision is in the direct watershed of a Great Pond7, the
following shall be submitted or indicated on the plan:
A. Major Subdivisions (additional standards): For subdivisions containing 5 or more lots or dwelling units
created within any 5-year period, or any combination of 800 linear feet of new or upgraded streets, the
following is required:
1. A Stormwater Management Plan shall be submitted that meets the phosphorus allocation across the
entire subdivision in accordance with the methodology described in the MDEP Phosphorus Design
Manual, Volume II of the Maine Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, 2006, or most
current editions. The phosphorus impact analysis and control plan shall include all worksheets,
engineering calculations, and construction specifications and diagrams for control measures.
7 Great ponds with watersheds within Vassalboro include Webber Pond, Threemile Pond, China Lake (West Basin), Pattee
Pond, Spectacle Pond, and Threecornered Pond. (Source: Maine Department of Environmental Protection Per Acre
Phosphorus Allocations for Selected Maine Lakes, updated 11/18/10)
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 36
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
2. A long-term maintenance plan for all phosphorus control measures shall be submitted.
B. For all other subdivisions not included in subsection 8.14.2.A above, meeting the requirements of 8.3
Erosion and Sedimentation and 8.13 Stormwater Management shall be demonstration that this criterion has
been met.
8.15 Spaghetti Lots Prohibited (Shoreland Zoning Areas)
8.15.1 Criterion: If any lots in the proposed subdivision have shore frontage on a river, stream, brook, or great
pond as these features are defined in 38 MRSA, §480-B, none of the lots created within the subdivision will
have a lot depth to shore frontage ratio greater than 5 to 1.
8.15.2 Standard: The subdivision plan shall clearly show that any subdivision lot with shore frontage on a river,
stream, brook or great pond, as defined in the Maine Shoreland Zoning statute, will not have a lot depth to
shore frontage ratio greater than 5 to 1. 8
8.16 Impact on Adjoining Municipality
8.16.1 Criterion: For any proposed subdivision that crosses municipal boundaries, the proposed subdivision will
not cause unreasonable traffic congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to the use of existing public
ways in an adjoining municipality in which part of the subdivision is located.
8.16.2 Standard: If any proposed subdivision crosses municipal boundaries, the Board shall conduct a review
parallel to the review of the adjoining municipality, and shall attempt to conduct at least one joint meeting.
If either municipality requests a traffic study or traffic impact analysis by the applicant, the study shall be
made available to both review authorities.
8.17 Lands Subject to Liquidation Harvesting
8.17.1 Criterion: Timber on the parcel being subdivided has not been harvested in violation of rules adopted
pursuant to 12 MRSA, §8869, sub-§14, adopted by the Maine Forest Service to substantially eliminate
liquidation harvesting.
8.17.2 Standards:
A. If the tract to be subdivided shows evidence of having been forested within the preceding 10 years, the
applicant shall submit an affidavit concerning the status of timber harvesting operations. The affidavit shall
be signed by the Maine Forest Service (MFS) or a forester licensed pursuant to Title 32, chapter 76. The
affidavit shall state whether the timber was harvested in compliance with 38 MRSA, §8869(14), and the
MFS Rule (Chapter 23 Timber Harvesting Standards to Substantially Eliminate Liquidation Harvesting).
B. If a violation of the above-cited rules adopted by the MFS has occurred, the Board must determine prior to
granting approval for the subdivision that 5 years have elapsed from the date the landowner under whose
ownership the harvest occurred acquired the parcel. The Board may request technical assistance from the
MFS to determine whether a rule violation has occurred. For the purposes of this subsection, "parcel"
means a contiguous area within the Town owned by one person or a group of persons in common or joint
ownership.
8 See Section 1.2.3 B with reference to 40 acre lot exemption.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 37
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
8.18 Pollution
8.18.1 Criterion: The proposed subdivision will not result in undue water or air pollution. In making this
determination, the Board shall at least consider:
A. The elevation of the land above sea level and its relation to the flood plains;
B. The nature of soils and subsoils and their ability to adequately support waste disposal;
C. The slope of the land and its effect on effluents;
D. The availability of streams for disposal of effluents; and
E. The applicable state and local health and water resource rules and regulations.
8.18.2 Standards:
A. Water Pollution
1. The proposed subdivision will meet all applicable water quality control standards of the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection (MDEP).
2. Water supplied to lots or units within the subdivision shall meet the primary drinking water standards
contained in the Maine Rules Relating to Drinking Water. If water supplied to any lot or unit within the
subdivision contains contaminants in excess of the secondary drinking water standards in the Maine
Rules Relating to Drinking Water, that fact shall be disclosed in a note on the final subdivision plan.
3. The subdivision will meet the requirements of sections 8.3, 8.5, 8.10, 8.11, and 8.14 of this Ordinance.
B. Air Pollution. The proposed subdivision will meet any applicable air pollution regulations of the MDEP.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 38
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION 9 - WAIVERS
9.1 Waivers of Certain Submission Requirements
The Board may waive certain submission requirements where there are special circumstances of the development,
or where the application is simple and minor in nature, provided the public health, safety, and welfare are protected,
and provided the waivers do not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purposes of this Ordinance.
9.2 Waivers of Certain Improvements
The Board may waive certain required improvements where there are special circumstances of the development
such that the required improvements are not requisite to providing for the public health, safety and welfare, or are
inappropriate because of inadequate or lacking connecting facilities adjacent to or in proximity of the proposed
development, provided the waivers do not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purposes of this Ordinance.
9.3 Requirements for Waivers
When granting waivers, the Board shall set conditions so that the purposes of this Ordinance are met. The Board
shall make a written record of waivers granted and the reasons for granting them to be made a part of the decision
on the application. When the Board grants a waiver to any of the improvements required by this ordinance, the final
plan, to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds, shall indicate the waiver(s) granted and the date on which they were
granted.
SECTION 10 - REVISIONS TO APPROVED PLANS
10.1 Procedure and Scope of Review
10.1.1 If the revision involves only modifications of the approved plan, without the creation of additional lots or
dwelling units, the procedures for final plan approval shall be followed.
10.1.2 Minor Subdivisions. If the revision involves the creation of additional lots or dwelling units, the procedures
for final plan approval shall be followed, unless the addition of lots or dwelling units creates a major
subdivision, in which case Section 10.1.3 below shall apply.
10.1.3 Major Subdivisions. If the revision involves the creation of additional lots or dwelling units, the procedures
for preliminary and final plan approval shall be followed.
10.1.4 The scope of review shall be limited to those portions of the plan proposed to be changed.
10.2 Submissions
The applicant shall submit a copy of the approved plan as well as 7 copies of the proposed revisions, with enough
supporting information to allow the Board to determine if the proposed revisions meet the standards of this
Ordinance. The revised plan shall indicate it is the revision of a previously approved and recorded plan, and shall
show the title of the subdivision and the book and page or cabinet and sheet on which the original plan is recorded
at the Registry of Deeds.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 39
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION 11 - PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES AND INSPECTION OF
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
11.1 Performance Guarantees
The Board shall require performance guarantees for all improvements necessary to meet the standards of this
Ordinance, including performance guarantees for the construction of the streets, pedestrian amenities, stormwater
management facilities, public sewage collection or disposal facilities, public water systems, landscaping and
recreation improvements, and erosion and sedimentation control measures.
11.2 Types of Guarantees
The applicant shall provide one of the following types of performance guarantees with the application for final plan
approval. The performance guarantee shall be for an amount adequate to cover the total construction costs of all
required improvements, taking into account the time-span of the construction schedule and the inflation rates for
construction costs.
A. Escrow Account. A cash contribution to the establishment of an escrow account shall be made by either a
certified check made out to the Town, the direct deposit into a savings account, or the purchase of a
certificate of deposit. For any account opened by the applicant, the Town shall be named as owner or coowner,
and the consent of the Town shall be required for a withdrawal. Any interest earned on the escrow
account shall be returned to the applicant unless the Town has found it necessary to draw on the account, in
which case the interest earned shall be proportionately divided between the amount returned to the
applicant and the amount withdrawn to complete the required improvements.
B. Performance Bond. A performance bond issued by a surety company shall be made payable to the Town
and approved by the Board of Selectmen or Town Manager. The performance bond shall detail the
conditions of the bond, the method for release of the bond or portions of the bond to the applicant, and the
procedures for collection by the Town. The bond documents shall specifically reference the subdivision for
which approval is sought.
C. Letter of Credit. An irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution establishing funding for the
construction of the subdivision, from which the Town may draw if construction is inadequate, approved by
the Board of Selectmen, or Town Manager. An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other lending
institution with offices in the region shall indicate that funds have been set aside for the construction of the
subdivision for the duration of the project and may not be used for any other project or loan.
11.3 Conditions and Contents of the Guarantee
11.3.1 The conditions and amount of the performance guarantee shall be determined by the Board with the advice
of the Town Manager, Road Commissioner, Board of Selectmen, town attorney, and/or a professional
engineer employed by the Town to review the proposed development.
11.3.2 The performance guarantee shall contain a construction schedule, cost estimates for each major phase of
construction taking into account inflation, provisions for inspections of each phase of construction,
provisions for the release of part or all of the performance guarantee to the developer, and a date after
which the applicant will be in default and the Town shall have access to the funds to finish construction.
11.3.3 A period of one year, or such period as the Planning Board may determine appropriate, not to exceed 5
years, shall be set forth in the performance guarantee within which time required improvements must be
completed.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 40
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
11.4 Release of Guarantee
11.4.1 Prior to the release of any part of the performance guarantees, the Board shall determine to its
satisfaction, in part upon the report of the CEO or other qualified individual(s) retained by the Town, and
any other agencies and departments involved, that the proposed improvements meet or exceed the design
and construction requirements for that portion or phase of the subdivision for which the release is
requested.
11.4.2 Default. If, upon inspection, the CEO and/or other qualified individual(s) working on behalf of the Town
finds any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the plans and
specifications filed as part of the application, (s)he shall so report in writing to the Board of Selectmen, the
Planning Board and the developer. The Board of Selectmen shall take any steps necessary to preserve the
Town’s rights. (See also Section 2.5 Violations and Enforcement.)
11.5 Conditional Agreement
11. 5.1 The Board, at its discretion, may provide for the applicant to enter into a binding agreement with
the Town in lieu of the other financial performance guarantees. Such an agreement shall provide for
approval of the final plan on the condition that no lot may be sold or built upon until either:
A. It is certified by the Board, or its agent, that all of the required improvements have been installed in
accordance with this Ordinance and the Board’s conditions of approval, or
B. A performance guarantee, acceptable to the Town, is submitted in an amount necessary to cover the
completion of the required improvements at an amount adjusted for inflation and prorated for the portions
of the required improvements already installed.
11.5.2 All conditional agreements shall have a time limit for completion and shall be approved by the Planning
Board and by the Board of Selectmen prior to final review of the plan. Notice of the agreement and any
conditions shall be noted on the plan which is recorded at the Registry of Deeds.
11. 5.3 Release from the agreement shall follow the procedures contained in Section 11.4.
11.6 Inspection of Required Improvements
11.6.1 At least 5 days prior to commencing construction of required improvements, the developer shall:
A. Notify the CEO in writing of the time when (s)he proposes to commence construction of such
improvements, so the Board of Selectmen can arrange for inspections to assure all Town specifications,
requirements, and conditions of approval are met during the construction of required improvements, and to
assure the satisfactory completion of improvements and utilities required by the Board.
B. Deposit with the Board of Selectmen a check for the amount of 2% of the estimated costs of the required
improvements to pay for the costs of inspection. If upon satisfactory completion of construction and
cleanup there are funds remaining, the surplus shall be refunded to the developer as appropriate. If the
inspection account shall be drawn down by 90%, the developer shall deposit an additional 1% of the
estimated costs of the required improvements.
11.6.2 If the CEO finds upon inspection of the improvements any of the required improvements have not been
constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications filed by the developer, the CEO shall so report
in writing to the Board of Selectmen, Planning Board, and the developer. The Board of Selectmen shall
take any steps necessary to assure compliance with the approved plans.
11.6.3 If at any time it appears necessary or desirable to modify the required improvements before or during the
construction of the required improvements, the CEO is authorized to approve minor modifications due to
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 41
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
unforeseen circumstances such as encountering hidden outcrops of bedrock, natural springs, etc. The CEO
shall issue any approval under this section in writing and shall transmit a copy of the approval to the Board.
Revised plans shall be filed with the Board. For major modifications, such as relocation of rights-of-way,
property boundaries, changes of grade by more than 1%, etc., the developer shall obtain permission from
the Board to modify the plans in accordance with Section 10 Revisions to Approved Plans.
11.6.4 At the close of each summer construction season the Town shall, at the expense of the developer, have the
site inspected by the CEO. By October 1 of each year during which construction was done on the site, the
CEO shall submit a report to the Board based on that inspection, addressing whether stormwater and
erosion control measures (both temporary and permanent) are in place, are properly installed, and appear
adequate. The report shall also include a discussion and recommendations on any problems which were
encountered.
11.6.5 Prior to the sale of any lot, the developer shall provide the Board with a letter from a professional land
surveyor, stating all monumentation shown on the plan has been installed.
11.6.6 Upon completion of street construction and prior to a vote by the Board of Selectmen to submit a proposed
public way to a Town Meeting vote, a written certification signed by a professional engineer shall be
submitted to the Board of Selectmen at the expense of the applicant, certifying the proposed public way
meets or exceeds the design and construction requirements of these regulations. If there are any
underground utilities, the servicing utility shall certify in writing they have been installed in a manner
acceptable to the utility. "As built" plans shall be submitted to the Board of Selectmen.
11.6.7 The developer shall be required to maintain all improvements and provide for snow removal on streets and
sidewalks until acceptance of the improvements by the Town or control is placed with a lot owners'
association.
SECTION 12 - APPENDIX
30-A, MRSA, §4401, as amended (Definitions)
30-A, MRSA, §4403, as amended (Municipal Review and Regulation)
30-A, MRSA, §4404, as amended (Review Criteria)
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 42
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
30-A §4401. DEFINITIONS
As used in this subchapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms have the following meanings.
[1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
1. Densely developed area. "Densely developed area" means any commercial, industrial or compact residential area of
10 or more acres with an existing density of at least one principal structure per 2 acres.
[ 1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW) .]
2. Dwelling unit. "Dwelling unit" means any part of a structure which, through sale or lease, is intended for human
habitation, including single-family and multifamily housing, condominiums, apartments and time-share units.
[ 1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW) .]
2-A. Freshwater wetland. "Freshwater wetland" means freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas which are:
A. Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration sufficient to support, and which
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils;
and [1989, c. 404, §1 (NEW).]
B. Not considered part of a great pond, coastal wetland, river, stream or brook. [1989, c. 404, §1 (NEW).]
These areas may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not conform to the criteria of this subsection.
[ 1989, c. 404, §1 (NEW) .]
2-B. Farmland. "Farmland" means a parcel consisting of 5 or more acres of land that is:
A. Classified as prime farmland, unique farmland or farmland of statewide or local importance by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service within the United States Department of Agriculture; or [2009, c. 356, Pt. C, §1
(NEW).]
B. Used for the production of agricultural products as defined in Title 7, section 152, subsection 2. [2009, c. 356,
Pt. C, §1 (NEW).]
[ 2009, c. 356, Pt. C, §1 (NEW) .]
3. Principal structure. "Principal structure" means any building or structure in which the main use of the premises takes
place.
[ 1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW); 1989, c. 497, §1
(RPR) .]
4. Subdivision. "Subdivision" means the division of a tract or parcel of land into 3 or more lots within any 5-year period
that begins on or after September 23, 1971. This definition applies whether the division is accomplished by sale, lease,
development, buildings or otherwise. The term "subdivision" also includes the division of a new structure or structures on a
tract or parcel of land into 3 or more dwelling units within a 5-year period, the construction or placement of 3 or more dwelling
units on a single tract or parcel of land and the division of an existing structure or structures previously used for commercial or
industrial use into 3 or more dwelling units within a 5-year period.
A. In determining whether a tract or parcel of land is divided into 3 or more lots, the first dividing of the tract or parcel is
considered to create the first 2 lots and the next dividing of either of these first 2 lots, by whomever accomplished, is
considered to create a 3rd lot, unless:
(1) Both dividings are accomplished by a subdivider who has retained one of the lots for the subdivider's own use as
a single-family residence that has been the subdivider's principal residence for a period of at least 5 years
immediately preceding the 2nd division; or
(2) The division of the tract or parcel is otherwise exempt under this subchapter. [2001, c. 359, §1
(AMD).]
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 43
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
B. The dividing of a tract or parcel of land and the lot or lots so made, which dividing or lots when made are not subject to
this subchapter, do not become subject to this subchapter by the subsequent dividing of that tract or parcel of land or any
portion of that tract or parcel. The municipal reviewing authority shall consider the existence of the previously created lot
or lots in reviewing a proposed subdivision created by a subsequent dividing. [1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45
(NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
C. A lot of 40 or more acres must be counted as a lot, except:
(2) When a municipality has, by ordinance, or the municipal reviewing authority has, by regulation, elected not to
count lots of 40 or more acres as lots for the purposes of this subchapter when the parcel of land being divided is
located entirely outside any shoreland area as defined in Title 38, section 435 or a municipality's shoreland zoning
ordinance. [2001, c. 651, §1 (AMD).]
D. [2001, c. 359, §2 (RP).]
D-1. A division accomplished by devise does not create a lot or lots for the purposes of this definition, unless the intent of
the transferor is to avoid the objectives of this subchapter. [2001, c. 359, §3 (NEW).]
D-2. A division accomplished by condemnation does not create a lot or lots for the purposes of this definition, unless the
intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of this subchapter. [2001, c. 359, §3 (NEW).]
D-3. A division accomplished by order of court does not create a lot or lots for the purposes of this definition, unless the
intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of this subchapter. [2001, c. 359, §3 (NEW).]
D-4. A division accomplished by gift to a person related to the donor of an interest in property held by the donor for a
continuous period of 5 years prior to the division by gift does not create a lot or lots for the purposes of this definition,
unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of this subchapter. If the real estate exempt under this
paragraph is transferred within 5 years to another person not related to the donor of the exempt real estate as provided in
this paragraph, then the previously exempt division creates a lot or lots for the purposes of this subsection. "Person related
to the donor" means a spouse, parent, grandparent, brother, sister, child or grandchild related by blood, marriage or
adoption. A gift under this paragraph can not be given for consideration that is more than 1/2 the assessed value of the real
estate. [2001, c. 359, §3 (NEW).]
D-5. A division accomplished by a gift to a municipality if that municipality accepts the gift does not create a lot or lots
for the purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of this subchapter. [2001,
c. 359, §3 (NEW).]
D-6. A division accomplished by the transfer of any interest in land to the owners of land abutting that land that does not
create a separate lot does not create a lot or lots for the purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the transferor is to
avoid the objectives of this subchapter. If the real estate exempt under this paragraph is transferred within 5 years to
another person without all of the merged land, then the previously exempt division creates a lot or lots for the purposes of
this subsection. [2001, c. 359, §3 (NEW).]
E. The division of a tract or parcel of land into 3 or more lots and upon each of which lots permanent dwelling structures
legally existed before September 23, 1971 is not a subdivision. [1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW);
1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
F. In determining the number of dwelling units in a structure, the provisions of this subsection regarding the determination
of the number of lots apply, including exemptions from the definition of a subdivision of land. [1989, c. 104,
Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
G. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, leased dwelling units are not subject to subdivision review if the
municipal reviewing authority has determined that the units are otherwise subject to municipal review at least as stringent
as that required under this subchapter. [1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C,
§10 (NEW); 1989, c. 497, §2 (AMD).]
H. [2001, c. 651, §2 (RP).]
H-1. This subchapter may not be construed to prevent a municipality from enacting an ordinance under its home rule
authority that:
(1) Expands the definition of "subdivision" to include the division of a structure for commercial or industrial use; or
(2) Otherwise regulates land use activities.
A municipality may not enact an ordinance that expands the definition of "subdivision" except as provided in this
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 44
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
subchapter. A municipality that has a definition of "subdivision" that conflicts with the requirements of this subsection at
the time this paragraph takes effect shall comply with this subsection no later than January 1, 2006. Such a municipality
must file its conflicting definition at the county registry of deeds by June 30, 2003 for the definition to remain valid for the
grace period ending January 1, 2006. A filing required under this paragraph must be collected and indexed in a separate
book in the registry of deeds for the county in which the municipality is located. [2001, c. 651, §3 (NEW).]
I. The grant of a bona fide security interest in an entire lot that has been exempted from the definition of subdivision under
paragraphs D-1 to D-6, or subsequent transfer of that entire lot by the original holder of the security interest or that
person's successor in interest, does not create a lot for the purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the transferor is
to avoid the objectives of this subchapter. [2001, c. 359, §5 (AMD).]
[ 2001, c. 651, §§1-3 (AMD) .]
5. New structure or structures. "New structure or structures" includes any structure for which construction begins on or
after September 23, 1988. The area included in the expansion of an existing structure is deemed to be a new structure for the
purposes of this subchapter.
[ 1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW) .]
6. Tract or parcel of land. "Tract or parcel of land" means all contiguous land in the same ownership, except that lands
located on opposite sides of a public or private road are considered each a separate tract or parcel of land unless the road was
established by the owner of land on both sides of the road after September 22, 1971.
[ 2007, c. 49, §1 (AMD) .]
7. Outstanding river segments. In accordance with Title 12, section 402, "outstanding river segments" means:
I. The Kennebec River from Thorns Head Narrows in North Bath to the Edwards Dam in Augusta, excluding Perkins
Township, and from the Route 148 bridge in Madison to the Caratunk and The Forks Plantation town line, excluding the
western shore in Concord Township, Pleasant Ridge Plantation and Carrying Place Township and excluding Wyman
Lake; [1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
V. The Sheepscot River from the railroad bridge in Wiscasset to the Halldale Road in Montville, excluding Long Pond
and Sheepscot Pond, including its tributary the West Branch of the Sheepscot from its confluence with the Sheepscot
River in Whitefield to the outlet of Branch Pond in China; [1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c.
104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
30-A §4404. REVIEW CRITERIA
When adopting any subdivision regulations and when reviewing any subdivision for approval, the municipal reviewing
authority shall consider the following criteria and, before granting approval, must determine that: [1989, c. 104, Pt.
A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
1. Pollution. The proposed subdivision will not result in undue water or air pollution. In making this determination, it
shall at least consider:
A. The elevation of the land above sea level and its relation to the flood plains; [1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45
(NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
B. The nature of soils and subsoils and their ability to adequately support waste disposal; [1989, c. 104, Pt. A,
§45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
C. The slope of the land and its effect on effluents; [1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104,
Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
D. The availability of streams for disposal of effluents; and [1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c.
104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
E. The applicable state and local health and water resource rules and regulations; [1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45
(NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 45
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
[1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW) .]
2. Sufficient water. The proposed subdivision has sufficient water available for the reasonably foreseeable needs of the
subdivision;
[ 1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
3. Municipal water supply. The proposed subdivision will not cause an unreasonable burden on an existing water
supply, if one is to be used;
[ 1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
4. Erosion. The proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or a reduction in the land's capacity to hold
water so that a dangerous or unhealthy condition results;
[ 1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
5. Traffic. The proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable highway or public road congestion or unsafe conditions
with respect to the use of the highways or public roads existing or proposed and, if the proposed subdivision requires
driveways or entrances onto a state or state aid highway located outside the urban compact area of an urban compact
municipality as defined by Title 23, section 754, the Department of Transportation has provided documentation indicating that
the driveways or entrances conform to Title 23, section 704 and any rules adopted under that section;
[ 2001, c. 560, §1 (AMD) .]
6. Sewage disposal. The proposed subdivision will provide for adequate sewage waste disposal and will not cause an
unreasonable burden on municipal services if they are utilized;
[ 1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW); 1989, c. 497, §8
(AMD) .]
7. Municipal solid waste disposal. The proposed subdivision will not cause an unreasonable burden on the
municipality's ability to dispose of solid waste, if municipal services are to be utilized;
[ 1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW); 1989, c. 497, §8
(AMD) .]
8. Aesthetic, cultural and natural values. The proposed subdivision will not have an undue adverse effect on the scenic
or natural beauty of the area, aesthetics, historic sites, significant wildlife habitat identified by the Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife or the municipality, or rare and irreplaceable natural areas or any public rights for physical or visual
access to the shoreline;
[ 1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW); 1989, c. 497, §8
(AMD) .]
9. Conformity with local ordinances and plans. The proposed subdivision conforms with a duly adopted subdivision
regulation or ordinance, comprehensive plan, development plan or land use plan, if any. In making this determination, the
municipal reviewing authority may interpret these ordinances and plans;
[ 1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
10. Financial and technical capacity. The subdivider has adequate financial and technical capacity to meet the standards
of this section;
[ 1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW) .]
11. Surface waters; outstanding river segments. Whenever situated entirely or partially within the watershed of any
pond or lake or within 250 feet of any wetland, great pond or river as defined in Title 38, chapter 3, subchapter I, article 2-B,
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 46
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
the proposed subdivision will not adversely affect the quality of that body of water or unreasonably affect the shoreline of that
body of water.
A. When lots in a subdivision have frontage on an outstanding river segment, the proposed subdivision plan must require
principal structures to have a combined lot shore frontage and setback from the normal high-water mark of 500 feet.
(1) To avoid circumventing the intent of this provision, whenever a proposed subdivision adjoins a shoreland strip
narrower than 250 feet which is not lotted, the proposed subdivision shall be reviewed as if lot lines extended to the
shore.
(2) The frontage and set-back provisions of this paragraph do not apply either within areas zoned as general
development or its equivalent under shoreland zoning, Title 38, chapter 3, subchapter I, article 2-B, or within areas
designated by ordinance as densely developed. The determination of which areas are densely developed must be
based on a finding that existing development met the definitional requirements of section 4401, subsection 1, on
September 23, 1983; [1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10
(NEW).]
[1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW); 1989, c. 497, §8
(AMD) .]
12. Ground water. The proposed subdivision will not, alone or in conjunction with existing activities, adversely affect
the quality or quantity of ground water;
[1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW); 1989, c. 429, §1
(AMD); 1989, c. 497, §8 (AMD) .]
13. Flood areas. Based on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and
Flood Insurance Rate Maps, and information presented by the applicant whether the subdivision is in a flood-prone area. If the
subdivision, or any part of it, is in such an area, the subdivider shall determine the 100-year flood elevation and flood hazard
boundaries within the subdivision. The proposed subdivision plan must include a condition of plan approval requiring that
principal structures in the subdivision will be constructed with their lowest floor, including the basement, at least one foot
above the 100-year flood elevation;
[1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW); 1989, c. 429, §1
(AMD); 1989, c. 497, §8 (AMD); 1989, c. 878, Pt. A, §85 (RPR).]
14. Freshwater wetlands. All freshwater wetlands within the proposed subdivision have been identified on any maps
submitted as part of the application, regardless of the size of these wetlands. Any mapping of freshwater wetlands may be done
with the help of the local soil and water conservation district;
[1989, c. 404, §2 (NEW); 1989, c. 429, §2 (NEW); 1989, c. 497, §9 (NEW); 1989, c.
772, §3 (AMD); 1989, c. 878, Pt. G, §5 (RPR) .]
14-A. Farmland. All farmland within the proposed subdivision has been identified on maps submitted as part of the
application. Any mapping of farmland may be done with the help of the local soil and water conservation district;
[2009, c. 356, Pt. C, §2 (NEW).]
15. River, stream or brook. Any river, stream or brook within or abutting the proposed subdivision has been identified
on any maps submitted as part of the application. For purposes of this section, "river, stream or brook" has the same meaning as
in Title 38, section 480-B, subsection 9;
[1991, c. 838, §12 (AMD).]
16. Storm water. The proposed subdivision will provide for adequate storm water management;
[1991, c. 838, §12 (AMD).]
17. Spaghetti-lots prohibited. If any lots in the proposed subdivision have shore frontage on a river, stream, brook, great
pond or coastal wetland as these features are defined in Title 38, section 480-B, none of the lots created within the subdivision
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 47
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
have a lot depth to shore frontage ratio greater than 5 to 1;
[1997, c. 226, §2 (AMD).]
18. Lake phosphorus concentration. The long-term cumulative effects of the proposed subdivision will not
unreasonably increase a great pond's phosphorus concentration during the construction phase and life of the proposed
subdivision;
[2003, c. 622, §2 (AMD).]
19. Impact on adjoining municipality. For any proposed subdivision that crosses municipal boundaries, the proposed
subdivision will not cause unreasonable traffic congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to the use of existing public ways
in an adjoining municipality in which part of the subdivision is located; and
[2003, c. 622, §3 (AMD).]
20. Lands subject to liquidation harvesting. Timber on the parcel being subdivided has not been harvested in violation
of rules adopted pursuant to Title 12, section 8869, subsection 14. If a violation of rules adopted by the Maine Forest Service to
substantially eliminate liquidation harvesting has occurred, the municipal reviewing authority must determine prior to granting
approval for the subdivision that 5 years have elapsed from the date the landowner under whose ownership the harvest
occurred acquired the parcel. A municipal reviewing authority may request technical assistance from the Department of
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, Division of Forestry to determine whether a rule violation has occurred, or the
municipal reviewing authority may accept a determination certified by a forester licensed pursuant to Title 32, chapter 76. If a
municipal reviewing authority requests technical assistance from the division, the division shall respond within 5 working days
regarding its ability to provide assistance. If the division agrees to provide assistance, it shall make a finding and determination
as to whether a rule violation has occurred. The division shall provide a written copy of its finding and determination to the
municipal reviewing authority within 30 days of receipt of the municipal reviewing authority's request. If the division notifies a
municipal reviewing authority that the division will not provide assistance, the municipal reviewing authority may require a
subdivision applicant to provide a determination certified by a licensed forester.
For the purposes of this subsection, "liquidation harvesting" has the same meaning as in Title 12, section 8868, subsection 6
and "parcel" means a contiguous area within one municipality, township or plantation owned by one person or a group of
persons in common or joint ownership. This subsection takes effect on the effective date of rules adopted pursuant to Title 12,
section 8869, subsection 14.
30-A §4403. MUNICIPAL REVIEW AND REGULATION
This section governs municipal review of proposed subdivisions. [1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW);
1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
1. Municipal reviewing authority. The municipal reviewing authority shall review all requests for subdivision approval.
On all matters concerning subdivision review, the municipal reviewing authority shall maintain a permanent record of all its
meetings, proceedings and correspondence.
[1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
1-A. Joint meetings. If any portion of a subdivision crosses municipal boundaries, all meetings and hearings to review
the application must be held jointly by the reviewing authorities from each municipality. All meetings and hearings to review
an application under section 4407 for a revision or amendment to a subdivision that crosses municipal boundaries must be held
jointly by the reviewing authorities from each municipality. In addition to other review criteria, the reviewing authorities shall
consider and make a finding of fact regarding the criteria described in section 4404, subsection 19.
The reviewing authorities in each municipality, upon written agreement, may waive the requirement under this subsection for
any joint meeting or hearing.
[1997, c. 226, §1 (AMD) .]
2. Regulations; review procedure. The municipal reviewing authority may, after a public hearing, adopt, amend or
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 48
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
repeal additional reasonable regulations governing subdivisions which shall control until amended, repealed or replaced by
regulations adopted by the municipal legislative body. The municipal reviewing authority shall give at least 7 days' notice of
this hearing.
A. The regulations may provide for a multi-stage application or review procedure consisting of no more than 3 stages:
(1) Preapplication sketch plan;
(2) Preliminary plan; and
(3) Final plan.
Each stage must meet the time requirements of subsections 4 and 5. [1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW);
1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
[1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
3. Application; notice; completed application. This subsection governs the procedure to be followed after receiving an
application for a proposed subdivision.
A. When an application is received, the municipal reviewing authority shall give a dated receipt to the applicant and shall
notify by mail all abutting property owners of the proposed subdivision, and the clerk and the reviewing authority of
municipalities that abut or include any portion of the subdivision, specifying the location of the proposed subdivision and
including a general description of the project. The municipal reviewing authority shall notify by mail a public drinking
water supplier if the subdivision is within its source water protection area. [1999, c. 761, §11 (AMD).]
B. Within 30 days after receiving an application, the municipal reviewing authority shall notify the applicant in writing
either that the application is complete or, if the application is incomplete, the specific additional material needed to
complete the application. [1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10
(NEW).]
C. After the municipal reviewing authority has determined that a complete application has been filed, it shall notify the
applicant and begin its full evaluation of the proposed subdivision. [1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW);
1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
D. The municipal reviewing authority may not accept or approve final plans or final documents prepared within the
meaning and intent of Title 32, chapter 121 that are not sealed and signed by the professional land surveyor under whose
responsible charge they were completed, as provided in Title 32, section 13907. [1995, c. 93, §1 (NEW).]
[1999, c. 761, §11 (AMD) .]
4. Public hearing; notice. If the municipal reviewing authority decides to hold a public hearing on an application for
subdivision approval, it shall hold the hearing within 30 days after determining it has received a complete application. The
municipal reviewing authority shall have notice of the date, time and place of the hearing:
A. Given to the applicant; and [1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10
(NEW).]
B. Published, at least 2 times, in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality in which the subdivision is
proposed to be located. The date of the first publication must be at least 7 days before the hearing. [1989, c. 104,
Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
[1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW); 1989, c. 497, §6
(AMD).]
5. Decision; time limits. The municipal reviewing authority shall, within 30 days of a public hearing or, if no hearing is
held, within 60 days of determining it has received a complete application or within any other time limit that is otherwise
mutually agreed to, issue an order:
A. Denying approval of the proposed subdivision; [1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104,
Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
B. Granting approval of the proposed subdivision; or [1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c.
104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 49
TOWN OF VASSALBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
C. Granting approval upon any terms and conditions that it considers advisable to:
(1) Satisfy the criteria listed in section 4404;
(2) Satisfy any other regulations adopted by the reviewing authority; and
(3) Protect and preserve the public's health, safety and general welfare. [1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45
(NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
[1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW); 1989, c. 497, §7
(AMD) .]
6. Burden of proof; findings of fact. In all instances, the burden of proof is upon the person proposing the subdivision.
In issuing its decision, the reviewing authority shall make findings of fact establishing that the proposed subdivision does or
does not meet the criteria described in subsection 5.
[1989, c. 104, Pt. A, §45 (NEW); 1989, c. 104, Pt. C, §10 (NEW).]
7. Conditioned on variance. If the initial approval or any subsequent amendment of a subdivision is based in part on the
granting of a variance, the subdivider must comply with section 4406, subsection 1, paragraph B.
Town of Vassalboro Subdivision Ordinance (June 10, 2014) Page 50
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page i
TOWN OF VASSALBORO
SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE
CERTIFIED BY
TOWN CLERK
ADOPTED MARCH 1974
AMENDMENT DATES
MAY 1977 MAY 1980 MAY 1981 JUNE 1985 JUNE 1987 JUNE 1989
MAY 1991 NOV 1991 JUNE 1994 JUNE 2009 JUNE 2010 JUNE 5, 2017
STATUTORY AUTHORITY: 38 M.R.S.A. Section 438-A(5)
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page ii of 45
(Intentionally Left Blank)
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page i of 45
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
1. Purposes.................................................................................................................................................. 1
2. Authority ................................................................................................................................................ 1
3. Applicability ........................................................................................................................................... 1
4. Effective Date of Ordinance and Ordinance Amendments .................................................................... 1
5. Availability ............................................................................................................................................. 1
6. Severability ............................................................................................................................................. 2
7. Conflicts with Other Ordinances ............................................................................................................ 2
8. Amendments ........................................................................................................................................... 2
9. Districts and Zoning Map ....................................................................................................................... 2
A. Official Shoreland Zoning Map ....................................................................................................... 2
B. Scale of Map .................................................................................................................................... 2
C. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map .............................................................................. 2
D. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning Map .............................................................................. 2
10. Interpretation of District Boundaries ...................................................................................................... 2
11. Land Use Requirements ......................................................................................................................... 2
12. Non-conformance ................................................................................................................................... 3
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................................. 3
B. General ............................................................................................................................................. 3
C. Non-conforming Structures ............................................................................................................. 3
D. Non-conforming Uses ...................................................................................................................... 6
E. Non-conforming Lots....................................................................................................................... 7
13. Establishment of Districts....................................................................................................................... 7
A. Resource Protection District ............................................................................................................ 7
B. Limited Residential District ............................................................................................................. 8
C. Limited Residential / Commercial District ...................................................................................... 8
14. Table of Land Uses ................................................................................................................................. 8
15. Land Use Standards .............................................................................................................................. 10
A. Minimum Lot Standards ................................................................................................................ 10
B. Principal and Accessory Structures ............................................................................................... 11
C. Piers, Docks, Wharves, Bridges, Public Boat Access Facilities, and Other Structures and Uses
Extending Over or Below the Normal High-Water Line of a Water body or Within a Wetland, and
Shoreline Stabilization ......................................................................................................................... 13
D. Campgrounds ................................................................................................................................. 14
E. Individual Private Campsites ......................................................................................................... 15
F. Commercial and Industrial Uses .................................................................................................... 15
G. Parking Areas ................................................................................................................................. 16
H. Roads and Driveways .................................................................................................................... 16
I. Signs............................................................................................................................................... 18
J. Storm Water Runoff ....................................................................................................................... 19
K. Septic Waste Disposal ……………………………………………………………………… ....... 19
L. Essential Services........................................................................................................................... 19
M. Mineral Exploration and Extraction ............................................................................................... 20
N. Agriculture ..................................................................................................................................... 20
O. Timber Harvesting Standards (Repealed) ...................................................................................... 21
P. Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other than Timber Harvesting ........................ 21
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page ii of 45
Q. Hazard Trees, Storm-Damaged Trees, and Dead Tree Removal ................................................... 24
R. Exemptions to Clearing and Vegetation Removal Requirements .................................................. 25
S. Revegetation Requirements ........................................................................................................... 26
T. Erosion and Sedimentation Control ............................................................................................... 28
U. Soils………………………………………………………………………………………..… ...... 29
V. Water Quality. ................................................................................................................................ 29
W. Archaeological Site. ....................................................................................................................... 29
16. Administration ...................................................................................................................................... 29
A. Administering Bodies and Agents ................................................................................................. 29
B. Permits Required ............................................................................................................................ 29
C. Permit Application ......................................................................................................................... 30
D1. Procedure for Administering Permits ............................................................................................ 30
D2. Prohibition of Permitting ............................................................................................................... 31
E. Special Exceptions ......................................................................................................................... 32
F. Expiration of Permit ....................................................................................................................... 32
G. Installation of Public Utility Service .............................................................................................. 32
H. Appeals .......................................................................................................................................... 33
I. Enforcement ................................................................................................................................... 37
17. Definitions ............................................................................................................................................ 38
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance for the Municipality of Vassalboro
1. Purposes. The purposes of this Ordinance are to further the maintenance of safe and healthful
conditions; to prevent and control water pollution; to protect fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird
and other wildlife habitat; to protect buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion; to
protect archaeological and historic resources; to protect commercial fishing and maritime industries;
to protect freshwater and wetlands; to control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; to
conserve shore cover, and visual as well as actual points of access to inland waters; to conserve
natural beauty and open space; and to anticipate and respond to the impacts of development in
shoreland areas.
2. Authority. This Ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 38 sections
435-449 of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated (M.R.S.A.).
3. Applicability. This Ordinance applies to all land areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the
? normal high-water line of any great pond, river, or stream
? upland edge of freshwater wetland,
This Ordinance also applies to any structure built on, over or abutting a dock, wharf or pier, or other
structure extending or located below the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland.
4. Effective Date of Ordinance and Ordinance Amendments. This Ordinance, which was adopted by
the municipal legislative body on June 1, 1974, shall not be effective unless approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection. A certified copy of the Ordinance, or
Ordinance Amendment, attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk, shall be forwarded to the
Commissioner for approval. If the Commissioner fails to act on this Ordinance or Ordinance
Amendment, within forty-five (45) days of his/her receipt of the Ordinance, or Ordinance
Amendment, it shall be automatically approved.
Any application for a permit submitted to the municipality within the forty-five (45) day period
shall be governed by the terms of this Ordinance, or Ordinance Amendment, if the Ordinance, or
Ordinance Amendment, is approved by the Commissioner.
5. Availability. A certified copy of this Ordinance shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and shall be
accessible to any member of the public. Copies shall be made available to the public at reasonable
cost at the expense of the person making the request. Notice of availability of this Ordinance shall be
posted.
6. Severability. Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be
invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the Ordinance.
7. Conflicts with Other Ordinances. Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is
inconsistent with another provision of this Ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute
administered by the municipality, the more restrictive provision shall control.
8. Amendments. This Ordinance may be amended by majority vote of the legislative body. All
amendments shall require adequate public participation through one or more hearings held by the
Board with the appropriate notice as required under 30-A M.R.S.A. section 4352 (1) and (9). Copies
of amendments, attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk, shall be submitted to the Commissioner
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 2 of 45
of the Department of Environmental Protection following adoption by the municipal legislative body
and shall not be effective unless approved by the Commissioner. If the Commissioner fails to act on
any amendment within forty-five (45) days of his/her receipt of the amendment, the amendment is
automatically approved. Any application for a permit submitted to the municipality within the fortyfive
(45) day period shall be governed by the terms of the amendment, if such amendment is
approved by the Commissioner.
9. Districts and Zoning Map
A. Official Shoreland Zoning Map. The areas to which this Ordinance is applicable are hereby
divided into the following districts as shown on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map(s) which is
(are) made a part of this Ordinance:
(1) Resource Protection
(2) Limited Residential
(3) Limited Residential / Commercial
B. Scale of Map. The Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be drawn at a scale of not less than: 1
inch = 2000 feet. District boundaries shall be clearly delineated and a legend indicating the
symbols for each district shall be placed on the map.
C. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map. The Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be
certified by the attested signature of the Municipal Clerk and shall be located in the municipal
office.
D. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning Map. If amendments, in accordance with Section 8,
are made in the district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Shoreland Zoning
Map, such changes shall be made on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map within thirty (30) days
after the amendment has been approved by the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection. The Board or Code Enforcement Officer shall provide the appropriate
notification to landowners as required under 38 M.R.S.A. section 438-A(1-B) whose property is
being considered for placement in a resource protection zone and a public hearing shall be held as
required under this subsection.
10. Interpretation of District Boundaries. Unless otherwise set forth on the Official Shoreland Zoning
Map, district boundary lines are property lines, the centerlines of streets, roads and rights of way, and
the boundaries of the shoreland area as defined herein. Where uncertainty exists as to the exact
location of district boundary lines, the Board of Appeals shall be the final authority as to location.
11. Land Use Requirements. Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure or land shall
hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, expanded, moved, or altered and no new lot shall be created except in conformity with
all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located, unless a variance is
granted.
12. Non-conformance
A. Purpose. It is the intent of this Ordinance to promote land use conformities, except that nonconforming
conditions that existed before the effective date of this Ordinance or amendments
thereto shall be allowed to continue, subject to the requirements set forth in Section 12. Except as
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 3 of 45
otherwise provided in this Ordinance, a non-conforming condition shall not be permitted to
become more non-conforming.
B. General
(1) Transfer of Ownership. Non-conforming structures, lots, and uses may be transferred, and
the new owner may continue the non-conforming use or continue to use the non-conforming
structure or lot, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
(2) Repair and Maintenance. This Ordinance allows, without a permit, the normal upkeep and
maintenance of non-conforming uses and structures including repairs or renovations that do
not involve expansion of the non-conforming use or structure, and such other changes in a
non-conforming use or structure as federal, state, or local building and safety codes may
require.
C. Non-conforming Structures
(1) Expansions. All new principal and accessory structures, excluding functionally waterdependent
uses, must meet the water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback requirements
contained in Section 15(B)(1). A non-conforming structure may be added to or expanded
after obtaining a permit from the Planning Board, if such addition or expansion does not
increase the non-conformity of the structure and is in accordance with subparagraphs (a) and
(b) below. Expansion of an accessory structure that is located closer to the normal high-water
line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland than the principal structure
is prohibited, even if the expansion will not increase nonconformity with the water body,
tributary stream, or wetland setback requirement.
(a) If a legally existing nonconforming principal structure is entirely located less than 25 feet
from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a
wetland, that structure may be expanded as follows, as long as all other applicable
municipal land use standards are met and the expansion is not prohibited by Section
12(C)(1).
(i) The maximum total footprint for the principal structure may not be expanded to a
size greater than 800 square feet or 30% larger than the footprint that existed on
January 1, 1989, whichever is greater. The maximum height of the principal structure
may not be made greater than 15 feet or the height of the existing structure,
whichever is greater.
(b) For structures located within 75 feet of the normal high-water line, expansion of any
portion of that structure within 25 feet of the normal high-water line of a water body,
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland is prohibited, even if the expansion will not
increase nonconformity with the water body, tributary stream or wetland setback
requirement.
(c) All other legally existing nonconforming principal and accessory structures that do not
meet the water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback requirements may be expanded
or altered as follows, as long as other applicable municipal land use standards are met and
the expansion is not prohibited by Section 12(C)(1) or Section 12(C)(1)(a), above.
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 4 of 45
(i) For structures located less than 75 feet from the normal high-water line of a water
body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, the maximum combined total
footprint for all structures may not be expanded to a size greater than 1,000 square
feet or 30% larger than the footprint that existed on January 1, 1989, whichever is
greater. The maximum height of any structure may not be made greater than 20 feet
or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater.
(ii) For structures located less than 100 feet from the normal high-water line of a great
pond classified as GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified as GPA, the
maximum combined total footprint for all structures may not be expanded to a size
greater than 1,500 square feet or 30% larger than the footprint that existed on January
1, 1989, whichever is greater. The maximum height of any structure may not be made
greater than 25 feet or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater. Any
portion of those structures located less than 75 feet from the normal high-water line
of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland must meet the footprint
and height limits in Section 12(C)(1)(a)(i) and Section 12(C)(1)(c)(i), above.
(iii) In addition to the limitations in subparagraphs (i) and (ii), for structures that are
legally nonconforming due to their location within the Resource Protection District
when located at less than 250 feet from the normal high-water line of a water body or
the upland edge of a wetland, the maximum combined total footprint for all structures
may not be expanded to a size greater than 1,500 square feet or 30% larger than the
footprint that existed at the time the Resource Protection District was established on
the lot, whichever is greater. The maximum height of any structure may not be made
greater than 25 feet or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater,
except that any portion of those structures located less than 75 feet from the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland must
meet the footprint and height limits in Section 12(C)(1)(a)(i) and Section
12(C)(1)(c)(i), above.
(d) An approved plan for expansion of a nonconforming structure must be recorded by the
applicant with the registry of deeds, within 90 days of approval. The recorded plan must
show the existing and proposed footprint of the non-conforming structure, the existing
and proposed structure height, the footprint of any other structures on the parcel, the
shoreland zone boundary and evidence of approval by the municipal review authority.
(2) Foundations. Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is constructed under a
non-conforming structure, the structure and new foundation must be placed such that the
setback requirement is met to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning
Board or its designee, basing its decision on the criteria specified in Section 12(C)(3)
Relocation, below.
(3) Relocation. A non-conforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries of the parcel
on which the structure is located provided that the site of relocation conforms to all setback
requirements to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board or its
designee, and provided that the applicant demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage
disposal system meets the requirements of State law and the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules (Rules), or that a new system can be installed in compliance with
the law and said Rules. In no case shall a structure be relocated in a manner that causes the
structure to be more non-conforming.
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 5 of 45
In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback to the greatest practical
extent, the Planning Board or its designee shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of the
land, the potential for soil erosion, the location of other structures on the property and on
adjacent properties, the location of the septic system and other on-site soils suitable for septic
systems, and the type and amount of vegetation to be removed to accomplish the relocation.
When it is necessary to remove vegetation within the water or wetland setback area in order
to relocate a structure, the Planning Board shall require replanting of native vegetation to
compensate for the destroyed vegetation in accordance with Section 15(S). In addition, the
area from which the relocated structure was removed must be replanted with vegetation.
Replanting shall be required as follows:
(a) Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted with at least one native
tree, three (3) feet in height, for every tree removed. If more than five trees are planted,
no one species of tree shall make up more than 50% of the number of trees planted.
Replaced trees must be planted no further from the water or wetland than the trees that
were removed.
Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and ground cover, that are removed or
destroyed in order to relocate a structure must be re-established. An area at least the same
size as the area where vegetation and/or ground cover was disturbed, damaged, or
removed must be reestablished within the setback area. The vegetation and/or ground
cover must consist of similar native vegetation and/or ground cover that was disturbed,
destroyed or removed.
(b) Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel the original location of the
structure shall be replanted with vegetation which may consist of grasses, shrubs, trees, or
a combination thereof.
(4) Reconstruction or Replacement. Any non-conforming structure which is located less than
the required setback from a water body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed,
or damaged or destroyed, regardless of the cause, by more than 50% of the market value of
the structure before such damage, destruction or removal, may be reconstructed or replaced
provided that a permit is obtained within eighteen (18) months of the date of said damage,
destruction, or removal, and provided that such reconstruction or replacement is in
compliance with the water body, tributary stream or wetland setback requirement to the
greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board or its designee in accordance
with the purposes of this Ordinance. In no case shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced
so as to increase its non-conformity. If the reconstructed or replacement structure is less than
the required setback it shall not be any larger than the original structure, except as allowed
pursuant to Section 12(C)(1) above, as determined by the non-conforming footprint of the
reconstructed or replaced structure at its new location. If the total footprint of the original
structure can be relocated or reconstructed beyond the required setback area, no portion of
the relocated or reconstructed structure shall be replaced or constructed at less than the
setback requirement for a new structure. When it is necessary to remove vegetation in order
to replace or reconstruct a structure, vegetation shall be replanted in accordance with Section
12(C)(3) above.
Any non-conforming structure which is located less than the required setback from a water
body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed by 50% or less of the market value,
or damaged or destroyed by 50% or less of the market value of the structure, excluding
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 6 of 45
normal maintenance and repair, may be reconstructed in place if a permit is obtained from the
Code Enforcement Officer within one year of such damage, destruction, or removal, provided
there is no expansion.
In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the setback to the
greatest practical extent, the Planning Board or its designee shall consider, in addition to
the criteria in Section 12(C)(3) above, the physical condition and type of foundation
present, if any.
(5) Change of Use of a Non-conforming Structure. The use of a non-conforming structure may
not be changed to another use unless the Planning Board, after receiving a written
application, determines that the new use will have no greater adverse impact on the water
body, tributary stream, or wetland, or on the subject or adjacent properties and resources than
the existing use.
In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, the Planning Board shall require
written documentation from the applicant, regarding the probable effects on public health and
safety, erosion and sedimentation, water quality, fish and wildlife habitat, vegetative cover,
visual and actual points of public access to waters, natural beauty, floodplain management,
archaeological and historic resources, and functionally water-dependent uses.
D. Non-conforming Uses
(1) Expansions. Expansions of non-conforming uses are prohibited, except that non-conforming
residential uses may, after obtaining a permit from the Planning Board, be expanded within
existing residential structures or within expansions of such structures as allowed in Section
12(C)(1) above.
(2) Resumption Prohibited. A lot, building or structure in or on which a non-conforming use is
discontinued for a period exceeding one year, or which is superseded by a conforming use,
may not again be devoted to a non-conforming use except that the Planning Board may, for
good cause shown by the applicant, grant up to a one year extension to that time period.
(3) Change of Use. An existing non-conforming use may be changed to another non-conforming
use provided that the proposed use has no greater adverse impact on the subject and adjacent
properties and resources than the former use, as determined by the Planning Board. The
determination of no greater adverse impact shall be made according to criteria listed in
Section 12(C)(5) above.
E. Non-conforming Lots
(1) Non-conforming Lots: A non-conforming lot of record as of the effective date of this
Ordinance or amendment thereto may be built upon, without the need for a variance,
provided that such lot is in separate ownership and not contiguous with any other lot in the
same ownership, and that all provisions of this Ordinance except lot area, lot width and shore
frontage can be met. Variances relating to setback or other requirements not involving lot
area, lot width or shore frontage shall be obtained by action of the Board of Appeals.
(2) Contiguous Built Lots: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in a single or joint
ownership of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, if all or part of the lots do not
meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, and if a principal use or structure exists
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 7 of 45
on each lot, the non-conforming lots may be conveyed separately or together, provided that
the State Minimum Lot Size Law (12 M.R.S.A. sections 4807-A through 4807-D) and the
State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules are complied with.
If two or more principal uses or structures existed on a single lot of record, on the effective
date of this ordinance, the lot shall not be divided in a manner that creates a non-conforming
lot or causes a non-conforming lot to become more non-conforming.
(3) Contiguous Lots - Vacant or Partially Built: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are
in single or joint ownership of record at the time of or since adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance, if any of these lots do not individually meet the dimensional requirements of this
Ordinance or subsequent amendments, and if one or more of the lots are vacant or contain no
principal structure the lots shall be combined to the extent necessary to meet the dimensional
requirements.
13. Establishment of Districts
A. Resource Protection District. The Resource Protection District includes areas in which
development would adversely affect water quality, productive habitat, biological ecosystems, or
scenic and natural values. This district shall include the following areas when they occur within
the limits of the shoreland zone, except that areas which are currently developed and areas which
meet the criteria for the Limited Residential or Limited Residential / Commercial need not be
included within the Resource Protection District.
(1) Floodplains along rivers and floodplains along artificially formed great ponds along rivers,
defined by the 100 year floodplain as designated on the Federal Emergency Management
Agency's (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood
of record, or in the absence of these, by soil types identified as recent floodplain soils. This
district shall also include 100 year floodplains adjacent to tidal waters as shown on FEMA's
Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps.
(2) Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of 20% or greater.
(3) Areas of two (2) or more contiguous acres supporting wetland vegetation and hydric soils,
which are not part of a freshwater wetland as defined, and which are not surficially connected
to a water body during the period of normal high water.
(4) Land areas along rivers subject to severe bank erosion, undercutting, or river bed movement;
(5) Other important wildlife habitat;
(6) Natural sites of significant scenic or aesthetic value;
(7) Areas designated by federal, state or municipal governements as natural areas of significance
to be preotected from development; and
(8) Other significant areas which should be included in this district to fulfill the purposes of this
Ordinance, such as, but not limited to, existing public access areas and certain significant
archaeological and historic sites deserving of long-term protection as determined by the
municipality after consultation with the Maine Historic Preservation Commission.
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 8 of 45
(9) Areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of freshwater wetlands, which
are rated “moderate” or “high” value waterfowl and wading bird habitat, including nesting
and feeding areas, by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (MDIF&W).
These areas are generally depicted on a Geographic Information System (GIS) data layer.
B. Limited Residential District. The Limited Residential District includes those areas suitable for
residential and recreational development. It includes areas other than those in the Resource
Protection District, and areas which are used less intensively than those in the Limited Residential
/ Commercial District.
C. Limited Residential / Commercial District. The Limited Residential / Commercial District
includes areas of mixed, light commercial and residential uses. This district includes areas of two
or more contiguous acres in size devoted to a mix of residential and low intensity business and
commercial uses. Industrial uses are prohibited.
14. Table of Land Uses. All land use activities, as indicated in Table 1, Land Uses in the Shoreland
Zone, shall conform with all of the applicable land use standards in Section 15. The district designation
for a particular site shall be determined from the Official Shoreland Zoning Map.
Key to Table 1: LAND USES IN THE SHORELAND ZONE
Yes - Allowed (no permit required but the use must comply with all applicable land use standards)
No - Prohibited
PB - Allowed with permit issued by the Planning Board.
CEO - Allowed with permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
LPI - Allowed with permit issued by the Local Plumbing Inspector
Abbreviations:
RP - Resource Protection
LR - Limited Residential
LR/C - Limited Residential / Commercial
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 9 of 45
TABLE 1: LAND USES IN THE SHORELAND ZONE
LAND USES RP LR LR/C
1. Non-intensive recreational uses not requiring structures such as hunting,
fishing and hiking including the construction of trails for public use
yes yes yes
2. Motorized vehicular traffic on existing roads and trails yes yes yes
3. Clearing or removal of vegetation for activities other than timber harvesting CEO 1 yes yes
4. Fire prevention activities yes yes yes
5. Wildlife management practices yes yes yes
6. Soil and water conservation practices yes yes yes
7. Mineral exploration yes 2 yes 2 yes 2
8. Mineral extraction including sand and gravel extraction PB 3 PB PB
9. Surveying and resource analysis yes yes yes
10. Emergency operations yes yes yes
11. Agriculture PB yes yes
12. Aquaculture PB PB yes
13. Principal structures and uses
A. One and two family residential, including driveways PB 4 PB PB
B. Multi-unit residential no PB PB
C. Commercial no 5 no 5 PB 5
D. Industrial no no no
E. Governmental and institutional no PB PB
F. Small non-residential facilities for educational, scientific, or nature
interpretation purposes
PB CEO CEO
14. Structures accessory to allowed uses PB CEO CEO
15. Piers, docks, wharfs, bridges, public boat access facilities and other structures
and uses extending over of below the normal high-water line or within a
wetland
A. Temporary CEO 6 CEO 6 CEO 6
B. Permanent PB PB PB
16. Conversions of seasonal residences to year-round residences LPI LPI LPI
17. Home occupations PB PB CEO
18. Private sewage disposal systems for allowed uses LPI LPI LPI
19. Essential services PB 7 PB PB
A. Roadside distribution lines (34.5kV and lower) CEO 7 yes 8 yes 8
B. Non-roadside or cross-country distribution lines involving ten poles or
less in the shoreland zone
PB 7 CEO CEO
C. Non-roadside or cross country distribution lines involving eleven or
more poles in the shoreland zone
PB 7 PB PB
D. Other essential services PB 7 PB PB
20. Service drops, as defined, to allowed uses yes yes yes
21. Public and private recreational areas involving minimal structural
development
PB PB CEO
22. Individual, private campsites CEO CEO CEO
23. Campgrounds no 9 PB PB
24. Road construction no 10 PB PB
25. Parking facilities no 9 PB PB
26. Marinas no PB PB
27. Filling and earth moving of <10 cubic yards CEO yes yes
28. Filling and earth moving of >10 cubic yards PB CEO CEO
29. Signs yes yes yes
30. Uses similar to allowed uses CEO CEO CEO
31. Uses similar to uses requiring a Code Enforcement Officer permit CEO CEO CEO
32. Uses similar to uses requiring a Planning Board permit PB PB PB
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 10 of 45
1 In RP not allowed within 75 feet horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of great ponds, except to remove
safety hazards.
2
Requires permit from the Code Enforcement Officer if more than 100 square feet of surface area, in total, is
disturbed.
3 In RP not allowed in areas so designated because of wildlife value.
4 Single family residential structures may be allowed by special exemption only according to the provisions of Section
16(E), Special Exceptions. Two-family residential structures are prohibited.
5 Except for commercial uses otherwise listed in this Table, such as marinas and campgrounds, that are allowed in the
respective district.
6 Excluding bridges and other crossings not involving earthwork, in which case no permit is required.
7 See further restrictions in Section 15(L)(2).
8 Permit not required, but must file a written “notice of intent to construct” with Code Enforcement Officer.
9 Except when area is zoned for resource protection due to floodplain criteria in which case a permit is required from
the Planning Board.
10 Except as provided in Section 15(H)(4).
NOTE: A person performing any of the following activities shall require a permit from the Department of
Environmental Protection, pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. section 480-C, if the activity occurs in, on, over or adjacent to any
freshwater or coastal wetland, great pond, rivers, stream or brook and operates in such a manner that material or soil
may be washed into them:
A. Dredging, bulldozing, removing or displacing soil, sand, vegetation or other materials;
B. Draining or otherwise dewatering;
C. Filling, including adding sand or other material to a sand dune; or
D. Any construction or alteration of any permanent structure.
15. Land Use Standards. All land use activities within the shoreland zone shall conform with the
following provisions, if applicable.
A. Minimum Lot Standards
Minimum Lot Minimum Shore
Area (sq. ft.) Frontage (ft.)
(1) (a) Residential per dwelling unit 40,000 200
(b) Governmental, Institutional, Commercial
or Industrial per principal structure 60,000 300
(c) Public and Private Recreational Facilities 40,000 200
(2) Land below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and land
beneath roads serving more than two (2) lots shall not be included toward calculating
minimum lot area.
(3) Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall be considered each a separate
tract or parcel of land unless such road was established by the owner of land on both sides
thereof after September 22, 1971.
(4) The minimum width of any portion of any lot within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland shall be
equal to or greater than the shore frontage requirement for a lot with the proposed use.
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 11 of 45
(5) If more than one residential dwelling unit, principal governmental, institutional, commercial or
industrial structure or use, or combination thereof, is constructed or established on a single
parcel, all dimensional requirements shall be met for each additional dwelling unit, principal
structure, or use.
B. Principal and Accessory Structures
(1) All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of great ponds classified GPA, and other
water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland. In the Resource Protection
District the setback requirement shall be 250 feet, horizontal distance, except for structures,
roads, parking spaces or other regulated objects specifically allowed in that district in which
case the setback requirements specified above shall apply.
In addition:
(a) The water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback provision shall neither apply to
structures which require direct access to the water body or wetland as an operational
necessity, such as piers, docks and retaining walls, nor to other functionally waterdependent
uses.
(b) On a non-conforming lot of record on which only a residential structure exists, and it is not
possible to place an accessory structure meeting the required water body, tributary stream
or wetland setbacks, the code enforcement officer may issue a permit to place a single
accessory structure, with no utilities, for the storage of yard tools and similar equipment.
Such accessory structure shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet in area nor eight (8) feet
in height, and shall be located as far from the shoreline or tributary stream as practical and
shall meet all other applicable standards, including lot coverage and vegetation clearing
limitations. In no case shall the structure be located closer to the shoreline or tributary
stream than the principal structure.
(c) The Planning Board has the authority to increase the required setback of a proposed
structure, if necessary, to accomplish the purposes of this ordinance. Instances where a
greater setback may be appropriate include, but are not limited to: areas of steep slope;
shallow or erodible soils; or where an adequate vegetative buffer does not exist.
(2) Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing structures which are permitted in
the Resource Protection, Limited Residential, and Limited Residential / Commercial, shall not
exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. This provision shall not apply to structures such as
transmission towers, windmills, antennas, and similar structures having no floor area.
(3) The lowest floor elevation or openings of all buildings and structures, including basements,
shall be elevated at least one foot above the elevation of the 100 year flood, the flood of
record, or in the absence of these, the flood as defined by soil types identified as recent floodplain
soils, except accessory structures may be placed in accordance with the standards of the
Floodplain Management Ordinance and need not meet the elevation requirements of this
paragraph.
(4) The total footprint area of all structures, parking lots and other non-vegetated surfaces, within
the shoreland zone shall not exceed a total of twenty (20) percent of the portion of the lot
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 12 of 45
located within the shoreland zone. This limitation does not apply to public boat launching
facilities regardless of the district in which the facility is located.
For the purposes of calculating lot coverage, non-vegetated surfaces include, but are not
limited to the following: structures, driveways, parking areas, and other areas from which
vegetation has been removed. Naturally occurring ledge and rock outcroppings are not
counted as nonvegetated surfaces when calculating lot coverage for lots of record on March
24, 1990 and in continuous existence since that date.
(5) Retaining walls that are not necessary for erosion control shall meet the structure setback
requirement, except for low retaining walls and associated fill provided all of the following
conditions are met:
(a) The site has been previously altered and an effective vegetated buffer does not exist;
(b) The wall(s) is(are) at least 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of
a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland;
(c) The site where the retaining wall will be constructed is legally existing lawn or is a site
eroding from lack of naturally occurring vegetation, and which cannot be stabilized with
vegetative plantings;
(d) The total height of the wall(s), in the aggregate, are no more than 24 inches;
(e) Retaining walls are located outside of the 100-year floodplain on rivers, streams, coastal
wetlands, and tributary streams, as designated on the Federal Emergency Management
Agency’s (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood
of record, or in the absence of these, by soil types identified as recent flood plain soils.
(f) The area behind the wall is revegetated with grass, shrubs, trees, or a combination
thereof, and no further structural development will occur within the setback area,
including patios and decks; and
(g) A vegetated buffer area is established within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland when a
natural buffer area does not exist. The buffer area must meet the following characteristics:
(i) The buffer must include shrubs and other woody and herbaceous vegetation. Where
natural ground cover is lacking the area must be supplemented with leaf or bark mulch;
(ii) Vegetation plantings must be in quantities sufficient to retard erosion and provide
for effective infiltration of stormwater runoff;
(iii) Only native species may be used to establish the buffer area;
(iv) A minimum buffer width of 15 feet, horizontal distance, is required, measured
perpendicularly to the normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland;
(v) A footpath not to exceed the standards in Section 15(P)(2)(a), may traverse the buffer;
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 13 of 45
NOTE: If the wall and associated soil disturbance occurs within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of a
water body, tributary stream or coastal wetland, a permit pursuant to the Natural
Resource Protection Act is required from the Department of Environmental Protection.
(6) Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or similar structures may be allowed
with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, to provide shoreline access in areas of steep
slopes or unstable soils provided: that the structure is limited to a maximum of four (4) feet in
width; that the structure does not extend below or over the normal high-water line of a water
body or upland edge of a wetland, (unless permitted by the Department of Environmental
Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. section 480-C); and
that the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative exists on the property.
C. Piers, Docks, Wharves, Bridges, Public Boat Access Facilities, and Other Structures and Uses
Extending Over or Below the Normal High-Water Line of a Water Body or Within a
Wetland, and Shoreline Stabilization
(1) No more than one pier, dock, wharf or similar structure extending or located below the normal
high-water line of a water body or within a wetland is allowed on a single lot; except that when
a single lot contains at least twice the minimum shore frontage as specified in Section 15(A), a
second structure may be allowed and may remain as long as the lot is not further divided.
(2) Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such use and constructed so as to
control erosion.
(3) The location shall not interfere with existing developed or natural beach areas.
(4) The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects on fisheries.
(5) The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to carry on the activity and be
consistent with the surrounding character and uses of the area.
(6) No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structure
extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland unless the
structure requires direct access to the water body or wetland as an operational necessity.
NOTE: A structure constructed on a float or floats is prohibited unless it is designed to
function as, and is registered with the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife as a watercraft.
(7) New permanent piers and docks shall not be permitted unless it is clearly demonstrated to the
Planning Board that a temporary pier or dock is not feasible, and a permit has been obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant to the Natural Resources
Protection Act.
(8) No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock, wharf or other structure
extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland shall be
converted to residential dwelling units in any district.
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 14 of 45
(9) Structures built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structure extending beyond
the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland shall not exceed twenty (20)
feet in height above the pier, wharf, dock or other structure.
(10) Vegetation may be removed in excess of the standards in Section 15(P) of this ordinance in
order to conduct shoreline stabilization of an eroding shoreline, provided that a permit is
obtained from the Planning Board. Construction equipment must access the shoreline by
barge when feasible as determined by the Planning Board.
(a) When necessary, the removal of trees and other vegetation to allow for construction
equipment access to the stabilization site via land must be limited to no more than 12 feet
in width. When the stabilization project is complete the construction equipment
accessway must be restored.
(b) Revegetation must occur in accordance with Section 15(S).
NOTE: A permit pursuant to the Natural Resource Protection Act is required from the Department
of Environmental Protection for Shoreline Stabilization activities.
(11) A deck over a river may be exempted from the shoreland setback requirements if it is part of
a downtown revitalization project that is defined in a project plan approved by the legislative
body of the municipality, and may include the revitalization of structures formerly used as
mills that do not meet the structure setback requirements, if the deck meets the following
requirements:
(a) The total deck area attached to the structure does not exceed 700 square feet;
(b) The deck is cantilevered over a segment of a river that is located within the boundaries of
the downtown revitalization project;
(c) The deck is attached to or accessory to an allowed commercial use in a structure that was
constructed prior to 1971 and is located within the downtown revitalization project;
(d) The construction of the deck complies with all other applicable standards, except the
shoreline setback requirements in section 15(B); and
The construction of the deck complies with all other state and federal laws.
NOTE: New permanent structures, and expansions thereof, projecting into or over water bodies shall
require a permit from the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural
Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. section 480-C. Permits may also be required from the
Army Corps of Engineers if located in navigable waters.
(12) Clearing and roads for public boat access facilities are permitted but subject to conditions in
Sections 15(H) and 15(P).
D. Campgrounds. Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under State
licensing procedures and the following:
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 15 of 45
(1) Campgrounds shall contain a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet of land, not including
roads and driveways, for each site. Land supporting wetland vegetation, and land below the
normal high-water line of a water body shall not be included in calculating land area per site.
(2) The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or shelter, and utility and
service buildings shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet, from the normal
high-water line of a great pond classified GPA, rivers flowing to a great pond classified GPA,
from other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.
E. Individual Private Campsites. Individual private campsites not associated with campgrounds
are allowed provided the following conditions are met:
(1) One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, or thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet of lot area within the shoreland zone, whichever is less, may be permitted.
(2) When an individual private campsite is proposed on a lot that contains another principal use
and/or structure, the lot must contain the minimum lot dimensional requirements for the
principal structure and/or use, and the individual private campsite separately.
(3) Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a recreational vehicle or tent
platform, shall be set back one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal highwater
line of a great pond classified GPA, rivers flowing to a great pond classified GPA, from
other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.
(4) Only one recreational vehicle shall be allowed on a campsite. The recreational vehicle shall
not be located on any type of permanent foundation except for a gravel pad, and no structure
except a canopy shall be attached to the recreational vehicle.
(5) The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter in a
Resource Protection District shall be limited to one thousand (1000) square feet.
(6) A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and location of sewage
disposal shall be required for each campsite and shall be approved by the Local Plumbing
Inspector. Where disposal is off-site, written authorization from the receiving facility or land
owner is required.
(7) When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed on-site for more than one hundred
and twenty (120) days per year, all requirements for residential structures shall be met,
including the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system in compliance with the State
of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules unless served by public sewage facilities.
F. Commercial and Industrial Uses. The following new commercial and industrial uses are
prohibited within the shoreland zone adjacent to great ponds classified GPA, and rivers and
streams which flow to great ponds classified GPA:
(1) Auto washing facilities
(2) Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations, including body shops
(3) Chemical and bacteriological laboratories
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 16 of 45
(4) Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers, other than amounts
normally associated with individual households or farms
(5) Commercial painting, wood preserving, and furniture stripping
(6) Dry cleaning establishments
(7) Electronic circuit assembly
(8) Laundromats, unless connected to a sanitary sewer
(9) Metal plating, finishing, or polishing
(10) Petroleum or petroleum product storage and/or sale except storage on same property as use
occurs and except for storage and sales associated with marinas
(11) Photographic processing
(12) Printing
G. Parking Areas
(1) Parking areas shall meet the shoreline and tributary stream setback requirements for
structures for the district in which such areas are located The setback requirement for parking
areas serving public boat launching facilities shall be no less than fifty (50) feet, horizontal
distance, from the shoreline or tributary stream if the Planning Board finds that no other
reasonable alternative exists further from the shoreline or tributary stream.
(2) Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed use and shall be designed to prevent
stormwater runoff from flowing directly into a water body, tributary stream or wetland and
where feasible, to retain all runoff on-site.
(3) In determining the appropriate size of proposed parking facilities, the following shall apply:
(a) Typical parking space: Approximately ten (10) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long,
except that parking spaces for a vehicle and boat trailer shall be forty (40) feet long.
(b) Internal travel aisles: Approximately twenty (20) feet wide.
H. Roads and Driveways. The following standards shall apply to the construction of roads and/or
driveways and drainage systems, culverts and other related features.
(1) Roads and driveways shall be set back at least one-hundred (100) feet, from the normal highwater
line of a great pond classified GPA, rivers flowing to a great pond classified GPA, from
other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland unless no reasonable
alternative exists as determined by the Planning Board. If no other reasonable alternative
exists, the road and/or driveway setback requirement shall be no less than fifty (50) feet,
horizontal distance, upon clear showing by the applicant that appropriate techniques will be
used to prevent sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such
techniques may include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling basins, and/or the
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 17 of 45
effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed so as to avoid
sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland.
On slopes of greater than twenty (20) percent the road and/or driveway setback shall be
increased by ten (10) feet, horizontal distance, for each five (5) percent increase in slope
above twenty (20) percent.
Section 15 (H)(1) does not apply to approaches to water crossings or to roads or driveways
that provide access to permitted structures, public boat access facilities, and facilities located
nearer to the shoreline or tributary stream due to an operational necessity, excluding
temporary docks for recreational uses. Roads and driveways providing access to permitted
structures within the setback area shall comply fully with the requirements of Section
15(H)(1) except for that portion of the road or driveway necessary for direct access to the
structure.
(2) Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right of way regardless of their
setback from a water body, tributary stream or wetland.
(3) New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection District except that the
Planning Board may grant a permit to construct a road or driveway to provide access to public
boat access facilities or other permitted uses within the district. A road or driveway may also
be approved by the Planning Board in a Resource Protection District, upon a finding that no
reasonable alternative route or location is available outside the district. When a road or
driveway is permitted in a Resource Protection District the road and/or driveway shall be set
back as far as practicable from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or
upland edge of a wetland.
(4) Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two (2) horizontal to one (1)
vertical, and shall be graded and stabilized in accordance with the provisions for erosion and
sedimentation control contained in Section 15(T).
(5) Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than ten (10) percent except for segments of
less than two hundred (200) feet.
(6) In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from directly entering water bodies,
tributary streams or wetlands, roads and driveways shall be designed, constructed, and
maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip at least (50) feet plus two times the
average slope, in width between the outflow point of the ditch or culvert and the normal highwater
line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland. Surface drainage
which is directed to an unscarified buffer strip shall be diffused or spread out to promote
infiltration of the runoff and to minimize channelized flow of the drainage through the buffer
strip.
(7) Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnouts shall be installed in a
manner effective in directing drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before the flow gains
sufficient volume or head to erode the road, driveway, or ditch. To accomplish this, the
following shall apply:
(a) Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water turnouts shall be spaced along
the road, or driveway at intervals no greater than indicated in the following table:
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 18 of 45
Grade Spacing
(Percent) (Feet)
0-2 250
3-5 200-135
6-10 100-80
11-15 80-60
16-20 60-45
21 + 40
(b) Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only where the grade is
ten (10) percent or less.
(c) On sections having slopes greater than ten (10) percent, ditch relief culverts shall be
placed at approximately a thirty (30) degree angle downslope from a line perpendicular to
the centerline of the road or driveway.
(d) Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly installed in order to allow for
effective functioning, and their inlet and outlet ends shall be stabilized with appropriate
materials.
(8) Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other storm water runoff control
installations associated with roads and driveways shall be maintained on a regular basis to
assure effective functioning.
I. Signs. The following provisions shall govern the use of signs in the Resource Protection, Limited
Residential and Limited Residential / Commercial Districts:
(1) Signs relating to goods and services sold on the premises shall be allowed, provided that such
signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area and shall not exceed two (2) signs per
premises. In the Limited Residential / Commercial District, however, such signs shall not
exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. Signs relating to goods or services not sold or
rendered on the premises shall be prohibited.
(2) Name signs are allowed, provided such signs shall not exceed two (2) signs per premises, and
shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in the aggregate.
(3) Residential users may display a single sign not over three (3) square feet in area relating to
the sale, rental, or lease of the premises.
(4) Signs relating to trespassing and hunting shall be allowed without restriction as to number
provided that no such sign shall exceed two (2) square feet in area.
(5) Signs relating to public safety shall be allowed without restriction.
(6) No sign shall extend higher than twenty (20) feet above the ground.
(7) Signs may be illuminated only by shielded, non-flashing lights.
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 19 of 45
J. Storm Water Runoff
(1) All new construction and development shall be designed to minimize storm water runoff from
the site in excess of the natural predevelopment conditions. Where possible, existing natural
runoff control features, such as berms, swales, terraces and wooded areas, shall be retained in
order to reduce runoff and encourage infiltration of stormwaters.
(2) Storm water runoff control systems shall be maintained as necessary to ensure proper
functioning.
NOTE: The Stormwater Management Law (38 M.R.S.A. section 420-D) requires a full permit to
be obtained from the DEP prior to construction of a project consisting of 20,000 square
feet or more of impervious area or 5 acres or more of a developed area in an urban
impaired stream watershed or most-at-risk lake watershed, or a project with 1 acre or
more of developed area in any other stream, coastal or wetland watershed. A permit-byrule
is necessary for a project with one acre or more of disturbed area but less than 1 acre
impervious area (20,000 square feet for most-at-risk lakes and urban impaired streams)
and less than 5 acres of developed area. Furthermore, a Maine Construction General
Permit is required if the construction will result in one acre or more of disturbed area.
K. Septic Waste Disposal
(1) All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in conformance with the State of
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, and the following:
a) clearing or removal of woody vegetation necessary to site a new system and any
associated fill extensions, shall not extend closer than seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of a water body or the upland edge of a wetland
and
b) a holding tank is not allowed for a first-time residential use in the shoreland zone.
(2) All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall meet the setback distance in the Building
Permit Ordinance.
NOTE: The Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules require new systems, excluding fill
extensions, to be constructed no less than one hundred (100) horizontal feet from the normal
high-water line of a perennial water body. The minimum setback distance for a new
subsurface disposal system may not be reduced by variance.
L. Essential Services
(1) Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited to existing public ways
and existing service corridors.
(2) The installation of essential services, other than road-side distribution lines, is not allowed in
a Resource Protection, except to provide services to a permitted use within said district, or
except where the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable alternative exists. Where allowed,
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 20 of 45
such structures and facilities shall be located so as to minimize any adverse impacts on
surrounding uses and resources, including visual impacts.
(3) Damaged or destroyed public utility transmission and distribution lines, towers and related
equipment may be replaced or reconstructed without a permit.
M. Mineral Exploration and Extraction. Mineral exploration to determine the nature or extent of
mineral resources shall be accomplished by hand sampling, test boring, or other methods which
create minimal disturbance of less than one hundred (100) square feet of ground surface. A permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer shall be required for mineral exploration which exceeds the
above limitation. All excavations, including test pits and holes, shall be immediately capped,
filled or secured by other equally effective measures to restore disturbed areas and to protect the
public health and safety.
Mineral extraction may be permitted under the following conditions:
(1) A reclamation plan shall be filed with, and approved, by the Planning Board before a permit
is granted. Such plan shall describe in detail procedures to be undertaken to fulfill the
requirements of Section 15(M)(4) below.
(2) No part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff control features, shall be
permitted within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of
a great pond classified GPA, river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, the normal highwater
line of any other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland.
Extraction operations shall not be permitted within fifty (50) feet, horizontal distance, of any
property line without written permission of the owner of such adjacent property.
(3) Within twelve (12) months following the completion of extraction operations at any
extraction site, which operations shall be deemed complete when less than one hundred (100)
cubic yards of materials are removed in any consecutive twelve (12) month period, ground
levels and grades shall be established in accordance with the following:
(a) All debris, stumps, and similar material shall be removed for disposal in an approved
location, or shall be buried on-site. Only materials generated on-site may be buried or
covered on-site.
NOTE: The State of Maine Solid Waste Laws, 38 M.R.S.A., section 1301 and the solid waste
management rules, Chapters 400-419 of the Department of Environmental Protection's
regulations may contain other applicable provisions regarding disposal of such materials.
(b) The final graded slope shall be two and one-half to one (2 1/2:1) slope or flatter.
(c) Top soil or loam shall be retained to cover all disturbed land areas, which shall be
reseeded and stabilized with vegetation native to the area. Additional topsoil or loam
shall be obtained from off-site sources if necessary to complete the stabilization project.
(4) In keeping with the purposes of this Ordinance, the Planning Board may impose such
conditions as are necessary to minimize the adverse impacts associated with mineral
extraction operations on surrounding uses and resources.
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 21 of 45
N. Agriculture
(1) All spreading of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with the Manure Utilization
Guidelines published by the former Maine Department of Agriculture on November 1, 2001,
and the Nutrient Management Law (7 M.R.S.A. sections 4201-4209).
(2) Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of
a great pond classified GPA, a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, other water
bodies, tributary streams, or wetlands. All manure storage areas within the shoreland zone
must be constructed or modified such that the facility produces no discharge of effluent or
contaminated storm water.
(3) Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than forty thousand (40,000) square
feet in surface area, within the shoreland zone shall require a Conservation Plan to be filed
with the Planning Board. Non-conformance with the provisions of said plan shall be
considered to be a violation of this Ordinance.
NOTE: Assistance in preparing a Conservation Plan may be available through the local Soil and
Water Conservation District office.
(4) There shall be no new tilling of soil within one-hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA; within seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, from other water bodies; nor within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal
distance, of tributary streams and freshwater wetlands. Operations in existence on the
effective date of this ordinance and not in conformance with this provision may be
maintained.
(5) Newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted within one hundred (100)
feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA; within
seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of other water bodies; nor within twenty-five (25)
feet, horizontal distance, of tributary streams and freshwater wetlands. Livestock grazing
associated with ongoing farm activities, and which are not in conformance with the above
setback provisions may continue, provided that such grazing is conducted in accordance with a
Conservation Plan that has been filed with the planning board.
O. Timber Harvesting – Repealed (DATE_________)
The Bureau of Forestry will regulate Timber Harvesting
P. Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting
(1) In a Resource Protection District abutting a great pond, there shall be no cutting of vegetation
within the strip of land extending 75 feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal highwater
line, except to remove hazard trees as described in section Q.
Elsewhere, in any Resource Protection District the cutting or removal of vegetation shall be
limited to that which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that district.
(2) Except in areas as described in Section P(1), above, within a strip of land extending onehundred
(100) feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal high-water line of a great
pond classified GPA, a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, from any other water
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 22 of 45
body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland, a buffer strip of vegetation shall be
preserved as follows:
(a) There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet in the forest canopy (or
other existing woody vegetation if a forested canopy is not present) as measured from the
outer limits of the tree or shrub crown. However, a single footpath not to exceed six (6)
feet in width as measured between tree trunks and/or shrub stems is allowed for accessing
the shoreline provided that a cleared line of sight to the water through the buffer strip is
not created.
(b) Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is allowed provided that a welldistributed
stand of trees and other natural vegetation is maintained. For the purposes of
Section 15(P)(2)(b) a “well-distributed stand of trees” adjacent to a great pond classified
GPA or a river or stream flowing to a great pond classified GPA, shall be defined as
maintaining a rating score of 24 or more in each 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular (1250
square feet) area as determined by the following rating system.
Diameter of Tree at 4-1/2 feet Above Points
Ground Level (inches)
2 in. to < 4 in. 1
4 in. to <8 in. 2
8 in. to < 12 in. 4
12 in. or greater 8
Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands, a “well-distributed stand
of trees” is defined as maintaining a minimum rating score of 16 per 25-foot by 50-foot
rectangular area.
NOTE: As an example, adjacent to a great pond, if a 25-foot x 50-foot plot contains four (4)
trees between 2 and 4 inches in diameter, two trees between 4 and 8 inches in
diameter, three trees between 8 and 12 inches in diameter, and two trees over 12
inches in diameter, the rating score is:
(4x1) + (2x2) + (3x4) + (2x8) = 36 points
Thus, the 25-foot by 50-foot plot contains trees worth 36 points. Trees totaling 12
points (36 - 24 =12) may be removed from the plot provided that no cleared openings
are created.
The following shall govern in applying this point system:
(i) The 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular plots must be established where the landowner or
lessee proposes clearing within the required buffer;
(ii) Each successive plot must be adjacent to, but not overlap a previous plot;
(iii) Any plot not containing the required points must have no vegetation removed except
as otherwise allowed by this Ordinance;
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 23 of 45
(iv) Any plot containing the required points may have vegetation removed down to the
minimum points required or as otherwise allowed by this Ordinance;
(v) Where conditions permit, no more than 50% of the points on any 25-foot by 50-foot
rectangular area may consist of trees greater than 12 inches in diameter.
For the purposes of Section 15(P)(2)(b) “other natural vegetation” is defined as retaining
existing vegetation under three (3) feet in height and other ground cover and retaining at
least five (5) saplings less than two (2) inches in diameter at four and one half (4 ½) feet
above ground level for each 25-foot by 50-foot rectangle area. If five saplings do not
exist, no woody stems less than two (2) inches in diameter can be removed until 5
saplings have been recruited into the plot.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than 40% of the total volume of trees
four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level may be
removed in any ten (10) year period.
(c) In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing vegetation under three (3)
feet in height and other ground cover, including leaf litter and the forest duff layer, shall
not be cut, covered, or removed, except to provide for a footpath or other permitted uses
as described in Section 15(P) paragraphs (2) and (2)(a) above and 2(g) below.
(d) Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is allowed.
(e) In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the removal of storm-damaged,
dead or hazard trees results in the creation of cleared openings, these openings shall be
replanted with native tree species in accordance with Section Q, below, unless existing
new tree growth is present.
(f) In order to maintain the vegetation in the shoreline buffer, clearing or removal of
vegetation for allowed activities, including associated construction and related equipment
operation, within or outside the shoreline buffer, must comply with the requirements of
Section 15(P)(2).
(g) Clearing for recreational trails for public use is permitted provided that the width of the
trail does not exceed six (6) feet in width and the other objectives of this section are met
to the greatest extent practical.
Section 15(P)(2) does not apply to those portions of public recreational facilities adjacent
to public swimming areas and public boat access facilities as long as cleared areas are
limited to the minimum area necessary.
(3) At distances greater than one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, from a great pond
classified GPA, a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, from the normal high-water
line of any other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland, there shall be
allowed on any lot, in any ten (10) year period, selective cutting of not more than forty (40)
percent of the volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured 4 1/2 feet above
ground level. Tree removal in conjunction with the development of permitted uses shall be
included in the forty (40) percent calculation. For the purposes of these standards volume
may be considered to be equivalent to basal area.
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 24 of 45
In no event shall cleared openings for any purpose, including but not limited to, principal and
accessory structures, driveways, lawns and sewage disposal areas, exceed in the aggregate,
25% of the lot area within the shoreland zone or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever
is greater, including land previously cleared. This provision applies to the portion of a lot
within the shoreland zone, including the buffer area.
(4) Legally existing nonconforming cleared openings may be maintained, but shall not be
enlarged, except as allowed by this Ordinance.
(5) Fields and other cleared openings which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees, or other
woody vegetation shall be regulated under the provisions of Section 15(P).
Q. Hazard Trees, Storm-Damaged Trees, and Dead Tree Removal
(1) Hazard trees in the shoreland zone may be removed without a permit after consultation with
the Code Enforcement Officer if the following requirements are met:
(a) Within the shoreline buffer, if the removal of a hazard tree results in a cleared opening in
the tree canopy greater than two hundred and fifty (250) square feet, replacement with
native tree species is required, unless there is new tree growth already present. New tree
growth must be as near as practicable to where the hazard tree was removed and be at
least two (2) inches in diameter, measured at four and one half (4.5) feet above the
ground level. If new growth is not present, then replacement trees shall consist of native
species and be at least four (4) feet in height, and be no less than two (2) inches in
diameter. Stumps may not be removed.
(b) Outside of the shoreline buffer, when the removal of hazard trees exceeds forty (40)
percent of the volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured at four and
one half (4.5) feet above ground level in any ten (10) year period, and/or results in
cleared openings exceeding twenty-five (25) percent of the lot area within the shoreland
zone, or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is greater, replacement with native
tree species is required, unless there is new tree growth already present. New tree growth
must be as near as practicable to where the hazard tree was removed and be at least two
(2) inches in diameter, measured at four and one half (4.5) feet above the ground level. If
new growth is not present, then replacement trees shall consist of native species and be at
least two (2) inches in diameter, measured at four and one half (4.5) feet above the
ground level.
(c) The removal of standing dead trees, resulting from natural causes, is permissible without
the need for replanting or a permit, as long as the removal does not result in the creation
of new lawn areas, or other permanently cleared areas, and stumps are not removed. For
the purposes of this provision dead trees are those trees that contain no foliage during the
growing season.
(d) The Code Enforcement Officer may require the property owner to submit an evaluation
from a licensed forester or arborist before any hazard tree can be removed within the
shoreland zone.
(e) The Code Enforcement Officer may require more than a one–for-one replacement for
hazard trees removed that exceed eight (8) inches in diameter measured at four and one
half (4.5) feet above the ground level.
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 25 of 45
(2) Storm-damaged trees in the shoreland zone may be removed without a permit after
consultation with the Code Enforcement Officer if the following requirements are met:
(a) Within the shoreline buffer, when the removal of storm-damaged trees results in a cleared
opening in the tree canopy greater than two hundred and fifty (250) square feet,
replanting is not required, but the area shall be required to naturally revegetate, and the
following requirements must be met:
(i) The area from which a storm-damaged tree is removed does not result in new lawn
areas, or other permanently cleared areas;
(ii) Stumps from the storm-damaged trees may not be removed;
(iii) Limbs damaged from a storm event may be pruned even if they extend beyond the
bottom one-third (1/3) of the tree; and
(iv) If after one growing season, no natural regeneration or regrowth is present, replanting
of native tree seedlings or saplings is required at a density of one seedling per every
eighty (80) square feet of lost canopy.
(b) Outside of the shoreline buffer, if the removal of storm damaged trees exceeds 40% of
the volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured at four and one half
(4.5) feet above the ground level in any ten (10) year period, or results, in the aggregate,
in cleared openings exceeding 25% of the lot area within the shoreland zone or ten
thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is greater, and no natural regeneration occurs
within one growing season, then native tree seedlings or saplings shall be replanted on a
one-for-one basis.
R. Exemptions to Clearing and Vegetation Removal Requirements. The following activities are
exempt from the clearing and vegetation removal standards set forth in Section 15(P), provided
that all other applicable requirements of this chapter are complied with, and the removal of
vegetation is limited to that which is necessary:
(1) The removal of vegetation that occurs at least once every two (2) years for the maintenance
of legally existing areas that do not comply with the vegetation standards in this chapter, such
as but not limited to cleared openings in the canopy or fields. Such areas shall not be
enlarged, except as allowed by this section. If any of these areas, due to lack of removal of
vegetation every two (2) years, reverts back to primarily woody vegetation, the requirements
of Section 15(P) apply;
(2) The removal of vegetation from the location of allowed structures or allowed uses, when the
shoreline setback requirements of section 15(B) are not applicable;
(3) The removal of vegetation from the location of public swimming areas associated with an
allowed public recreational facility;
(4) The removal of vegetation associated with allowed agricultural uses, provided best
management practices are utilized, and provided all requirements of section 15(N) are
complied with;
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 26 of 45
(5) The removal of vegetation associated with brownfields or Voluntary Response Action
Program (VRAP) projects provided that the removal of vegetation is necessary for
remediation activities to clean-up contamination on a site approved by the Commissioner that
is part of a state or federal brownfields program or a voluntary response action program
pursuant 38 M.R.S.A section 343-E, and that is located along a river that does not flow to a
great pond classified as GPA pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A section 465-A.
(6) The removal of non-native invasive vegetation species, provided the following minimum
requirements are met:
(a) If removal of vegetation occurs via wheeled or tracked motorized equipment, the wheeled
or tracked motorized equipment is operated and stored at least twenty-five (25) feet,
horizontal distance, from the shoreline, except that wheeled or tracked equipment may be
operated or stored on existing structural surfaces, such as pavement or gravel;
(b) Removal of vegetation within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, from the
shoreline occurs via hand tools; and
(c) If applicable clearing and vegetation removal standards are exceeded due to the removal
of non-native invasive species vegetation, the area shall be revegetated with native
species to achieve compliance.
NOTE: An updated list of non-native invasive vegetation is maintained by the Department of
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry’s Natural Areas Program:
http://www.maine.gov/dacf/mnap/features/invasive_plants/invasives.htm
(7) The removal of vegetation associated with emergency response activities conducted by the
Department, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Coast Guard, and their
agents.
S. Revegetation Requirements. When revegetation is required in response to violations of the
vegetation standards set forth in Section 15(P), to address the removal of non-native invasive
species of vegetation, or as a mechanism to allow for development that may otherwise not be
permissible due to the vegetation standards, including removal of vegetation in conjunction with a
shoreline stabilization project, the revegation must comply with the following requirements.
(1) The property owner must submit a revegetation plan, prepared with and signed by a qualified
professional, that describes revegetation activities and maintenance. The plan must include a
scaled site plan, depicting where vegetation was, or is to be removed, where existing
vegetation is to remain, and where vegetation is to be planted, including a list of all
vegetation to be planted.
(2) Revegetation must occur along the same segment of shoreline and in the same area where
vegetation was removed and at a density comparable to the pre-existing vegetation, except
where a shoreline stabilization activity does not allow revegetation to occur in the same area
and at a density comparable to the pre-existing vegetation, in which case revegetation must
occur along the same segment of shoreline and as close as possible to the area where
vegetation was removed:
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 27 of 45
(3) If part of a permitted activity, revegetation shall occur before the expiration of the permit. If
the activity or revegetation is not completed before the expiration of the permit, a new
revegetation plan shall be submitted with any renewal or new permit application.
(4) Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for trees and saplings:
(a) All trees and saplings removed must be replaced with native noninvasive species;
(b) Replacement vegetation must at a minimum consist of saplings;
(c) If more than three (3) trees or saplings are planted, then at least three (3) different species
shall be used;
(d) No one species shall make up 50% or more of the number of trees and saplings planted;
(e) If revegetation is required for a shoreline stabilization project, and it is not possible to
plant trees and saplings in the same area where trees or saplings were removed, then trees
or sapling must be planted in a location that effectively reestablishes the screening
between the shoreline and structures; and
(f) A survival rate of at least eighty (80) percent of planted trees or saplings is required for a
minimum five (5) years period.
(5) Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for woody vegetation and other
vegetation under three (3) feet in height:
(a) All woody vegetation and vegetation under three (3) feet in height must be replaced with
native noninvasive species of woody vegetation and vegetation under three (3) feet in
height as applicable;
(b) Woody vegetation and vegetation under three (3) feet in height shall be planted in
quantities and variety sufficient to prevent erosion and provide for effective infiltration of
stormwater;
(c) If more than three (3) woody vegetation plants are to be planted, then at least three (3)
different species shall be planted;
(d) No one species shall make up 50% or more of the number of planted woody vegetation
plants; and
(e) Survival of planted woody vegetation and vegetation under three feet in height must be
sufficient to remain in compliance with the standards contained within this chapter for
minimum of five (5) years
(6) Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for ground vegetation and
ground cover:
(a) All ground vegetation and ground cover removed must be replaced with native
herbaceous vegetation, in quantities and variety sufficient to prevent erosion and provide
for effective infiltration of stormwater;
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 28 of 45
(b) Where necessary due to a lack of sufficient ground cover, an area must be supplemented
with a minimum four (4) inch depth of leaf mulch and/or bark mulch to prevent erosion
and provide for effective infiltration of stormwater; and
(c) Survival and functionality of ground vegetation and ground cover must be sufficient to
remain in compliance with the standards contained within this chapter for minimum of
five (5) years.
T. Erosion and Sedimentation Control
(1) All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or other similar activities which result
in unstabilized soil conditions and which require a permit shall also require a written soil
erosion and sedimentation control plan. The plan shall be submitted to the permitting
authority for approval and shall include, where applicable, provisions for:
(a) Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
(b) Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt fencing or diversion ditches.
(c) Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or rip-rap.
(2) In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall be designed to fit with the
topography and soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be
required shall be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours shall be followed as closely
as possible.
(3) Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed project
involving land disturbance, and shall be in operation during all stages of the activity. The
amount of exposed soil at every phase of construction shall be minimized to reduce the
potential for erosion.
(4) Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently stabilized within one (1) week
from the time it was last actively worked, by use of riprap, sod, seed, and mulch, or other
effective measures. In all cases permanent stabilization shall occur within nine (9) months of
the initial date of exposure. In addition:
(a) Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one (1) bale per five hundred
(500) square feet and shall be maintained until a catch of vegetation is established.
(b) Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable method may be
required to maintain the mulch cover.
(c) Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to avoid siltation into the
water. Such measures may include the use of staked hay bales and/or silt fences.
(5) Natural and man-made drainage ways and drainage outlets shall be protected from erosion
from water flowing through them. Drainageways shall be designed and constructed in order
to carry water from a twenty five (25) year storm or greater, and shall be stabilized with
vegetation or lined with riprap.
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 29 of 45
U. Soils. All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or structures can
be established or maintained without causing adverse environmental impacts, including severe
erosion, mass soil movement, improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during or after
construction. Proposed uses requiring subsurface waste disposal, and commercial or industrial
development and other similar intensive land uses, shall require a soils report based on an on-site
investigation and be prepared by state-certified professionals. Certified persons may include Maine
Certified Soil Scientists, Maine Registered Professional Engineers, Maine State Certified
Geologists and other persons who have training and experience in the recognition and evaluation
of soil properties. The report shall be based upon the analysis of the characteristics of the soil and
surrounding land and water areas, maximum ground water elevation, presence of ledge, drainage
conditions, and other pertinent data which the evaluator deems appropriate. The soils report shall
include recommendations for a proposed use to counteract soil limitations where they exist.
V. Water Quality. No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or discharge to the waters of the
State any pollutant that, by itself or in combination with other activities or substances, will impair
designated uses or the water classification of the water body, tributary stream or wetland.
W. Archaeological Site. Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil
disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, as determined by the permitting authority, shall be submitted by the applicant to
the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment, at least twenty (20) days
prior to action being taken by the permitting authority. The permitting authority shall consider
comments received from the Commission prior to rendering a decision on the application.
NOTE: Municipal officials should contact the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for the listing
and location of Historic Places in their community.
16. Administration
A. Administering Bodies and Agents
(1) Code Enforcement Officer. A Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed or reappointed
annually by July 1st.
(2) Board of Appeals. A Board of Appeals shall be created in accordance with the provisions of
30-A M.R.S.A. section 2691.
(3) Planning Board. A Planning Board shall be created in accordance with the provisions of
State law.
B. Permits Required. After the effective date of this Ordinance no person shall, without first
obtaining a permit, engage in any activity or use of land or structure requiring a permit in the
district in which such activity or use would occur; or expand, change, or replace an existing use
or structure; or renew a discontinued nonconforming use. A person who is issued a permit
pursuant to this Ordinance shall have a copy of the permit on site while the work authorized by
the permit is performed.
(1) A permit is not required for the replacement of an existing road culvert as long as:
(a) The replacement culvert is not more than 25% longer than the culvert being replaced;
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 30 of 45
(b) The replacement culvert is not longer than 75 feet; and
(c) Adequate erosion control measures are taken to prevent sedimentation of the water, and
the crossing does not block fish passage in the watercourse.
(2) A permit is not required for an archaeological excavation as long as the excavation is
conducted by an archaeologist listed on the State Historic Preservation Officer’s level 1 or
level 2 approved list, and unreasonable erosion and sedimentation is prevented by means of
adequate and timely temporary and permanent stabilization measures.
(3) Any permit required by this Ordinance shall be in addition to any other permit required by
other law or ordinance.
C. Permit Application
(1) Every applicant for a permit shall submit a written application, including a scaled site plan,
on a form provided by the municipality, to the appropriate official as indicated in Section 14.
(2) All applications shall be signed by an owner or individual who can show evidence of right,
title or interest in the property or by an agent, representative, tenant, or contractor of the
owner with authorization from the owner to apply for a permit hereunder, certifying that the
information in the application is complete and correct.
(3) All applications shall be dated, and the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as
appropriate, shall note upon each application the date and time of its receipt.
(4) If the property is not served by a public sewer, a valid plumbing permit or a completed
application for a plumbing permit, including the site evaluation approved by the Plumbing
Inspector, shall be submitted whenever the nature of the proposed structure or use would
require the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system.
D1. Procedure for Administering Permits. Within thirty-five (35) calendar days of the date of
receiving a written application, the Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer, as indicated in
Section 14, shall notify the applicant in writing either that the application is a complete
application, or, if the application is incomplete, that specified additional material is needed to
make the application complete. The Planning Board or the Code Enforcement Officer, as
appropriate, shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny all permit applications in writing
within thirty-five (35) calendar days of receiving a completed application. However, if the
Planning Board has a waiting list of applications, a decision on the application shall occur within
thirty-five (35) calendar days after the first available date on the Planning Board's agenda
following receipt of the completed application, or within 35 calendar days of the public hearing,
if the proposed use or structure is found to be in conformance with the purposes and provisions of
this Ordinance.
The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the proposed land use activity is in conformity
with the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance.
After the submission of a complete application to the Planning Board, the Board shall approve an
application or approve it with conditions if it makes a positive finding based on the information
presented that the proposed use:
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 31 of 45
(1) Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
(2) Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to surface waters;
(3) Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
(4) Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird or other wildlife
habitat;
(5) Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points of access to inland
(6) Will protect archaeological and historic resources as designated in the strategic plan;
(7) Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development and use; and
(8) Is in conformance with the provisions of Section 15, Land Use Standards.
If a permit is either denied or approved with conditions, the reasons as well as conditions shall be
stated in writing. No approval shall be granted for an application involving a structure if the
structure would be located in an unapproved subdivision or would violate any other local
ordinance, or regulation or statute administered by the municipality.
D2. Prohibition of Permitting
In addition to the other requirements of this this ordinance, a permit shall not be issued by the
Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer under the following conditions:
(1) The applicant for the permit is currently in violation of any land use ordinance or state law
related to land use within the Town of Vassalboro.
(2) The landowner for whom a permit application has been submitted is currently in violation of
any land use ordinance or state law related to land use within the Town of Vassalboro.
(3) The applicant for the permit has engaged in activities requiring a permit under state laws or
local ordinances without having obtained a permit with respect to any land within the Town
of Vassalboro.
(4) The landowner for whom a permit application has been submitted has engaged in activities
requiring a permit under state laws or local ordinances without having obtained a permit with
respect to any land within the Town of Vassalboro.
(5) The applicant or landowner will be using a contractor, developer, or any business or person
gaining monetary benefit to undertake work related to the issuance of the permit and the
contractor, developer, business or person is currently in violation of any ordinance or state
law related to land use in the Town of Vassalboro.
E. Special Exceptions. In addition to the criteria specified in Section 16(D1) above, excepting
structure setback requirements, the Planning Board may approve a permit for a single family
residential structure in a Resource Protection District provided that the applicant demonstrates
that all of the following conditions are met:
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 32 of 45
(1) There is no location on the property, other than a location within the Resource Protection
District, where the structure can be built.
(2) The lot on which the structure is proposed is undeveloped and was established and recorded
in the registry of deeds of the county in which the lot is located before the adoption of the
Resource Protection District.
(3) All proposed buildings, sewage disposal systems and other improvements are:
(a) Located on natural ground slopes of less than 20%; and
(b) Located outside the floodway of the 100-year flood-plain along rivers and artificially
formed great ponds along rivers and outside the velocity zone in areas subject to tides,
based on detailed flood insurance studies and as delineated on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate
Maps; all buildings, including basements, are elevated at least one foot above the 100-
year flood-plain elevation; and the development is otherwise in compliance with any
applicable municipal flood-plain ordinance.
If the floodway is not shown on the Federal Emergency Management Agency Maps, it is
deemed to be 1/2 the width of the 100-year flood-plain.
(4) The total footprint, including cantilevered or similar overhanging extensions, of all principal
and accessory structures is limited to a maximum of 1,500 square feet. This limitation shall
not be altered by variance.
(5) All structures, except functionally water-dependent structures, are set back from the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland to the greatest
practical extent, but not less than 100 feet, horizontal distance. In determining the greatest
practical extent, the Planning Board shall consider the depth of the lot, the slope of the land,
the potential for soil erosion, the type and amount of vegetation to be removed, the proposed
building site's elevation in regard to the flood-plain, and its proximity to moderate-value and
high-value wetlands.
F. Expiration of Permit. Permits shall expire one year from the date of issuance if a substantial
start is not made in construction or in the use of the property during that period. If a substantial
start is made within one year of the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall have one additional
year to complete the project, at which time the permit shall expire.
G. Installation of Public Utility Service. A public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility
company of any kind may not install services to any new structure located in the shoreland zone
unless written authorization attesting to the validity and currency of all local permits required under
this or any previous Ordinance has been issued by the appropriate municipal officials or other
written arrangements have been made between the municipal officials and the utility.
H. Appeals
(1) Powers and Duties of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall have the following
powers:
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 33 of 45
(a) Administrative Appeals: To hear and decide administrative appeals, on an appellate basis,
where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by, or failure to act by, the Planning Board in the
administration of this Ordinance; and to hear and decide administrative appeals on a de
novo basis where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement
Officer in his or her review of and action on a permit application under this Ordinance. Any
order, requirement, decision or determination made, or failure to act, in the enforcement of
this ordinance is not appealable to the Board of Appeals.
(b) Variance Appeals: To authorize variances upon appeal, within the limitations set forth in
this Ordinance.
(2) Variance Appeals. Variances may be granted only under the following conditions:
(a) Variances may be granted only from dimensional requirements including, but not limited
to, lot width, structure height, percent of lot coverage, and setback requirements.
(b) Variances shall not be granted for establishment of any uses otherwise prohibited by this
Ordinance.
(c) The Board of Appeals shall not grant a variance unless it finds that:
(i) The proposed structure or use would meet the provisions of Section 15 except for the
specific provision which has created the non-conformity and from which relief is
sought; and
(ii) The strict application of the terms of this Ordinance would result in undue hardship.
The term “undue hardship shall mean:
a. That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is
granted;
b. That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and
not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
c. That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality;
and
d. That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
(d) Notwithstanding Section 16(H)(2)(c)(ii) above, the Board of Appeals, or the Code
Enforcement Officer if authorized in accordance with 30-A MRSA §4353-A, may grant a
variance to an owner of a residential dwelling for the purpose of making that dwelling
accessible to a person with a disability who resides in or regularly uses the dwelling. The
board shall restrict any variance granted under this subsection solely to the installation of
equipment or the construction of structures necessary for access to or egress from the
dwelling by the person with the disability. The board may impose conditions on the
variance, including limiting the variance to the duration of the disability or to the time that
the person with the disability lives in the dwelling. The term “structures necessary for
access to or egress from the dwelling” shall include railing, wall or roof systems necessary
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 34 of 45
for the safety or effectiveness of the structure. Any permit issued pursuant to this
subsection is subject to Sections 16(H)(2)(f) and 16(H)(4)(b)(iv) below.)
(e) The Board of Appeals shall limit any variances granted as strictly as possible in order to
ensure conformance with the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance to the greatest
extent possible, and in doing so may impose such conditions to a variance as it deems
necessary. The party receiving the variance shall comply with any conditions imposed.
(f) A copy of each variance request, including the application and all supporting information
supplied by the applicant, shall be forwarded by the municipal officials to the
Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection at least twenty (20) days
prior to action by the Board of Appeals. Any comments received from the Commissioner
prior to the action by the Board of Appeals shall be made part of the record and shall be
taken into consideration by the Board of Appeals.
(3) Administrative Appeals
When the Board of Appeals reviews a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer the Board of
Appeals shall hold a “de novo” hearing. At this time the Board may receive and consider new
evidence and testimony, be it oral or written. When acting in a “de novo” capacity the Board of
Appeals shall hear and decide the matter afresh, undertaking its own independent analysis of
evidence and the law, and reaching its own decision.
When the Board of Appeals hears a decision of the Planning Board, it shall hold an appellate
hearing, and may reverse the decision of the Planning Board only upon finding that the decision
was contrary to specific provisions of the Ordinance or contrary to the facts presented to the
Planning Board. The Board of Appeals may only review the record of the proceedings before
the Planning Board. The Board Appeals shall not receive or consider any evidence which was
not presented to the Planning Board, but the Board of Appeals may receive and consider written
or oral arguments. If the Board of Appeals determines that the record of the Planning Board
proceedings are inadequate, the Board of Appeals may remand the matter to the Planning Board
for additional fact finding.
(4) Appeal Procedure
(a) Making an Appeal
(i) An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an
aggrieved party from any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning
Board, except for enforcement-related matters as described in Section 16(H)(1)(a)
above. Such an appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the
official, written decision appealed from, and not otherwise, except that the Board, upon
a showing of good cause, may waive the thirty (30) calendar day requirement.
(ii) Applications for appeals shall be made by filing with the Board of Appeals a written
notice of appeal which includes:
a. A concise written statement indicating what relief is requested and why the appeal
or variance should be granted.
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 35 of 45
b. A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of existing buildings and
structures and other physical features of the lot pertinent to the relief sought.
(iii) Upon receiving an application for an administrative appeal or a variance, the Code
Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of
Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the decision appealed from.
(iv) The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on an administrative appeal or a
request for a variance within thirty-five (35) calendar calendar days of its receipt of a
complete written application, unless this time period is extended by the parties.
(b) Notice of Appeal and Hearing
At least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing on such appeal, the Board
of Appeals shall:
(i) Cause to be published in one issue in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town, a
notice which includes:
a. The name of the person appealing;
b. The location and description of the property involved;
c. A brief description of the decision appealed from or of the nature of the appeal; and
d. The date, time and place of the hearing.
(ii) Cause the Code Enforcement Officer to give similar written notice by mail to:
a. All property owners whose properties lie within 200 feet of the affected property;
b. The person making the appeal; and
c. The Planning Board, the Code Enforcement Officer, the Municipal Officers and
any other parties expressing an interest in the hearing.
(c) Hearings:
(i) The Board of Appeals may receive any oral or documentary evidence, but may also
exclude any irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence. All parties shall
have the right to present their case or defense by oral or documentary evidence, to
submit rebuttal evidence, and to conduct such cross-examinations as may be required
for a full and true disclosure of the facts.
(ii) The appellant’s case shall be heard first. To maintain orderly procedure, each side shall
proceed without interruption. Questions may be asked through the Chair. All persons at
the hearings shall abide by the order established by the Chairperson.
(iii) At any hearing, a party may be represented by agent or attorney. Hearings shall not be
continued to other times except for good cause.
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 36 of 45
(iv) The transcript or tape recording of testimony, if any, minutes, and exhibits, together
with all papers, documents, exhibits and requests filed in the proceedings, shall
constitute the record.
(v) The record may be kept open after the hearing to receive additional comments or
evidence by order of the Chairperson until a date established by the order.
(d) Decision by Board of Appeals
(i) A majority of the full voting membership of the Board of Apeals shall constitute a
quorum for the purpose of deciding an appeal.
(ii) The concurring vote of a majority of the members present and voting shall be necessary
to reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Code Enforcement
Officer or Planning Board, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter on
which it is required to pass under this Ordinance, or to affect any variation in the
application of this Ordinance from its stated terms.
(iii) The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
(iv) Following the public hearing on an administrative appeal, the Board of Appeals may
reverse the decision of the CEO or Planning Board only upon a finding that the
decision was clearly contrary to specific provisions of this Ordinance.
(e) The Board of Appeals shall decide all administrative appeals and variance appeals within
thirty-five (35) calendar days after the close of the hearing, and shall issue a written
decision on all appeals.
(f) The Board of Appeals shall state the reasons and basis for its decision, including a
statement of the facts found and conclusions reached by the Board of Appeals. All
decisions shall be based upon the material issues of fact and law. The Board of Appeals
shall cause written notice of its decision to be mailed or hand-delivered to the applicant and
to the Department of Environmental Protection within seven (7) calendar days of the Board
of Appeals’s decision. Copies of written decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be given to
the Planning Board, Code Enforcement Officer, and the municipal officers.
(5) Appeal to Superior Court. Except as provided by 30-A M.R.S.A. section 2691(3)(F), any
aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings before the Board of Appeals
may take an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State laws within fourty-five (45)
calendar days from the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
(6) Reconsideration. In accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. section 2691(3)(F), the Board of Appeals
may reconsider any decision within 45 calendar days of its prior decision. A request to the
Board of Appeals to reconsider a decision must be filed within ten (10) calendar days of the
decision that is being reconsidered. A vote to reconsider and the action taken on that
reconsideration must occur and be completed within fourty-five (45) calendar days of the date
of the vote on the original decision. Reconsideration of a decision shall require a positive vote
of the majority of the Board members originally voting on the decision, and proper notification
to the landowner, petitioner, planning board, code enforcement officer, and other parties of
interest, including abutters and those who testified at the original hearing(s). The Board may
conduct additional hearings and receive additional evidence and testimony.
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 37 of 45
Appeal of a reconsidered decision to Superior Court must be made within fifteen (15) calendar
days after the decision on reconsideration.
I. Enforcement
(1) Nuisances. Any violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
(2) Code Enforcement Officer
(a) It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance. If the Code Enforcement Officer shall find that any provision of this
Ordinance is being violated, he or she shall notify in writing the person responsible for
such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to
correct it, including discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures, or work
being done, removal of illegal buildings or structures, and abatement of nuisance
conditions. A copy of such notices shall be submitted to the municipal officers and be
maintained as a permanent record.
(b) The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct on-site inspections to insure compliance with
all applicable laws and conditions attached to permit approvals. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall also investigate all complaints of alleged violations of this Ordinance.
(c) The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete record of all essential transactions of
the office, including applications submitted, permits granted or denied, variances granted or
denied, revocation actions, revocation of permits, appeals, court actions, violations
investigated, violations found, and fees collected.
(3) Legal Actions. When the above action does not result in the correction or abatement of the
violation or nuisance condition, the Municipal Officers, upon notice from the Code
Enforcement Officer, are hereby directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings, either
legal or equitable, including seeking injunctions of violations and the imposition of fines, that
may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance in the name of the
municipality. The municipal officers, or their authorized agent, are hereby authorized to enter
into administrative consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating violations of this
Ordinance and recovering fines without Court action. Such agreements shall not allow an
illegal structure or use to continue unless there is clear and convincing evidence that the illegal
structure or use was constructed or conducted as a direct result of erroneous advice given by an
authorized municipal official and there is no evidence that the owner acted in bad faith, or
unless the removal of the structure or use will result in a threat or hazard to public health and
safety or will result in substantial environmental damage.
(4) Fines. Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner's agent or a
contractor, who violates any provision or requirement of this Ordinance shall be penalized in
accordance with 30-A, M.R.S.A. section 4452.
NOTE: Current penalties include fines of not less than $100 nor more than $2500 per violation for
each day that the violation continues. However, in a resource protection district the
maximum penalty is increased to $5000 (38 M.R.S.A. section 4452).
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 38 of 45
17. Definitions
Accessory structure or use - a use or structure which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use
or structure. Accessory uses, when aggregated, shall not subordinate the principal use of the lot. A deck
or similar extension of the principal structure or a garage attached to the principal structure by a roof or
a common wall is considered part of the principal structure.
Aggrieved party - an owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly affected by the granting or
denial of a permit or variance under this Ordinance; a person whose land abuts land for which a permit
or variance has been granted; or any other person or group of persons who have suffered particularized
injury as a result of the granting or denial of such permit or variance.
Agriculture - the production, keeping or maintenance for sale or lease, of plants or animals, including,
but not limited to, forages and sod crops, grains and seed crops, dairy animals and dairy products,
poultry and poultry products, livestock, fruits and vegetables and ornamental green-house products.
Agriculture does not include forest management and timber harvesting activities.
Aquaculture - the growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater, estuarine, or marine plant or
animal species.
Basal Area - the area of cross-section of a tree stem at 4 1/2 feet above ground level and inclusive of
bark.
Basement - any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of 6 feet or more and having more
than 50% of its volume below the existing ground level.
Boat Launching Facility - a facility designed primarily for the launching and landing of watercraft,
and which may include an access ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for vehicles and trailers.
Bureau of Forestry – State of Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry, Bureau
of Forestry.
Campground - any area or tract of land to accommodate two (2) or more parties in temporary living
quarters, including, but not limited to tents, recreational vehicles or other shelters.
Canopy – the more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a wooded area.
Commercial use - the use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than a "home occupation," defined
below, the intent and result of which activity is the production of income from the buying and selling
of goods and/or services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings and/or dwelling units.
Development – a change in land use involving alteration of the land, water or vegetation, or the
addition or alteration of structures or other construction not naturally occurring.
Dimensional requirements - numerical standards relating to spatial relationships including but not
limited to setback, lot area, shore frontage and height.
Disability - any disability, infirmity, malformation, disfigurement, congenital defect or mental
condition caused by bodily injury, accident, disease, birth defect, environmental conditions or illness;
and also includes the physical or mental condition of a person which constitutes a substantial
handicap as determined by a physician or in the case of mental handicap, by a psychiatrist or
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 39 of 45
psychologist, as well as any other health or sensory impairment which requires special education,
vocational rehabilitation or related services.
Driveway - a vehicular access-way less than five hundred (500) feet in length serving two singlefamily
dwellings or one two-family dwelling, or less.
Emergency operations - operations conducted for the public health, safety or general welfare, such
as protection of resources from immediate destruction or loss, law enforcement, and operations to
rescue human beings, property and livestock from the threat of destruction or injury.
Essential services - gas, electrical or communication facilities; steam, fuel, electric power or water
transmission or distribution lines, towers and related equipment; telephone cables or lines, poles and
related equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry or other similar pipelines; municipal sewage lines, collection
or supply systems; and associated storage tanks. Such systems may include towers, poles, wires,
mains, drains, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarms and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and
similar accessories, but shall not include service drops or buildings which are necessary for the
furnishing of such services.
Expansion of a structure - an increase in the footprint of a structure, including all extensions such
as, but not limited to: attached decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
Expansion of use - the addition of one or more months to a use's operating season; or the use of more
footprint of a structure or ground area devoted to a particular use.
Family - one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit.
Floodway - the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved
in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
by more than one foot in height.
Footprint - the entire area of ground covered by the structure(s) on a lot, including but not limited to
cantilevered or similar overhanging extensions, as well as unenclosed structures, including decks.
Forested wetland - a freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six (6) meters tall
(approximately twenty (20) feet) or taller.
Foundation - the supporting substructure of a building or other structure, excluding wooden sills and
post supports, but including basements, slabs, frostwalls, or other base consisting of concrete, block,
brick or similar material.
Freshwater wetland - freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, other than forested
wetlands, which are:
(1) Of ten or more contiguous acres; or of less than 10 contiguous acres and adjacent to a surface
water body, excluding any river, stream or brook, such that in a natural state, the combined
surface area is in excess of 10 acres; and
(2) Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration sufficient
to support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils.
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 40 of 45
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not conform to
the criteria of this definition.
Functionally water-dependent uses - those uses that require, for their primary purpose, location on
submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location in, inland waters and that can not be
located away from these waters. The uses include, but are not limited to, commercial and recreational
fishing and boating facilities, finfish and shellfish processing, fish-related storage and retail and
wholesale fish marketing facilities, waterfront dock and port facilities, shipyards and boat building
facilities, marinas, navigation aids, basins and channels, shoreline structures necessary for erosion
control purposes, industrial uses dependent upon water-borne transportation or requiring large
volumes of cooling or processing water that can not reasonably be located or operated at an inland
site, and uses that primarily provide general public access to inland waters. Recreational boat storage
buildings are not considered to be a functionally water-dependent use.
Great pond - any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess of ten
acres, and any inland body of water artificially formed or increased which has a surface area in excess
of thirty (30) acres except for the purposes of this Ordinance, where the artificially formed or
increased inland body of water is completely surrounded by land held by a single owner,
Great pond classified GPA - any great pond classified GPA, pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. Article 4-A
Section 465-A. This classification includes some, but not all impoundments of rivers that are defined
as great ponds.
Ground cover – small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the partially decayed organic
matter of the forest floor.
Hazard tree - a tree with a structural defect, combination of defects, or disease resulting in a
structural defect that under the normal range of environmental conditions at the site exhibits a high
probability of failure and loss of a major structural component of the tree in a manner that will strike a
target. A normal range of environmental conditions does not include meteorological anomalies, such
as, but not limited to: hurricanes; hurricane-force winds; tornados; microbursts; or significant ice
storm events. Hazard trees also include those trees that pose a serious and imminent risk to bank
stability. A target is the area where personal injury or property damage could occur if the tree or a
portion of the tree fails. Targets include roads, driveways, parking areas, structures, campsites, and
any other developed area where people frequently gather and linger.
Height of a structure - the vertical distance between the mean original (prior to construction) grade
at the downhill side of the structure and the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys,
steeples, antennas, and similar appurtenances that have no floor area.
Home occupation - an occupation or profession which is customarily conducted on or in a residential
structure or property and which is 1) clearly incidental to and compatible with the residential use of
the property and surrounding residential uses; and 2) which employs no more than two (2) persons
other than family members residing in the home.
Increase in nonconformity of a structure - any change in a structure or property which causes
further deviation from the dimensional standard(s) creating the nonconformity such as, but not limited
to, reduction in water body, tributary stream or wetland setback distance, increase in lot coverage, or
increase in height of a structure. Property changes or structure expansions which either meet the
dimensional standard or which cause no further increase in the linear extent of nonconformance of the
existing structure shall not be considered to increase nonconformity. For example, there is no increase
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 41 of 45
in nonconformity with the setback requirement for water bodies, wetlands, or tributary streams if the
expansion extends no further into the required setback area than does any portion of the existing
nonconforming structure. Hence, a structure may be expanded laterally provided that the expansion
extends no closer to the water body, tributary stream, or wetland than the closest portion of the
existing structure from that water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Included in this allowance are
expansions which in-fill irregularly shaped structures.
Individual private campsite - an area of land which is not associated with a campground, but which
is developed for repeated camping by only one group not to exceed ten (10) individuals and which
involves site improvements which may include but not be limited to a gravel pad, parking area, fire
place, or tent platform.
Industrial - The assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packaging or processing of goods,
or the extraction of minerals.
Institutional – a non-profit or quasi-public use, or institution such as a church, library, public or
private school, hospital, or municipally owned or operated building, structure or land used for public
purposes.
Lot area - The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, minus land below the normal
high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and areas beneath roads serving more
than two lots.
Marina - a business establishment having frontage on navigable water and, as its principal use,
providing for hire offshore moorings or docking facilities for boats, and which may also provide
accessory services such as boat and related sales, boat repair and construction, indoor and outdoor
storage of boats and marine equipment, bait and tackle shops and marine fuel service facilities.
Market value - the estimated price a property will bring in the open market and under prevailing
market conditions in a sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer, both conversant with the
property and with prevailing general price levels.
Mineral exploration - hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of determining the nature or
extent of mineral resources which create minimal disturbance to the land and which include
reasonable measures to restore the land to its original condition.
Mineral extraction - any operation within any twelve (12) month period which removes more than
one hundred (100) cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, rock, peat, or other like
material from its natural location and to transport the product removed, away from the extraction site.
Minimum lot width - the closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot. When only two lot lines
extend into the shoreland zone, both lot lines shall be considered to be side lot lines.
Multi-unit residential - a residential structure containing three (3) or more residential dwelling units.
Native – indigenous to the local forests.
Non-conforming condition – non-conforming lot, structure or use which is allowed solely because it
was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendment took effect.
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 42 of 45
Non-conforming lot - a single lot of record which, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this Ordinance, does not meet the area, frontage, or width requirements of the district in which it is
located.
Non-conforming structure - a structure which does not meet any one or more of the following
dimensional requirements; setback, height, lot coverage or footprint, but which is allowed solely
because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Non-conforming use - use of buildings, structures, premises, land or parts thereof which is not
allowed in the district in which it is situated, but which is allowed to remain solely because it was in
lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Non-native invasive species of vegetation - species of vegetation listed by the Maine Department of
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry as being invasive in Maine ecosystems and not native to
Maine ecosystems.
Normal high-water line (non-tidal waters) - that line which is apparent from visible markings,
changes in the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation, and
which distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial land. Areas
contiguous with rivers and great ponds that support non-forested wetland vegetation and hydric soils
and that are at the same or lower elevation as the water level of the river or great pond during the
period of normal high-water are considered part of the river or great pond.
Person - an individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality, trust, estate, partnership,
association, two or more individuals having a joint or common interest, or other legal entity.
Piers, docks, wharves, bridges and other structures and uses extending over or beyond the normal
high-water line or within a wetland.
Temporary: Structures which remain in or over the water for less than seven (7) months in
any period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
Permanent: Structures which remain in or over the water for seven (7) months or more in any
period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
Principal structure - a structure other than one which is used for purposes wholly incidental or
accessory to the use of another structure or use on the same lot.
Principal use - a use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory to another use on the
same lot.
Public facility - any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings, property, recreation areas, and
roads, which are owned, leased, or otherwise operated, or funded by a governmental body or public
entity.
Recent floodplain soils - the following soil series as described and identified by the National
Cooperative Soil Survey:
Fryeburg Hadley Limerick Lovewell Medomak Odnawa
Alluvial Cornish Charles Podunk Rumney Saco
Suncook Sunday Winooski
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 43 of 45
Recreational facility - a place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time
activities, and other customary and usual recreational activities, excluding boat launching facilities.
Recreational vehicle - a vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle designed to be towed, and designed for
temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons, and which may include a pick-up
camper, travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and motor home. In order to be considered as a vehicle
and not as a structure, the unit must remain with its tires on the ground, and must be registered with
the State Division of Motor Vehicles.
Replacement system - a system intended to replace: 1.) an existing system which is either
malfunctioning or being upgraded with no significant change of design flow or use of the structure, or
2.) any existing overboard wastewater discharge.
Residential dwelling unit - a room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use as
permanent, seasonal, or temporary living quarters for only one family at a time, and containing
cooking, sleeping and toilet facilities. The term shall include mobile homes and rental units that
contain cooking, sleeping, and toilet facilities regardless of the time-period rented. Recreational
vehicles are not residential dwelling units.
Riprap - rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least six (6) inches in diameter, used for erosion control
and soil stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two (2) units horizontal to one (1) unit
vertical or less.
River - a free-flowing body of water including its associated floodplain wetlands from that point at
which it provides drainage for a watershed of twenty five (25) square miles to its mouth.
Road - a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel, asphalt, or other surfacing
material constructed for or created by the repeated passage of motorized vehicles, excluding a
driveway as defined.
Sapling - a tree species that is less than two (2) inches in diameter at four and one half (4.5) feet
above ground level.
Seedling - a young tree species that is less than four and one half (4.5) feet in height above ground
level.
Service drop - any utility line extension which does not cross or run beneath any portion of a water
body provided that:
(1) in the case of electric service
(a) the placement of wires and/or the installation of utility poles is located entirely upon the
premises of the customer requesting service or upon a roadway right-of-way; and
(b) the total length of the extension is less than one thousand (1,000) feet.
(2) in the case of telephone service
(a) the extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation of telephone wires to
existing utility poles, or
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 44 of 45
(b) the extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or placement underground is
less than one thousand (1,000) feet in length.
Setback - the nearest horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of a water body or tributary
stream, or upland edge of a wetland, to the nearest part of a structure, road, parking space or other
regulated object or area.
Shore frontage - the length of a lot bordering on a water body or wetland measured in a straight line
between the intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline.
Shoreland zone - the land area located within two hundred and fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance,
of the normal high-water line of any great pond or river; within 250 feet of the upland edge of a
freshwater wetland; or within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water
line of a stream.
Shoreline – the normal high-water line, or upland edge of a wetland.
Shoreline buffer – vegetated area within 100 feet of the shoreline.
Significant River Segments - No Significant River Segments exist in Vassalboro.
Storm-damaged tree - a tree that has been uprooted, blown down, is lying on the ground, or that
remains standing and is damaged beyond the point of recovery as the result of a storm event.
Stream - a free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond or the confluence of two (2)
perennial streams as depicted on the most recent , highest resolution version of the national
hydrography dataset available from the United States Geological Survey on the website of the United
States Geological Survey or the national map to the point where the stream becomes a river or where
the stream meets the shoreland zone of another water body or wetland. When a stream meets the
shoreland zone of a water body or wetland and a channel forms downstream of the water body or
wetland as an outlet, that channel is also a stream.
Structure – anything temporarily or permanently located, built, constructed or erected for the
support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods or property of any kind or anything
constructed or erected on or in the ground. The term includes structures temporarily or permanently
located, such as decks, patios, and satellite dishes. Structure does not include fences; poles and wiring
and other aerial equipment normally associated with service drops, including guy wires and guy
anchors; subsurface waste water disposal systems as defined in Title 30-A, section 4201, subsection
5; geothermal heat exchange wells as defined in Title 32, section 4700-E, subsection 3-C; or wells or
water wells as defined in Title 32, section 4700-E, subsection 8.
Substantial start - completion of thirty (30) percent of a permitted structure or use measured as a
percentage of estimated total cost.
Subsurface sewage disposal system – any system designed to dispose of waste or waste water on or
beneath the surface of the earth; includes, but is not limited to: septic tanks; disposal fields;
grandfathered cesspools; holding tanks; pretreatment filter, piping, or any other fixture, mechanism,
or apparatus used for those purposes; does not include any discharge system licensed under 38
M.R.S.A. section 414, any surface waste water disposal system, or any municipal or quasi-municipal
sewer or waste water treatment system..
Town of Vassalboro Shoreland Zoning Ordinance Page 45 of 45
Sustained slope - a change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is substantially
maintained or exceeded throughout the measured area.
Tree - a woody perennial plant with a well-defined trunk(s) at least two (2) inches in diameter at four
and one half (4.5) feet above the ground, with a more or less definite crown, and reaching a height of
at least ten (10) feet at maturity.
Tributary stream – means a channel between defined banks created by the action of surface water,
which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial vegetation or by the presence of a bed, devoid of
topsoil, containing waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material or bedrock; and which is
connected hydrologically with other water bodies. “Tributary stream” does not include rills or gullies
forming because of accelerated erosion in disturbed soils where the natural vegetation cover has been
removed by human activity.
This definition does not include the term “stream” as defined elsewhere in this Ordinance, and only
applies to that portion of the tributary stream located within the shoreland zone of the receiving water
body or wetland.
NOTE: Water setback requirements apply to tributary streams within the shoreland zone.
Upland edge of a wetland - the boundary between upland and wetland. The upland edge is formed
where the soils are not saturated for a duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation; or where the
soils support the growth of wetland vegetation, but such vegetation is dominated by woody stems that
are six (6) meters (approximately twenty (20) feet) tall or taller.
Vegetation - all live trees, shrubs, and other plants including without limitation, trees both over and
under 4 inches in diameter, measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level.
Volume of a structure - the volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by roof and fixed exterior
walls as measured from the exterior faces of these walls and roof.
Water body - any great pond, river or stream.
Water crossing - any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a river, stream,
tributary stream, or wetland whether under, through, or over the water or wetland. Such projects
include but may not be limited to roads, fords, bridges, culverts, water lines, sewer lines, and cables
as well as maintenance work on these crossings. This definition includes crossings for timber
harvesting equipment and related activities.
Wetland - a freshwater wetland.
Woody Vegetation - live trees or woody, non-herbaceous shrubs.

TOWN OF VASSALBORO
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE

Adopted ________________________


Purpose..............................................................................................................................................1
Definitions.........................................................................................................................................1
Emergency Management Agency....................................................................................................1
Emergency Management Agency Forces........................................................................................1
Director..............................................................................................................................................1
Director..............................................................................................................................................1
Organization.......................................................................................................................................1
Appointment of Director; Duties and Responsibilities....................................................................2
Rules and Regulations.......................................................................................................................2
Emergency Proclamation...................................................................................................................2
Termination of Emergency................................................................................................................2
Emergency Management Director Duties and Emergency Powers................................................3
Emergency Operational Plans...........................................................................................................3
National Incident Management System...........................................................................................4
Immunity from Liability ....................................................................................................................4
Compensation for Injuries ................................................................................................................4
Violation of Regulations................................................................................................................... 4
Penalty ...............................................................................................................................................4
Severability....................................................................................................................................... 4
Conflicting Ordinances, Orders, Rules and Regulations Suspended ............................................4


TOWN OF VASSALBORO

EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE

Purpose
It is the intent and purpose of this Ordinance to establish an Emergency Management Agency in compliance and in conformity with the provisions of Title 37-B, MRSA, Section 781 et seq., to ensure the complete and efficient utilization of the Town’s facilities and resources to combat disaster as defined herein.

Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this ordinance:
Emergency Management Agency. “Emergency Management Agency” means the agency created under this ordinance for the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, in order to minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters or catastrophes caused by enemy or terrorist attacks, sabotage, riots or other hostile action, or by fire, flood, earthquake or other natural or man-made causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting, police, medical and health, emergency welfare, rescue, engineering, public warning and communications services; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; allocation of critical materials in short supply; emergency transportation; other activities related to civilian protection and other activities necessary to the preparation for the carrying out of these functions.

Emergency Management Agency Forces. “Emergency Management Agency Forces” shall mean the employees, equipment and facilities of all town departments, boards, institutions and commissions; and in addition, it shall include all volunteer persons, equipment and facilities contributed by or obtained from volunteer persons or agencies.

Director. “Director” means the director of the Town of Vassalboro Emergency Management Agency, appointed as prescribed in this ordinance.

Disaster. “Disaster” means the occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or man-made cause including, but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, critical material shortage, infestation, explosion or riot.

Organization
The Emergency Management Director shall be responsible for the agency’s organization, administration and operation. The Emergency Management Director may employ such permanent or temporary employees as he/she deems necessary and prescribe their duties.
The Vassalboro Selectmen shall review the operational organization to ascertain the agency’s ability to cope with its responsibilities and shall also approve the Town’s Emergency Operations Plan.

Appointment of Director; Duties and Responsibilities
The Vassalboro Selectmen shall appoint an Emergency Management Director, who shall coordinate the activities of all town departments, organizations and agencies for civil emergency preparedness within the town and maintain a liaison with other emergency management agencies, public safety agencies, and have such additional duties as prescribed by the Selectmen.

Rules and Regulations
The Emergency Management Director shall prepare, under the direction of the Selectmen, such policies as may be deemed necessary for the administration and operational requirements of the agency, whose policies must be approved by the Vassalboro Selectmen prior to becoming effective.

Emergency Proclamation
The Emergency Management Director shall have the power and authority, after consultation and approval of the Vassalboro Board of Selectmen, to issue a proclamation that an emergency exists whenever a disaster or civil emergency exists or appears imminent. The proclamation may declare that an emergency exists in any or all sections of the town. If the Emergency Management Director is temporarily absent from the town or otherwise unavailable, a Deputy Emergency Director, designated by the Board of Selectmen, may issue the proclamation that an emergency exists. If neither the Emergency Management Director nor the person designated to act in the Emergency Management Director’s absence is available, then the following persons shall have the power and authority after consultation and approval of the Vassalboro Board of Selectmen, to issue a proclamation that an emergency exists, in the following order of succession: the Fire Chief, the Police Chief, and the Public Works Director. A copy of such proclamation shall be filed within twenty-four (24) hours in the office of the town clerk.
Notwithstanding the above, when consultation with the Vassalboro Board of Selectmen would result in a substantial delay in an effective response in alleviating or preventing an emergency or disaster, the Emergency Management Director, or his/her successor as outlined above, is authorized to take whatever actions are necessary to prevent the loss of life and property in the town. The Emergency Management Director shall be responsible for submitting a full report to the Vassalboro Selectmen of all actions taken as a result of the declared emergency as soon as the Board of Selectmen can be convened.

Termination of Emergency
When the Emergency Management Director or successor and the Vassalboro Board of Selectmen is satisfied that a disaster or civil emergency no longer exists, he/she shall terminate the emergency proclamation by another proclamation affecting the sections of the Town covered by the original proclamation, or any part thereof. Said termination of emergency shall be filed in the office of the town clerk.
No state of emergency may continue for longer than five (5) days unless renewed by the Vassalboro Board of Selectmen.

Emergency Management Director Duties and Emergency Powers
During any period when an emergency proclamation is in effect, the Emergency Management Director may promulgate such regulations as he/she deems necessary to protect life and property and to preserve critical resources within the purposes of this ordinance. Such regulations may include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles in areas within or without the town;
2. Regulations facilitating or restricting the movement of persons within the town;
3. Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from hazardous areas within the town;
4. Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health and safety.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority or responsibility of any department to proceed under powers and authority granted to them by state statute or town ordinance.
The Emergency Management Director or his/her designee may order the evacuation of persons from hazardous areas within the town.
The Emergency Management Director or his/her designee shall be authorized to request aid or assistance from the state or any political subdivision of the state and may render assistance to other political subdivision under the provisions of Title 37-B, M.R.S.A.
The Emergency Management Director may obtain vital supplies, equipment and other items found lacking and needed for the protection of health, life and property during an emergency without following normal purchasing or formal bid procedures.
The provisions of this section will terminate at the end of the declared emergency.

Emergency Operational Plans
The Emergency Management Director shall prepare an all hazard emergency operational plan for the town, which shall be submitted to the Vassalboro Board of Selectmen for approval.
It shall be the responsibility of all municipal departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned and to maintain their portions of the plan in a current state of readiness. The town plan shall be reviewed periodically by the Town Manager in conjunction with all the town department heads and the Emergency Management Director.

Establishment of the National Incident Management System
The Town of Vassalboro hereby establishes the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as the municipal standard for incident management. This system provides a consistent approach for Federal, State, and municipal governments to work together more effectively and efficiently to prevent, prepare for, respond to and recover from domestic incidents, regardless of cause, size, or complexity. NIMS will utilize standardized terminology, standardized organizational structures, interoperable communications, consolidated action plans, unified command structures, uniform personnel qualification standards, uniform standards for planning, training, and exercising, comprehensive resource management, and designated incident facilities during emergencies or disasters. The NIMS Incident Command System (ICS) will be utilized by all Vassalboro emergency and disaster responders for incident management.

Immunity from Liability
All Emergency Management Agency Forces, while engaged in Emergency Management Agency activities, shall be immune from liability, as set forth in Title 37-B, Section 822 M.R.S.A.

Compensation for Injuries
All of Emergency Management Agency Forces shall be deemed to be employees of the state when engaged in training or on duty and shall have all of the rights of state employees under the Workmen’s Compensation Act, as set forth in Title 37-B, Section 823 M.R.S.A.

Violation of Regulations
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions of this ordinance or of the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority contained herein, or to obstruct, hinder or delay any Emergency Management Agency Forces as herein defined in the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance or any regulation or plan issued hereunder.

Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this ordinance or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the costs of prosecution.

Severability
Should any provisions of this ordinance be declared invalid for any reason, such declaration shall not affect the validity of other provisions or of this ordinance as a whole, it being the legislative intent that the provisions of this ordinance shall be severable and remain valid notwithstanding such declaration.

Conflicting Ordinances, Orders, Rules and Regulations Suspended
At all times when an emergency proclamation is in effect, the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this ordinance shall supersede all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations, insofar as the latter may be inconsistent herewith.
 
TOWN OF VASSALBORO, MAINE

 

ROAD CONSTRUCTION ORDINANCE

 

SECTION I. Statement of Purpose

 

            The purpose of this ordinance is to promote the health, safety, and public welfare of the resident of Vassalboro through establishing minimum construction standards for roads, streets, and other public and private ways.

 

SECTION II. Authority, Administration, and Effective Date

           

            A.        AUTHORITY:  This ordinance is enacted pursuant to and consistent with Article VIII-A of the State of Maine constitution, and with Title 30, M.R.S.A., Section 2151-A.

 

            B.        ADMINISTRATION: This ordinance shall be administered by the Planning Board with assistance from the Road commissioner or an engineer employed by the town.

           

            C.        EFFECTIVE DATE: The effective date of this ordinance is June 3, 1989, which was the date of adoption by the town meeting.

 

SECTION III. Applicability

 

A.                 NEW CONSTRUCTION: This ordinance shall apply to the construction of all new roads or streets within the town whenever such roads or streets are proposed to be accepted by the town. New and/or existing private ways which service lots in a subdivision approved after the effective date of this ordinance shall also meet the standards of this ordinance.

 

B.                 ALTERATIONS: Alterations, widening, and improvements shall be consistent with Section IV: “Street Design Standards,” of this ordinance. The Town of Vassalboro shall be exempt from the provisions of this ordinance when the town undertakes alterations, widening and improvements.

 

C.                 HIGHER DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARD:  Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the design and construction of streets which meet higher standards, use improved methods, or higher quality materials.

 

 

 

 

 

 

SECTION IV. Application Procedure

 

            Prior to the construction of any new road or street or the reconstruction or lengthening of an existing road or street, an application shall be submitted to the Board with the following information.

 

A.                 SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS

 

1.      The name(s) of the applicant(s);

2.      The name(s) of the owner(s) of record of the land upon which the proposed street is to be located;

3.      A statement of any legal encumbrances on the land upon which the proposed street is to be located;

4.      The anticipated starting and completion dates of each major phase of street construction;

5.      A statement indicating the nature and volume of traffic expressed in average daily traffic (ADT) expected to use the proposed street.

 

B.                 PLANS

The plans and illustrations submitted as part of the application shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer to include the following information.

 

1.      The scale of the plan. (All streets and roadway plan and profile drawings shall be drawn to a scale of 1” = 50’ horizontal and 1” = 10’ vertical.);

2.      The direction of magnetic north;

3.      A plan profile and typical cross section views of all proposed streets;

4.      The starting and ending point with relation to established roads, streets or ways and any planned or anticipated future extensions of the streets. (All terminal points and the center line alignment shall be identified by survey stationing.);

5.      The roadway and roadway limits with relation to existing buildings and established landmarks;

6.      Dimensions, both lineal and angular, necessary for locating boundaries, and necessary for locating subdivisions, lots, easements, and building lines;

7.      The lots, if any, as laid out and numbered on said street, showing the names of all owners of abutting property;

8.      All natural waterways and watercourses in or on land contiguous to the said streets and ways;

9.      The kind, size, location, profile and cross section of all existing and proposed drainage ways and structures and their relationship to existing natural waterways;

10.  The soil erosion and sedimentation control plan showing interim and final control provisions;

11.  Curve date for all horizontal and vertical curves shall be the center line radius, arc length, beginning of curve and end of curve points;

12.  All center line gradients shall be shown and expressed as a percent;

13.  All curve and property line radii of intersections;

14.  The limits and location of any proposed sidewalks and curbing;

15.  The location of all existing and proposed overhead and underground utilities, to include, but not limited to, the following: [NOTE—When a location, in the case of any underground utility, is an approximate location, it shall be noted on the plan as such.]

a.       storm drains;

b.      telephone line poles or underground vaults;

c.       electrical power line poles or underground vaults;

d.      street lights;

e.       public water supply lines;

f.        sanitary sewers;

g.       street lights.

 

16.  The name(s) of each proposed new road or street.

 

C.                 REVIEW AND COMMENT

Upon receipt of plans for a proposed public street, the Planning Board shall forward one copy to the municipal officers, fire chief, and road commissioner for review and comment. Plans for streets which are not proposed to be accepted by the municipality shall also be sent to the municipal officers and road commissioner for review and comment.

 

D.                 STREETS WITHIN PROPOSED SUBDIVISIONS  

Streets proposed as apart of a subdivision as defined in the Subdivision Ordinance of the Town of Vassalboro shall be submitted to the Planning Board as an integral part of the subdivision application. Plans shall conform to the provisions of the ordinance as well as those required by the Subdivision Ordinance of the Town of Vassalboro.

 

E.                  APPLICATION FEE

An application fee of $25 shall be paid to the Town of Vassalboro upon submission of an application. The selectmen shall have the authority to review and revise the application fee. The application fee shall be waived if the street is being reviewed as an element of a subdivision application.

 

SECTION V.    Public Acceptance of Streets

              The approval by the Planning Board of a proposed public road or street shall not be deemed to constitute or be evidence of any acceptance by the municipality of a road or street. Final acceptance of a proposed public way shall be made by an affirmative vote at town meeting.

 

SECTION VI. Street Design Standards

 

A.                 These design standards shall be met by all streets and shall control the roadway, shoulders, curbs, sidewalks, drainage systems, culverts, and other appurtenances.

 

B.                 Streets shall be designed to discourage through traffic within a residential subdivision.

 

C.                 Wherever existing or other proposed streets, topography, and public safety permit, streets shall run in east-west directions to maximize access for solar energy utilization. The character, extent, width, and grade of all streets shall be considered ion their relation to existing or planned streets.

 

D.                 Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is definitely paced in the municipality.

 

E.                  Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow street (not meeting the width requirements of the standards for streets in these regulations), or when the Comprehensive Plan indicates plans for realignment o widening of a road that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the plan shall indicate reserved areas for widening or realigning the road marked “Reserved for Road Realignment (Widening) Purposes.” Land reserved for such purposes may not be included in computing lot area or setback requirements.

 

F.                  Privately-Owned Roads. Where streets are to remain privately owned roads, the following words shall appear on the recorded plan:

 

“All roads shall remain private road to be maintained by the developer or the lot owner and shall not be accepted or maintained by the town.”

 

G.         The following design standards apply according to street classification:

 

ROAD DESIGN STANDARDS

 

            ROAD TYPE               MINOR           MAJOR           PRIVATE            PUBLIC

                                                                                                MINOR               MAJOR

 

            Av. Daily Traffic           0-250               250+                0-100                  100+

 

            Right-of-way width       50’                   60’                   50’                      50’

 

            Pavement width            20’                   22’                   18’                      20’

 

            Shoulder width 2’                     4’                     2’                        2’

 

            Aggregate base req.                 

              (compacted)               18”                   24”                   18”                      18”

 

            Hot bituminous

               Pavement                  2”base              2” base             N/A                    2”base

                                                1” surface         1”surface                                     1”surface

 

            Roadway Crown          ¼”/ft                 ¼”/ft                 ½”/ft                    ¼”/ft

 

            Maximum Grade           8%                   6%                   8%                      6%

 

            Min.angles at

            Intersection                   75                    90                    75                       90

 

            Min center line

            radius for curve 150’                 220’                 150’                    200’

 

            Min tangent length

            between curves 100’                 100’                 50’                      100’ 

 

H.                 TRIP GENERATION RATES

The following chart shall be used to determine the anticipated average daily traffic (ADT) levels of proposed residential development.

 

            Housing types                                       Average Weekday Trip Generation

           

            Single-family detached                                     10 trips per dwelling unit

            Duplex (twin) multiplex,

               Townhouses, etc.                                           8 trips per dwelling unit

            Apartment                                                        8 trips per dwelling unit

            Mobile home                                                    8 trips per dwelling unit

            Retirement Village                                             3.5 trips per dwelling unit

 

I.                    The centerline of the roadway shall be the centerline of the right-of-way.

 

J.                   Dead-end streets shall service no more than twenty (20) dwelling units. In addition to the design standards above, dead-end streets shall be constructed to provide a cul-de-sac turn-around with the following requirements for radii: 65 feet to property lines and 50 feet to the edge of pavement. Dead-end streets may provide a permanent “T” turn-around in lieu of a cul-de-sac. Such turn-arounds shall be a minimum of 35 feet in length and 20 feet in width. The right-of-way dimensions shall be 50 feet in length and 30 feet in width.

 

K.                GRADES, INTERSECTIONS, AND SIGHT DISTANCES

 

1.      Grades of all streets shall conform in general to the terrain, so that cut and fill are minimized while maintaining the grade standards above.

 

2.      All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves to provide for the minimum sight distances below.

 

3.   Where new street intersections of driveway curb-cuts are proposed, sight distances, as measured along the road onto which traffic will be turning, shall be based upon the posted speed limit and conform to the table below:

 

Posted Speed Limit                              Sight Distances

            25 mph                                     250 ‘

            30 mph                                     300’

            35 mph                                     350’

            40 mph                                     400’

            45 mph                                     450’

            50 mph                                     500’

            55 mph                                     550’

Where necessary, corner lots shall be cleared of all growth and sight obstructions, including ground excavation, to achieve the required visibility.

 

4.      Cross (four-cornered) street intersections shall be avoided insofar as possible, except as shown on the Comprehensive Plan or at other important traffic intersections. A minimum distance of 200 feet shall be maintained between centerlines of side streets.

 

L.                  Sidewalks, installed where required by the Planning Board, shall meet these minimum requirements:

 

1.      Bituminous Sidewalks

 

a.                          The gravel aggregate sub-base course shall be no less than twelve (12) inches thick.

b.                          The crushed aggregate base course shall be no less than two (2) inches thick.

c.                          The hot bituminous pavement surface course shall be no less than two (20 inches thick after compaction.

 

2. Portland Cement Concrete Sidewalks

 

a.       The sand base shall be no less than six (6) inches think.

b.      The Portland cement concrete shall be reinforced with six-inch-square, number 10 wire mesh and shall be no less than four (4) inches thick.

 

SECTION VIII. Street Construction Standards

 

            A. PREPARATION    

                       

1.      Before any clearing has started on the traveled way, the centerline and sidelines of the new road shall be staked or flagged at 50-foot intervals.

2.      Before grading is started, the entire traveled way shall be cleared of all stumps, roots, brush, and other objectionable material. All ledge, large boulders, and tree stumps shall be removed from the traveled way.

3.      All organic materials shall be removed to a depth of two (2) feet below the sub-grade of the roadway. Rocks and boulders shall also be removed to a depth of two (2) feet below the sub-grade of the roadway. On soils which have been identified as not suitable for roadways, the subsoil shall be removed from the street site to a depth of two (2) feet below the sub-grade and replaced with material meeting the specifications for gravel aggregate sub-base below. In lieu of  removal of all organic material, engineering fabric (geo-textile) may be used to stabilize the road base.

4.      Side slopes shall be no steeper than a slope of three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical, and shall be graded, limes, fertilized, and seeded according to the specifications of the erosion and sedimentation control plan.

5.      All underground utilities shall be installed prior to paving to avoid cuts in the pavement. Building sewers and water service connections shall be installed to the edge of the right-of-way prior to paving.

 

B.BASES AND PAVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS

 

1.                  Base Material

 

This material shall meet Maine Department of Transportation (MDOT) Standard Specification #703.06 (B) – Type D for the entire (18” or 24”) fill thickness. Depth of fill material will be as measured after compaction. For 18” of material, compaction shall occur after each 9” lift. For 24” of material, compaction is required after each 12” lift. All aggregate sub-base material shall be free of rocks or rock particles which exceed four (4) inches in diameter.

 

2.         Pavements       

 

a.       Base mix: A 2” depth of base mix is required which meets MDOT specifications for Plant Mix Grade B with aggregate size of no more than ¾ inch maximum, and a liquid asphalt content between 5.2% and 6.0% by weight.

 

b.      Surface Mix: A 1” layer of mix is required which meets MDOT specifications for Plant Mix for Grade C or Grade D with an aggregate size no greater than ½ inch and a liquid asphalt content between 6.0% and 7.0% by weight.

 

SECTION VIII.  Additional Improvements and Requirements

 

A.     EROSION CONTROL: The procedures outlined in the erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be implemented during the site preparation, construction, and clean-up stages.

 

B.     CLEANUP: Following street construction, the developer or contractor shall conduct a thorough clean-up of stumps and other debris from the entire street right-of-way. If on-site disposal of the stumps and debris is proposed, the site shall be indicated on the plan, and be suitably covered with fill and topsoil, limed, fertilized, and seeded.

 

C.     STREET NAMES, SIGNS, AND LIGHTING: Streets which join and are in alignment with streets of abutting or neighboring properties shall not duplicate, nor bear phonetic resemblance to, the names of existing streets within the municipality; and they shall be subject to the approval of the board. No street name shall be the common given name of a person. The developer shall reimburse the municipality for the costs of installing street-name, traffic-safety, and control signs. Street lighting shall be installed as approved by the Board.

 

SECTION IX. Certification of Construction

 

            Upon completion of street construction and prior to a vote by the municipal officers to submit a proposed public way to the legislative body, a written certification signed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Maine shall be submitted to the municipal officers at the expense of the applicant, certifying that the proposed way meets or exceeds the design and construction requirements of these regulations. “As built” plans shall be submitted to the municipal officers.

 

SECTION X. Performance Guarantees

                Performance guarantees shall be as specified in the Subdivision Ordinance as adopted by the town on June 3, 1989.

 

SECTION XI. Inspection

 

A.     NOTIFICATION OF CONSTRUCTION: At least ten (10) days prior to commencing street construction or alteration of roads, the applicant shall notify the road commissioner or his appointed inspector, in writing, of the time when he proposes to commence construction. The municipal officers can cause inspection to be made, to assure that all municipal specifications and requirements be met during the construction.

 

B.     NONCOMPLIANCE WITH PLAN: If it is found, upon inspection of the improvements, that the street or road is not being or has not been constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, the inspector shall so report to the municipal officers and Planning Board. The municipal officers shall then notify the applicant and, if necessary, the bonding company, and shall take all necessary steps to preserve the rights of the municipality under the guarantee, security, or bond.

 

 

C.     MODIFICATION DURING CONSTRUCTION: If at any time before or during the construction of the street, it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the appointed inspector that unforeseen conditions make it necessary or preferable to modify the location or design of the street, the appointed inspector may, upon approval of the Board, authorize modifications provided these modifications are within the spirit and intent of the Board’s approval. The appointed inspector shall issue any authorization under this section in writing and shall transmit a copy of such authorization to the Board at its next regular meeting.

 

D.     INSPECTION FEE: The Board may assess the applicant a fee to cover the costs of construction inspection.

 

SECTION XII. Separability

               If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.

 

SECTION XIII. Appeals

 

An appeal may be taken within thirty (30) days from the Board’s decision on the application, by any party to Superior Court in accordance with Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.

 

SECTION XIV. Amendments

 

            This ordinance may be amended by a majority vote of town meeting. Amendment may be initiated by a majority vote of the board of selectmen of by request of the Planning Board to the selectmen or on petition of 10% of the votes cast in the last gubernatorial election in the town. The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing on any proposed amendment.

 

SECTION XV. Definitions

 

Average daily traffic: A traffic count of vehicles anticipated for weekdays based on the number of dwelling units in residential developments. [See chart, page 5]

Major street: A street which has an average daily traffic count exceeding 250 vehicles.

Minor street: A street which has an average daily traffic count of 250 vehicles or fewer.

Privately owned street: A vehicular access way which s not intended to be dedicated as a private way.

Street: Public and private ways such as alleys, avenues, boulevards, highways, and roads.

 

Given unto our hands this 24th day of May, A.D. 1989

 

Selectmen, Town of Vassalboro                        Phillip W. Haines

                                                                        Dudley E. Foley

                                                Charles Kellenberger

 
     VASSALBOR0

                              SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL 

                                                                                     ORDINANCE

                                                                                 May, 1988

                     Table of Contents

I .AUTHORITY ..................................................1

II  PURPOSE ...................................................1

III DEFINITIONS.................................................1

IV. GENERAL PROVISIONS/PROHIBITIONS.............................4

V.  MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITY............................... ..5

 

VI. PENALTY ...................................................6

 

VII. SEVERABILITY...............................................6


VIII. EFFECTIVE DATE............................................ 6

SECTION I.


AUTHORITY

This Ordinance has been prepared and adopted pursuant to the provisions of Title 30 Sections 1917, 2151 and Title 38 Section 1721.

SECTION II.

PURPOSE

The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect public health and safety by providing rules and regulations for the proper operation of the Town landfill and Transfer Station Facility, herein after called the Solid Waste Disposal Facility, and to provide that all wastes generated in the Town are disposed of at the Solid Waste Disposal Facility.

SECTION III.

DEFINITIONS

Administrator:  Administrator is the municipal officer who has final responsibility for administration of the Solid Waste  Disposal Facility.           

Ashes: shall mean residue from the combustion of solid fuels.

Carrion: Carrion shall mean animals, birds, and other living creatures that have died naturally or have been accidentally killed. Animals or parts of animals from slaughter houses are not included in this category.

Demolition Debris: See Inert. Material.

Department: Department shall mean the Public Works Department.

Equipment, Backup: Backup equipment means equipment available to the site supervisor within a certain period of breakdown of the primary Solid Waste Facility equipment.

Equipment, Solid Waste: Solid waste equipment means any equip­ment including buildings on-site used for solid waste storage, compaction, transfer, covering, grading, and other operational activities. .

Garbage: Garbage means all putrescible animals or vegetable. wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food in any private dwelling house, multiple dwelling, hotel, restaurant, building,. or institution.

Hazardous Waste: Hazardous Waste means a substance designated as hazardous by the Department of Environmental Protection such as poison, corrosive agents, etc.

Hot load: Any loads of solid waste that are on fire, smoldering, or are potentially flammable by spontaneous combustion. Hot loads include wood ashes, cigarette tray residue, coal ash

and clinkers, residue from a fire, etc.                              

 

Household Wastes: Household wastes shall mean mixed refuse, ashes and bulk refuse originating in and around private dwellings, multiple dwellings, fraternity houses, living quarters or

dining facilities located in schools, colleges, or universities.

Inert Material: Inert material means solid waste that does not react with other substances under ordinary conditions, including but not limited to concrete, rocks, bricks, plaster, contaminated fill, building construction wastes, etc.

Junk: Junk means old, worn-out, or unserviceable plumbing or heating supplies, household appliances and furniture, scrap,

scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, rubber debris, waste and all scrap iron, steel and other scrap ferrous or nonferrous material or parts thereof.

 

Landfill, Sanitary: Sanitary landfill means a disposal facility

for solid waste on land designed to protect the environment.

Landscape Refuse: landscape refuse means leaves, garden stubble, lawn rakings, weeds and other material that can be composted and refused as a soil conditioner.

Refuse: Refuse shall mean mixed garbage and rubbish placed and stored together in a standard refuse container.

 

Resource Recovery: Resource recovery means the recovery of materials or substances that still have useful physical or chemical properties after serving a specific purpose and can be reused or recycled for the same or other purposes.

 

Rubbish: Rubbish means all cardboard, plastic, metal, or glass food containers, waste paper, rags, sweepings, small pieces of wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, and similar waste materials that ordinarily accumulate around a home, business or industry. It shall not include garbage, ashes, bulk refuse, dead animals, hazardous waste, industrial waste, or building waste resulting from the operations of a Contractor.

 

Salvaging: Salvaging is the controlled removal of reusable discarded-solid waste.

Septage:  Septage means waste, refuse, effluent, sludge and any other materials from septic tanks, cesspools, or any other similar facility.

Solid Waste Disposal Facility: Means all facilities owned by the Town used to transport or dispose of solid waste, to include the sanitary landfill, solid waste equipment, etc.

Solid Waste Management: Solid waste management means purposeful, systematic, and unified control of the collection, storage, transportation, processing, salvaging, and disposal of solid waste.

Solid Waste: Solid waste means unwanted or discarded solid material with insufficient liquid content to be free flowing, including by way of example, and not by limitation, rubbish, garbage, junk, refuse, inert household wastes material, landscape refuse, wood wastes, white goods, but shall not include sludge, septage, hazardous wastes, agricultural or industrial wood by­products.

Special Wastes: Special wastes include that fraction of solid wastes and other wastes designated by the Town to be handled, stored or disposed separately. Special wastes include but are not limited to white goods, tires, inert material, hot loads, wood wastes, carrion, asbestos, oil, fuels, paints, ash, recyclable materials, etc.

Storage: Storage means the containment of any waste that is not hazardous, for a period of less than one year, in such a manner as not to constitute disposal.

Sludge: Sludge mean the concentration of solids resulting from the treatment of liquid wastes such as sewage, industrial wastes, commercial wastes, etc.

Tires: Tires shall include all tires, tubes, and rubber protective flaps. Tire rims are not included under this definition.

Transfer Station Facility: Transfer station facility means a constructed and managed to store, dispose and/or process solid wastes in containers for transport to a facility.

Transfer Station Supervisor: Transfer Station Supervisor has. the responsibility to properly operate and maintain transfer station facility. His direct supervisor is the Public Works Road Foreman and he works under that department.

Transport: Transport means movement of solid waste from the point of generation to any intermediate points, and finally to the point of ultimate storage or disposal.
 
Unacceptable wastes: This category shall include, but not be limited to, the following items:

Leather over 4" or 5" long Rugs

Plastic sawdust

Metals

Metal strapping

Furniture

 
Long pieces of rope Tires with wheels Batteries

                                                                                      Wire

                                                                               Nylon in spools

                                                                                  Mattresses

Vector: Vector means a carrier, usually an insect, bird, or rodent, that is capable of transmitting a pathogen from one organism to another or from one place to another.

White Goods: White goods means large appliances including, but not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, washing machines, clothes dryers, dishwashers and air conditioners.

Wood Wastes: Wood waste means dry waste made of wood to include trees, stumps, brush, slabs, edgings and pallets.

 

SECTION IV.

 
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND PROHIBITIONS

1. All waste generated or produced within the legal borders of the Town of Vassalboro shall be delivered to the Solid Waste Disposal Facility, except as shown below, or as other­wise provided for by State Law.

 
 
2. All residents, private or commercial haulers, or other legally authorized individuals delivering waste to the

Solid Waste Disposal Facility shall be required to separate and dispose of all wastes as follows:

 
 
 
Transfer Station

Household Wastes                                       

Garbage

Refuse

Landscape Refuse or Litter

White Goods Area

Junk

White Goods

Wood waste Disposal Area

Trees, brush and other wood wastes

Stumps or large tree trunks Inert Material or Demolition Debris

Hot Loads Area

Hot Loads

Not Accepted

Hazardous Wastes

Carrion

Septage

Sludge

To Be Determined by the Transfer Station Supervisor

Unacceptable Wastes

 
 
3. In regards to unacceptable wastes, it shall be the responsibility of the resident, with assistance from the Transfer Station Attendant, to assure that such items are not disposed of in the Transfer Station Facility.

4. As provided for by State Law, the Town may not accept any wastes from commercial operations depending on, but 'not necessarily limited to, quality and quantity.

5. All solid waste transported within the Town must be placed in covered containers securely fastened to the vehicle to prevent spillage and litter. Each resident and business shall be responsible for the transportation of solid waste from his property to the Solid Waste Facility.

6. Solid waste facilities owned, operated and maintained by the Town, shall be for disposal of solid wastes produced

within the boundaries of the Town. All users of the solid waste facilities must obtain a decal from the Administrator or his designated representative. This decal must be in the possession of all users when depositing solid waste. Persons, firms or corporations without a decal will be denied use of the Solid Waste Facility.

 

SECTION V.      MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITY

 

The Town, through the Board of Selectmen, assume overall responsibility for Town-owned Solid Waste Disposal Facility and for the proper disposal of wastes accepted there.

The Administrator of this Ordinance and overall Supervisor of the Solid Waste Disposal Facility is the Town Manager.

 

The Public Works Department is responsible for the day-to-day operation, and maintenance of the Solid Waste Disposal Facility.

 

It shall be the duty of the Public Works Department's Transfer Station Attendant to strictly enforce this Ordinance and to see that any and all violations are promptly abated and violators prosecuted, and

it shall .be the special duty of the Chief of Police and all Policemen to promptly summons any violators of this Ordinance.

 

Other responsibilities and duties shall be as outlined in the Solid Waste Disposal Facility Operational and Maintenance Manual or as designated by the Administrator.

Solid Waste shall be disposed at the Solid Waste Disposal Facility only during the times designated by the Board of Selectmen.

The Solid Waste Disposal Facility shall be operated in accordance with the Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) regulations, the operation and maintenance manuals or as designated by both the Administrator and the Department.

 

All solid waste delivered and deposited for disposal at the Town Solid Waste Disposal Facility shall become the property of the Town. No person shall separate, collect, carry off or dispose of such materials unless authorized in writing by the Administrator.

 
SECTION VI. PENALTY

Any person or persons, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less that fifty dollars ($50) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500) for each offense and each day's continuance or failure to comply herewith shall constitute a separate and distinct offense for each of said days and shall be punished as such. It shall be the duty of the Police Chief to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance and any other applicable State law.

SECTION VII. SEVERABILITY

Should any, section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of said Ordinance shall not be affected thereby.

SECTION VIII. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from the date of adoption, June 4, 1988.

Given unto our hands this 25th day of May, 1988.



Philip W. Haines

 

Brett E. Hoskins

 

Dudley E. Foley


Selectmen of Vassalboro

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 

Unacceptable wastes: This category shall include, but 'not be limited to, the following items:                    

 

TOWN OF VASSALBORO
BUILDING PERMIT ORDINANCE
APPROVED JUNE 2008
AMENDED JUNE 2012, JUNE 2018
1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION TITLE PAGE
SECTION 1 PURPOSE 1
SECTION 2 AUTHORITY 1
SECTION 3 APPLICABILITY 1
SECTION 4 EFFECTIVE DATE 1
SECTION 5 CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES 1
SECTION 6 VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY 1
SECTION 7 AMENDMENT 1
SECTION 8 ADMINISTRATION 1
A.) AUTHORITY 2
B.) PERMITS
1.) PERMIT REQUIRED 2
2.) REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMTTING 2
3.) ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURED HOUSING 2
4.) PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTERING PERMITS 2
5.) TERM OF PERMIT 2
6.) PERMIT MODIFICATION 2
7.) PERMIT FEES 2
SECTION 9 EROSION CONTROL 4
SECTION 10 INSPECTION AND OCCUPANCY 5
SECTION 11 ENFORCEMENT 5
SECTION 12 RIGHT OF ENTRY 5
SECTION 13 APPEAL 5
SECTION 14 REPEAL 5
SECTION 15 DEFINITIONS 5
2
SECTION 1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to assure compliance with existing state and local regulations governing
land use and subsurface wastewater disposal; secure the comfort, convenience, safety, health and welfare
of the people of the Town of Vassalboro; and protect the environment and to promote the development
of an economically sound and stable community.
SECTION 2 AUTHORITY
limitations on home rule authority.
This chapter provides express limitations on municipal home rule authority.
The Maine Uniform Building and Code (MUBEC) must be enforced in a municipality that has more
than 4,000 residents and that has adopted any building code by August 1, 2008.
Beginning July 1, 2012, the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code must be enforced in a municipality
that has more than 4,000 residents and that has not adopted any building code by August 1, 2008.
The Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code must be enforced through inspections that comply with
Title 25, section 2373. [Title 10, Chapter 1103 §9724].
SECTION 3 APPLICABILITY
A. The following Chapters of the 2015 International Building Code, (IBC) published by the
International Code Council, Inc., in effect on May 2014, are hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference:
l. Chapters 1 - 10
2. Chapters 12 - 27
3. Chapters 31- 35
The following chapters, and all appendices, of the IBC are specifically excluded from adoption:
4. Chapter 11 Accessibility
5. Chapter 28 Mechanical Systems
6. Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems
7. Chapter 30 Elevators and Conveying Systems
8. Appendix A - M
B. Chapters 1 - 15 of the 2015 International Existing Building Code, {IEBC) published by the
International Code Council, Inc., in effect on May 2014, are hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference.
C. The following Chapters of the 2015 International Residential Code, (IRC} published by the
International Code Council, Inc., in effect on May 2014, are hereby adopted and incorporated by
l. Chapters 1 - 10
2. Chapters 12 - 19
3. Chapter 23
4. Chapter 41
5. Chapter 42
6. Chapter 44
7. Appendix G
3
The following Chapters, and all appendices, of the IRC are specifically excluded from adoption
8. Chapter 11
9. Chapters 20 - 22
10. Chapters 24 - 40
11. Chapter 43
12. Appendix A - F and H - Q
D. Chapters 1 15 of the 2015 International Energy Conservation Code, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., in effect on May 2014, are hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference.
1. Table R402.l.2 Basement wall insulation R/10
E. Exempt structures. The following structures are exempt from the application of the IBC, IEBC, IRC
and IECC:
1. Log homes, manufactured housing, Post and beam and timber frame construction and
2. Nontraditional or experimental construction, including but not limited to straw bale and earth
berm construction
3. Building materials from local sawmills, including but not limited to nongraded lumber
4. Buildings used to house livestock or harvested crops
SECTION 4 EFFECTIVE DATE
The Building Ordinance shall supersede all former building code ordinances and shall become effective
immediately after approval by the voters of the Town of Vassalboro.
SECTION 5 CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
Where the provisions of this Ordinance conflict with this or any other ordinance, the stricter standard
shall apply.
SECTION 6 VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared invalid, such invalidity shall not void or make
invalid any other section of this Ordinance.
SECTION 7 AMENDMENT
This Ordinance may be amended by a majority vote of any legal Town Meeting when such amendment is
published in the Warrant calling for such meeting.
SECTION 8 ADMINISTRATION
A.) Authority - The Code Enforcement Officer shall administer provisions of this Ordinance.
B.)~~
1.) Permit required - No person shall authorize or undertake any applicable work as defined in
SECTION 3 of this Ordinance without first obtaining a permit from the Town. All applications for
permits required by this ordinance shall be made in writing. The application for permits shall be
on a form furnished by the Town.
4
The applications shall be filed with the town office prior to the start of any work. A permit is valid only for
the named applicant and is non-transferable.
2.)
provided:
a) A driveway entrance permit has been obtained from Maine DOT for a proposed driveway
entering a state road (MRSA Title 30-A, Chapter 185, §4103, 3D),
b) A proposed driveway entering a town or private road in subdivisions meets the sight distances
indicated in the Vassalboro Road Ordinance for driveway curb cuts or 10 for every posted
mph and the driveway entrance is a minimum of 7 feet from road intersections,
c) Wastewater disposal is permitted, adequately sized, and meets the state plumbing code,
d) A permit for internal plumbing, as required, is issued at the same time as the application for the
building permit, and
e) The building site has been inspected as required in SECTION 10 of this Ordinance.
f) Setbacks for structures A minimum setback of twenty (20) feet from property lines and twentyfive
(25) feet from the edge of the right of way of any town and state road or private road within
a subdivision shall be maintained for all new structures and structure additions permitted as of
the effective date of this ordinance, except setback distances for reconstructions or
replacements of structures that existed prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall meet
these setback distances to the greatest extent practical. Where the road right of way cannot be
established, a required setback of 50 feet measured from the centerline of the traveled road shall
be used.
g) A building permit shall not be issued prior to obtaining required permitting from the Town for
Shoreland Zoning, Subdivision or Site Review, and required state and federal permitting. If the
proposed construction or alteration is in conflict with this ordinance a permit shall not be issued
until such conflict has been removed. A building permit shall not be issued within any subdivision
that is not in compliance with all local ordinances and state laws.
h) For proposed projects located within the Wellhead Protection Area of the East Vassalboro Water
Company as mapped by the Maine Drinking Water Program, a written statement has been
obtained from the East Vassalboro Water Company indicating that the proposed project will not
negatively impact their essential operations, and proposed petroleum storage tanks are doublewalled
and installed by a professional who is certified by the Maine Fuel Board.
3.) Additional requirements for manufacturing housing -A permit to place a manufactured housing
unit (as defined in Title 10 M.R.S.A. Chapter 951 §9002 and §9061) on individual housing lots, on
undeveloped lots where single-family dwellings are allowed shall be issued only if the following
conditions have been met:
The manufactured home must have a pitched roof prior to be located on-site. A pitched roof is
defined as a roof with a pitch of 2 or more vertical units for every 12 horizontal units of
measurement and which is covered with asphalt or fiberglass composition shingles or other
materials, but specifically excludes corrugated metal roofing material,
b.) The manufactured home has an exterior siding that is residential in appearance but this exterior
siding shall not consist of vertical metal siding, and
c.) The permit applicant provides proof of payment of property taxes on any mobile moved from
another town in the municipality where the home was formerly located (MRSA, Title 30-A,
Chapter 185, §4103, 3C),
5
d.) Manufactured homes located within the legal borders of the Town of Vassalboro as of the date
of the adoption of this Ordinance do not have to meet the above requirements in (a), (b), and
(c) if they are being re-located within the Town of Vassalboro.
e.) Initial placement of Pre-HUD-code homes, which are those units constructed prior to June 15,
1976, meaning structures, transportable in one or more sections, that are 8 body feet or more
in width and are 32 body feet or more in length and are built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as dwellings, with or without permanent foundations, when connected to
the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning or electrical systems
contained therein, is not permitted.
4.) Procedure for Administering Permits - All permits shall be approved or denied in writing as
soon as practical but not more than seven (7) days of receiving a complete application. Permits
may be subjected to reasonable conditions to insure conformity of this ordinance and other
local and state laws. If a permit is denied, the reasons for denial will be stated in writing. A
request for an appeal from any approval or denial shall be made within thirty {30) days of the
approval or denial.
5.) Term of Permit - All building permits shall be void unless work is commenced and at least
thirty (30) percent of the estimated total cost of the building, including exterior siding, is
complete within two (2) years from the date of approval.
6.) Permit Modification - Any modifications to the description or scope of the project above and
beyond minimal changes shall require a revised permit application, payment of an additional
one-half of the application fee, and a permit prior to beginning the work.
7.) Permit Fees- Permit fees for building in the Town of Vassalboro will be set by the Selectmen.
SECTION 9
The Planning Board shall make recommendations to the Selectmen, The fee structure will be
reviewed annually by both bodies.
Fees shall be paid to the Municipal Treasurer. If any person, including any owner, and
contractor, or any authorized agent, fails to obtain any permit in accordance with the
Ordinance until after the work has begun, the fees set forth above shall be three (3) times the
regular permit fee, in addition to any enforcement action that may be taken.
EROSION CONTROL
Under the authority of the Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Law (Title 38, Chapter 3 §420-C), the Code
Enforcement Officer shall require erosion control measures, whenever filling displacing, excavation or
exposing soil and earthen materials will occur at the building site. All erosion control methods will be
consistent with DEP's Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Best Management Practices Manual for
construction sites (DEPL W0588, March 2003) or any updated version of this document. Erosion control
measures must be in place before the construction and any disturbance of soil begins and must remain in
place until the site is permanently stabilized.
SECTION 10 INSPECTIONS AND OCCUPANCY
An inspection of the site will be made by the Code Enforcement Officer prior to issuing a building permit
to determine the necessary erosion control measures whenever filling, displacing, excavating or exposing
6
Before any building can be occupied as a residential dwelling, it must have the inspection and approval of
the Code Enforcement Officer.
The CEO shall assure the dwelling unit has:
1. An approved method for the on-site wastewater disposal installed with the minimum of one
working toilet and sink,
2. The internal plumbing system and subsurface wastewater disposal system has been inspected by
the Licensed Plumbing Inspector,
3. The electrical wiring in a newly constructed residence has been installed by or inspected by a
Master Electrician, State Electrical Inspector, or an appropriate state certified electrical inspector,
4. That there is a permanent heat source,
5. That there are smoke and carbon monoxide detectors as required by the National Electric Code,
and
6. Overall conditions of safety and sanitation are met.
An Occupancy Certificate shall be issued. Buildings occupied without the required inspection shall be
subject to enforcement action as indicated in SECTION 11 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 11 ENFORCEMENT
The Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce this Ordinance and initiate all procedures and actions through
the Municipal Officers. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be subject
to a fine of not less than one-hundred (100) dollars for each offense nor more than two-thousand fivehundred
(2,500) dollars. All fines shall be paid to the Town of Vassalboro. Such persons shall also be liable
for court costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Town of Vassalboro in the event of the
necessity of such actions.
SECTION 12 RIGHT OF ENTRY
The Code Enforcement Officer or his/her assistant, in the performance of his/her duties, may enter any
building during construction for the purpose of making the inspections required by this code with proper
notification to the owner(s).
SECTION 13 APPEAL
Appeal from the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be made to the Board of Appeals and
from the Board of Appeals to Superior Court. Such appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) calendar days of
the date of the order being appealed.
SECTION 14 REPEAL
With the enactment of this Ordinance, the Building Permit Ordinance of June 2005 as amended is
repealed.
SECTION 15 DEFINITIONS
1. Addition -A change in the existing building footprint or volume as measured from the exterior of
the building.
2. Bedroom - Any room within a residential dwelling unit that has a closet and a means of outside
egress, such as a window or any room that is used primarily as sleeping quarters.
7
3. Driveway-A vehicular access way less than five-hundred (500) feet, horizontal distance, in length
serving two {2) residential dwelling units or fewer.
4. Major reconstruction - The replacement or alteration of an existing building or part thereof which
results in an estimated fair market value of 1,000 or more for the replacement or alteration
excluding normal building maintenance. The actual cost of materials may be substituted for fair
market value when it is difficult to determine the fair market value.
5. Minor reconstruction - The replacement or alteration of an existing interior or exterior part of
the building without changing the building footprint or volume which results in an estimated fair
market value of less than one-thousand (1,000) for the replacement or alteration. The actual cost
of materials may be substituted for fair market value when it is difficult to determine the fair
market value.
6. Dwelling -Any building that contains one or two dwelling units used, intended, or designed to be
built, used rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or that are occupied for living purposes.
7. Dwelling unit A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more
persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
8. Setbacks - The minimum horizontal distance from a lot property line or the edge of the right of
way of any town and state road or private road within a subdivision to the nearest part of any
new structure.
8

 